S/PV.9059

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9059th meeting

Wednesday, 8 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Aguiar Barboza
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mrs. Onanga
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. O’Sullivan
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Arrocha Olabuenaga
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-37540 (E)
*2237540*

S/PV.9059

Threats to international peace and security

data and records. This undertaking is vital to enabling
efficient and fair legal proceedings, and it is critical to
preserving the historical record of ISIL’s international
crimes in Iraq. All our work continues to be conducted
in full compliance with international legal standards
and applicable policies of the United Nations.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Christian
Ritscher, Special Adviser and Head of the Investigative
Team established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2379 (2017), to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Ritscher.
Mr. Ritscher: I am honoured to address the
Security Council today as I deliver the eighth report (see
S/2022/434) of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD).
Over the past six months, the Team continued to
make great progress in its investigative work. After
more than two years of restrictions and preventive
measures, UNITAD is back to its full capacity and,
with its growing presence in Iraq, is stronger than ever.
Against the backdrop of the challenges posed by the
pandemic, we have continued to deliver accountability
outcomes for survivors and their families, strengthened
our partnerships in the country and throughout the
world, and have stepped up our pursuit of accountability
and justice for international crimes committed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Overall, our evidence collection has surged, as
working modalities returned to normal, for instance
when it comes to the excavation of mass graves and other
field-based activities. During the reporting period,
we preserved and converted to digital formats a total
of over 4.5 million hard copy pages of documentary
evidence from courts across Iraq. This was done in
close cooperation with the Iraqi judiciary and the
Government of Iraq, including the Kurdistan Regional
Government. By doing so, we can reduce search times
of databases from days to minutes and help the Iraqi
authorities to make full and better use of their own
2/18

08/06/2022

Since I last reported to the Security Council (see
S/PV.8914), the Team has successfully made progress
in the full range of our investigative activities, such as
carrying out witness interviews, conducting analysis of
evidence and the drafting of case files. Allow me to
highlight a few examples of the progress made within
our investigations and the approaches taken towards
seeking justice in relation to ISIL’s crimes in Iraq.
Investigations into the Bayt Al-Mal — ISIL’s socalled House of Money — have progressed significantly.
An initial draft case brief articulates how Bayt Al-Mal
provided vital material to and financial support for
the overall structure of ISIL, including managing the
payments of units that have allegedly committed core
international crimes. Bayt Al-Mal was crucial to the
daily operations of ISIL. We plan to provide additional
strategic reports to our counterparts at the Iraqi judiciary
that address the internal functioning of Bayt Al-Mal,
to help broaden the understanding of ISIL’s financial
activities. This is particularly important as tracing the
money means mapping the organization, understanding
its structure and identifying the hierarchy and those in
charge of giving orders. It brings us closer to identifying
the individuals most responsible for the range of heinous
international crimes committed in Iraq.
Since my last briefing, investigations into the
development and use of chemical and biological
weapons by ISIL are ongoing and have revealed new
information. Through field missions to relevant
sites, engagement with affected communities and
cooperation with Iraqi authorities, the Team collected
and preserved testimonial, digital and documentary
evidence pertaining to the manufacturing and use of
chemical and biological weapons.
Our investigations will look more closely at the
underlying procurement system for these weapons and
related financial flows. This entails focusing on the
involvement of specific individuals, including those
involved in conducting human tests with chemical
agents on detained persons. The aftermath of such
chemical attacks, namely, severe health problems
22-37540

08/06/2022

Threats to international peace and security

among survivors and affected communities, continue
to this day.
UNITAD’s investigations have helped to produce
dedicated case files and the identification of those
allegedly most responsible for, for example, the crimes
committed against the Yazidi community and those
committed against the personnel of Tikrit Air Academy,
also known as Camp Speicher. Our Tikrit Air Academy
investigation contributed to the identification of alleged
perpetrators from ISIL who have played a prominent
role in harassing, abusing and terrorizing the civilian
populations of Tikrit and Al-Alam. It revealed that ISIL
systematically targeted all people who did not agree
with their ideology. It encompasses those belonging
or perceived to belong to groups either opposing, not
supporting or not aligning themselves with ISIL. This
includes the Shia community, those affiliated with
Governmental authorities, members of specific tribes
and those who had assisted the cadets and military
personnel of the Tikrit Air Academy.
Together with the Permanent Missions of Iraq and
Finland to the United Nations in New York, UNITAD
is organizing a special public event on the massacre of
the personnel of Tikrit Air Academy, which will be held
in the Trusteeship Council Chamber on Friday, 10 June,
at 1.15 p.m. We will screen a short film about our
investigation, followed by an expert panel discussion
and interventions from the floor. The event coincides
with the eighth anniversary of the massacre.
The investigation into the mass execution of
approximately 600 Badush prison detainees on 10 June
2014 also continues to gain momentum. That is in large
part thanks to the excavation of the Badush Valley mass
grave conducted by the Iraqi Mass Grave Directorate,
with technical and operational support provided by my
Team. We engaged directly with the competent Iraqi
court in that investigation to identify the perpetrators of
the massacre, including individuals who are currently
held in custody. That is in line with the Team’s
intention to intensify the investigations pertaining to
crimes committed in Mosul, the capital of the so-called
caliphate. UNITAD ensures that investigations into
sexual and gender-based crimes committed by ISIL
form part of each investigation.
As part of that approach, we continue to interview
Yazidi women and girls who are survivors of sexual
enslavement by ISIL and others who are able to provide
information on the perpetrators, including foreign

S/PV.9059

terrorist fighters. Crimes against and affecting children
are also considered to be an overarching priority. During
the reporting period, the Team conducted interviews
with Shia Turkmen boys who were conscripted by ISIL.
Those are just some examples of the work that
has been done, and continues to be done, by our
six investigative and two thematic units, which
advance UNITAD’s structural investigations of core
international crimes committed against all affected
communities in Iraq, including the Christian, Sunni,
Shia, Kaka’i, Shabak and Turkmen Shia communities.
Our victim- and survivor-centric approach means
that each and every person affected matters and all
international crimes committed by ISIL members will
be thoroughly investigated and their record of evidence
duly established. Today’s meeting does not allow me to
go into all our work in detail. The recently submitted
eighth report to the Security Council (see S/2022/434)
covers in greater depth all of the Team’s progress during
the reporting period.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
my gratitude to the Government of Iraq, the Iraqi
judiciary and the authorities of the Kurdistan Regional
Government for supporting the implementation of our
mandate. I have made it a priority to establish and
maintain a continuous dialogue with senior members
of the Iraqi Government, including the presidency,
the Prime Minister’s Office, the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs and the National Security Advisory.
Together, we are working towards ensuring
accountability for the core international crimes
committed by ISIL in evidence-based trials and in
accordance with due process and international fair trial
standards. By doing so, we aim to advance justice in
the name of the many victims and survivors of the core
international crimes committed by ISIL against the
people of Iraq.
At a strategic discussion workshop held in January
with the National Coordinating Committee and chaired
by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, we reflected
on our cooperation and jointly defined common areas of
priority, including information-sharing and capacitybuilding with national counterparts and coordinated
operations in the areas of mass grave excavations and the
return of identified remains of victims to their families.
UNITAD’s cooperation with the Iraqi Ministry
for Foreign Affairs has advanced significantly over

22-375403/18

S/PV.9059

Threats to international peace and security

the past six months. As agreed during the strategic
discussion workshop and at the Ministry’s request,
we have been working in coordination with Iraqi
Embassies in different countries to organize a series
of special events to promote accountability for ISIL’s
international crimes.
In April, we held an event in Berlin entitled
“Investigating financial dimensions of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide: the international
legal and regulatory framework”. UNITAD, Iraq
and Germany renewed their commitment to further
investigating the financial dimensions of ISIL’s core
international crimes. The upcoming special event to be
held this week is also part of our global cooperation
with Iraq.
Consistent with its terms of reference, UNITAD
is committed to improving the modalities of
information-sharing with the Government of Iraq and
the Iraqi judiciary. Accordingly, the Team expanded and
further operationalized arrangements with members
of the Iraqi judiciary that allowed for the sharing of
information relevant to financial crimes committed
in connection with ISIL activities in Iraq. A general
overview of key investigative findings of the crimes
committed against the Yazidi community and Tikrit
Air Academy personnel was presented to members of
the National Coordinating Committee in Baghdad.
UNITAD believes it essential to seize every
opportunity to hold ISIL perpetrators accountable for
the core international crimes committed in Iraq — war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. There
are ongoing discussions in Iraq to adopt the necessary
legal framework to deal with ISIL crimes as core
international crimes before the Iraqi courts. UNITAD
stands ready to provide technical advice and to work
with the Iraqi Council of Representatives, as well as
the judiciary, going forward. We hope that there will be
positive developments in the coming months, and we
call on the international community to support Iraq in
those efforts.
My team and I feel privileged that we get to
experience the beauty of Iraq, its historic sights and
the hospitality of its diverse communities at first hand.
For me, community engagement and being part of an
ongoing dialogue with civil society are key objectives
for UNITAD.
Last month, in partnership with the Office of the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and
4/18

08/06/2022

the United Nations Development Programme in Iraq,
UNITAD organized in Baghdad the second high-level
conference on the theme “Interfaith statement on the
survivors and victims of ISIL”. The conference brought
together religious leaders from all governorates of Iraq
and its diverse religious communities, who confirmed
that ensuring accountability for ISIL’s crimes and
providing justice to all victims, regardless of their
faith, are important steps towards reconciliation.
UNITAD continues to have an important role to play
in those processes.
Just last week, we held the fourth thematic round
table of the UNITAD-non-governmental organizations
dialogue forum, which focused on ISIL’s destruction
of cultural heritage in Iraq, an area in which UNITAD
will be expanding its investigations in the coming
months. ISIL’s vicious destruction of cultural heritage
was an attempt to erase Iraq’s diverse cultural history.
After the briefing I provided to the Security Council
in December (see S/PV.8914), I visited the site of
Nimrud, which had been blown up by ISIL in 2015 — a
3,000-year-old site reduced to a pile of rubble. I was
devasted by the destruction of that and other cultural
heritage sites I visited recently.
At the same time, I continue to be impressed by
Iraq’s ongoing efforts to restore those sites. I can
compare the restoration of cultural heritage sites to
our work at UNITAD in the pursuit of accountability
and justice. It takes years and is a painstaking process,
but it is work that must be done. At UNITAD, we are
committed to continuing our investigation to ensure
that the ISIL members responsible for atrocity crimes in
Iraq are held accountable before the competent courts
in Iraq and elsewhere.
Extrabudgetary contributions to the UNITAD
Trust Fund have proven to be vital to our operations
and the continuation of many investigative leads
and distinct projects. Therefore, we continue to rely
on voluntary contributions from Member States.
We welcome the recent contributions by Denmark,
France, India and Slovakia. We are also grateful for
the recent commitments of additional funds made by
the Netherlands and the United States of America. To
date, 15 States have provided extrabudgetary funds to
UNITAD, which is very encouraging.
At the same time, we call on more States to
consider contributing financially to our work to
enable us to take advantage of existing and future
22-37540

08/06/2022

Threats to international peace and security

justice opportunities. We encourage States to make
unearmarked contributions to support our general
operations so that we can maintain an agile, flexible
and needs-based management of the funds. Without
extrabudgetary funding, UNITAD’s investigations and
broader operations in pursuit of accountability will
have to be curtailed. That also affects the assistance
we provide to jurisdictions of Member States currently
investigating and prosecuting the conduct of individuals
affiliated with ISIL.
The Investigative Team increased its support to
ongoing domestic proceedings in several Member
States, in consultation with the Government of Iraq. As
of today, a total of 15 Member States have requested
assistance from UNITAD. Demands continue to
increase, with more jurisdictions looking into requesting
assistance. Perhaps the most notable contribution in
that context is the landmark conviction for the crime of
genocide of ISIL member Taha Al-Jumailly in Frankfurt
last year. We also supported the Swedish Prosecution
Authority during the trial of a woman who was charged
and finally convicted for the war crime of enlisting
her child as a soldier during her time with ISIL. That
assistance included providing expert testimony on ISIL
practices regarding enlistment, conscription and the
use of child soldiers.
The Team has also continued to support the joint
investigation team created by the national prosecution
authorities of Sweden and France to adjudicate core
international crimes committed by ISIL against the
Yazidi community in 2015. UNITAD is assisting
with a range of investigative steps, including focused
interviews with Yazidi witnesses in Iraq and elsewhere
and the collection of battlefield evidence related to
Yazidi enslavement networks, as well as searches
within our evidence holdings and database. In that way
we aim to minimize the retraumatization of victims, in
line with our commitment to a victim- and survivorcentric approach. The work with the joint investigation
team also enables us to better identify and exploit
linkages between foreign terrorist fighters across
jurisdictions so as to facilitate prosecutions in a number
of Member States.
Three weeks ago I conducted a joint field visit
to Sinjar and Duhok with Ms. Alice Nderitu, Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide. We met with
survivors of the genocide and of ISIL’s sexual slavery,
some of whom obtained their freedom only a couple
of years ago and some of whom, I should emphasize,

S/PV.9059

still have relatives enslaved by ISIL to this very day.
As I listened to those young people’s thoughts and
concerns, I saw pain and grief but also resilience
and determination. We were sitting on the floor of
a survivor’s house, still under construction, on the
outskirts of the Khanke refugee camp, where Yazidi
survivors stressed the importance of the genocide
conviction in Frankfurt and told us that it was what
they want to see done in Iraq. I reiterated UNITAD’s
commitment to working for that goal, a commitment
that we owe to the survivors, to international justice
and to humankind at large.
The crimes committed by ISIL are some of the
most gruesome acts we have seen in recent history. The
individuals responsible for such acts must be identified
and ultimately tried and convicted for their crimes at the
national and international level. Only by prosecuting
and referring such barbaric acts as war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide will we be able to
deliver justice to the many victims and survivors and
ensure that their voices are heard. Only by remaining
impartial and serving all the communities affected can
we contribute to broader reconciliation processes in
Iraq. UNITAD will continue its work on that path to
accountability. I thank the Council for its support.
The President: I thank Mr. Ritscher for his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of note 507, which encourages all
participants in Council meetings to deliver their
statements in five minutes or less, in line with the
Security Council’s commitment to making more
effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): We welcome the
Special Adviser’s report on the very important work
that he and his team are doing.
The world was shocked by the horrific crimes
committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and by its barbaric methods and use of mass
execution, torture and rape. We must maintain our
collective determination to ensure accountability for
all the suffering that ISIL has caused. The United
Kingdom therefore reaffirms its strong support for
the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)

22-375405/18

S/PV.9059

Threats to international peace and security

and the progress that it is making. In particular, we
strongly support UNITAD’s efforts to contribute to the
domestic prosecution of ISIL members in 15 Member
States, including Sweden and Germany. We also
welcome UNITAD’s thorough efforts to investigate the
financing of ISIL’s crimes through Bayt Al-Mal, or the
“House of Money”, as described by the Special Adviser.
Detailed documentation of the House of Money is vital
if we are to establish accountability for the full scope
of ISIL’s activity and determine the full ISIL hierarchy.
We reiterate our support for UNITAD’s work
with the Iraqi judiciary to develop the capacity to
deal with the full range of those complex crimes.
We hope to see it continue and strengthen, and we
welcome the cooperation of the Iraqi Government with
UNITAD’s work.
We applaud the focus that UNITAD maintains on
the welfare and experiences of survivors, as well as its
continued efforts to engage with all the communities
affected in Iraq, including ethnic and religious
minorities. As the Special Adviser said, the resilience
of those survivor groups is inspiring. In particular,
ensuring that survivors of sexual enslavement and
violence, such as the women and girls of the Yazidi
community, can have their experiences documented
safely and effectively is a first step towards achieving
justice and accountability for those awful crimes. That
is why UNITAD’s investigative experts contributed
to the development of the Murad Code, a global code
of conduct for gathering information from survivors,
which we launched with Nadia Murad under our recent
presidency of the Security Council. We have also
supported the International Organization for Migration
and its work with the Directorate for Survivors’ Care in
Iraq, facilitating the design and implementation of an
effective, accessible reparations mechanism.
The UNITAD mission deserves the Council’s
full support. UNITAD’s close collaboration with the
Government of Iraq is vital if we are to deliver the
justice and accountability that the victims and survivors
of ISIL atrocities deserve.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Special Adviser Christian Ritscher for
his comprehensive briefing and welcome Ambassador
Bahr Aluloom to today’s meeting.
Delivering justice for the victims of crimes
committed by Da’esh is a pivotal element in combating
and eliminating terrorism. It also sends a clear message
6/18

08/06/2022

to terrorists around the world that the international
community is determined to hold them accountable
for their heinous crimes. In that regard, the United
Arab Emirates commends the considerable efforts
of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) and the
progress that has been made on several cases during
the reporting period, particularly with the completion
of the initial assessment report on the case related to
Da’esh’s development and use of chemical and biological
weapons, as well as the investigations into the funding
of its terrorist crimes.
We urge UNITAD to continue investigating crimes
committed by Da’esh against local communities,
including the Yazidis, and to complete its search
for mass graves in Sinjar, Tal Afar and elsewhere in
order to identify the victims. Priority must be given to
completing the remaining case briefs without delay and
to achieving justice for the families of the victims so
they can bury their loved ones with dignity. Moreover,
in accordance with resolution 2379 (2017), all the
available evidence must be supplied to the relevant
Iraqi authorities as the primary intended recipients, so
that it can be used in court to hold Da’esh members
accountable for their crimes and to ensure justice.
We commend UNITAD’s efforts to provide
expertise and technical support to Iraq, including
providing the Government with an advanced Laboratory
Information Management System, which uses DNA
matching to identify victims. We emphasize the Team’s
important role in digitizing and archiving the evidence
that is currently available at Iraqi courts to preserve it
from any damage.
Furthermore, we commend the Team’s use of
advanced technology and applications, such as Zeteo,
which has greatly improved the Team’s ability to
identify perpetrators of terrorist crimes. We encourage
the further development of such methods, which can
be replicated in future investigations related to similar
crimes in other areas. That highlights the important
role that technology plays in maintaining international
peace and security.
The United Arab Emirates attaches special
importance to the work carried out by the specialized
unit in UNITAD that investigates crimes committed
against women and children, including crimes of sexual
and gender-based violence, while cooperating with
22-37540

08/06/2022

Threats to international peace and security

specialized agencies to provide psychological support
to the victims. My country has been keen to support
that unit and provided it with $0.5 million, as we believe
that it is critical to have a gender-responsive approach
during investigations into Da’esh’s crimes.
Supporting victims also includes the restoration
and rebuilding of Iraq’s deeply rooted cultural
heritage, which Da’esh has attempted to destroy in
order to completely erase the identity and history
of Iraqi communities. The crimes committed by
Da’esh have affected historical and sacred sites, such
as Al-Tahera and Al-Saa’a Churches, as well as the
Al-Nuri Mosque in Mosul. The United Arab Emirates
is currently contributing to rebuilding those three
landmarks in cooperation with the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as
part of international efforts in the context of the Revive
the spirit of Mosul initiative. We commend Iraq’s
commitment to its history and diverse heritage as well
as its fight against any attempt to obliterate its identity.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses that
there is a need to continue working with international
partners to ensure that Da’esh is defeated, prevent the
spread of its violent ideology wherever it appears and
bring members of that terrorist group to justice to hold
them accountable for their crimes against innocent
people. In that regard, we welcome UNITAD joining the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact, and we affirm the keenness of the United
Arab Emirates to enhance cooperation with UNITAD
and support it in carrying out its tasks effectively.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Adviser, Mr. Christian Ritscher, for his
very detailed briefing on the progress in the activities
of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD). I
assure him of Gabon’s support. I acknowledge the
presence among us of the Permanent Representative of
Iraq, whom I welcome.
Let me begin by reiterating Gabon’s condemnation
in the strongest terms of all acts of terrorism
throughout the world and to affirm our full support for
the Security Council’s counter-terrorism efforts. We
support the Security Council’s strategy to prevent the
proliferation and use of chemical weapons by State and
non-State actors, such as terrorist organizations, and to
combat impunity.

S/PV.9059

The eighth report (see S/2022/434) of the
Investigative Team, submitted for our review, highlights
the significant progress made in the area of investigation
during the reporting period. That progress is based on
the sound cooperation between UNITAD and the Iraqi
authorities. We welcome such cooperation, and call for
it to be strengthened in order to ensure accountability
for the crimes.
We welcome the judicious use of state-ofthe-art technology, in particular the new strategies to
accelerate the scanning of evidence documents, thereby
facilitating access to those documents and saving
considerable time.
We also note with interest the Team’s support to
Iraqi investigating judges and investigators in the
preparation of cases for the prosecution of Da’esh
members for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide.
We welcome the Team’s efforts in investigating
crimes against Christians, such as the perpetration
of sexual violence and the enslavement of
Christian communities by Da’esh, as well as forced
religious conversions.
We commend the practical, survivor-centred
approach, with a particular focus on gender
mainstreaming throughout the investigation process,
which enabled access to survivors of sexual and genderbased violence and other vulnerable survivors despite
difficult social constraints.
The demand for accountability for members of
Da’esh is part of both the fight against terrorism
and the rebuilding of the Iraqi nation and State. The
fight against impunity also involves the international
community due to Da’esh’s cross-border activities. To
that end, my country supports the cooperation between
the Investigative Team and the National Security
Advisory to conclude an agreement that would facilitate
information-sharing in the context of United Nations
sanctions and the national assets freeze.
In the same vein, we welcome the ministerial
meeting of the Global Coalition against Da’esh held
in Morocco on 12 May. It is crucial to address the
global threat posed by Da’esh through a holistic and
comprehensive coordination of efforts.
Of course, the Iraqi Government has the primary
responsibility to try those responsible for crimes
committed on its territory. As such, all initiatives must

22-375407/18

S/PV.9059

Threats to international peace and security

08/06/2022

be carried out with full respect for the sovereignty
of Iraq and its jurisdiction over crimes committed
against another person on its territory, in accordance
with paragraph 39 of the UNITAD mandate (see
S/2018/118, annex).

regard. Central to the success of UNITAD’s work,
however, lies cooperation with the Iraqi authorities. We
recognize that there has been progress on this front. The
exhumation of three mass graves in Sinjar last March is
precisely a testament to that positive cooperation.

In conclusion, we would like to stress the urgent
need to create the conditions for restorative justice
for the killings of Iraqi people, especially Yazidis,
in relation to the war crimes, crimes of genocide and
crimes against humanity committed by Da’esh. It
is imperative that an inclusive approach be taken to
maximize the collection of information to better ensure
the establishment of facts.

Undoubtedly, the good faith participation of the
national authorities is necessary so that the pending
investigations can be concluded and so that the families
of the victims can have access to the truth and, with it,
to reconciliation and reconstruction of the social fabric.
On this also depends that the holding of fair trials,
with full respect for due process, in which the affected
country itself sets the standard in the administration of
justice. In this regard, it is essential that pending national
legislation be adopted so as to provide substance for the
criminal trials of those who have committed the crimes
that have been investigated by UNITAD. We hope that
the next report of the Secretary-General will reflect
even greater progress to this end and that the number
of prosecutions opened, thanks to the collection and
preservation of evidence by UNITAD, will continue
to increase and gradually translate into reparations
for victims.

Mr. Arrocha Olabuenaga (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Mr. Christian Ritscher and his team
for the presentation of the eighth report (see S/2022/434)
on the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD), which reflects the progress made in the
ongoing investigations.
In particular, we highlight the importance of the
assessment on the use of chemical and biological
weapons by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) in Iraq, where the findings are conclusive in
relation to the attack perpetrated in Taza Khurmatu on
8 March 2016. We agree with Mr. Ritscher’s decision
to prioritize the investigation of crimes committed
by ISIL using chemical weapons given their immense
gravity and their prohibition under international law.
The international community cannot afford to let those
crimes go unpunished. Otherwise, we run the risk that
other actors, State and non-State, in other places will
also test our collective determination for accountability.

Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Ritscher for his substantive
briefing on the outcome of six months of work by
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD). We have
studied closely the eighth report (see S/2022/434) of the
investigative team he heads and welcome the completion
of the preparations for the initial case-assessment report
investigating the development and use by terrorists of
chemical and biological weapons in Iraq.

For those reasons, we agree with the point made
in the report that, now that we have the amount of
evidence collected by UNITAD, we must move from an
investigative stage to a new phase of prosecutions. It is
commendable that this reporting period saw a doubling
of the amount of documentary evidence that has been
preserved and digitized by UNITAD members.

As we see from the report, the use of such weapons
was encouraged by the High Command of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We hope that the
Investigative Team will redouble its efforts for fuller
collection of data and comprehensive analysis of all
available information on ISIL’s chemical programme
in Iraq.

We must therefore not lose sight of the fact that the
ultimate goal of all these investigations is the criminal
prosecution, in both national and international courts, of
those individuals found responsible for all war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide committed by
ISIL in Iraq. We reiterate the importance of the role
that the International Criminal Court can play in this

It would probably be naive to think that, given
their programme to develop and use chemical weapons
in Iraq, terrorists from ISIL would not use a similar
approach beyond the borders of the country as well,
for example, in neighbouring Syria. And if, in this
neighbouring State, the Western coalition is, at the
same time, as usual striving to overthrow a legal

8/18

22-37540

08/06/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9059

Government, then those terrorists would have every
opportunity to evade responsibility and accountability,
and the blame for their actions would be placed on the
undesirable Government, after which a series of missile
strikes would be carried out on its facilities.

of initial case briefs and the transition being made to
the phase of building up of targeted case files against
perpetrators identified as most responsible for the
crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL).

Council members understand the matter to which
I am referring: the plan that three permanent members
of the Security Council — the United States, the
United Kingdom and France — used on 14 April 2018,
in an act of unprovoked and unjustified aggression of
choice. At that time, they used cruise missiles launched
from sea and from air to hit Douma, on the outskirts
of Damascus.

The successful completion of the perpetratorfocused phase requires continued cooperation of the
Government of Iraq. In this regard, we are encouraged
by the collaborative working modalities between
the Team and the Iraqi authorities, and we hope that
the Iraqi judiciary will extend the support needed in
this endeavour.

The Investigative Team is working at a good tempo in
investigating the functioning of ISIL’s central treasury.
We believe that this is one of the most promising areas
from the point of view of collecting evidence, which will
allow us to establish the main connections within ISIL
and maybe identify the sponsors of that organization.
The Russian delegation welcomes the investigation of
crimes against the Sunni, Christian, Kaka’i, Shabak
and Shia Turkmen communities. We also note evidence
continues to be collected on the aspects of investigation
that have already been completed, including crimes
against the Yazidi in Sinjar, the murder of students
at the Tikrit Air Academy and the execution of Shia
detainees in Badush Central Prison.
We emphasize that the mission of the UNITAD
should not be limited only to the collection of evidence.
First and foremost, the team’s job is to support the
domestic efforts in Iraq aimed at bringing terrorists
to accountability within the framework of their
respectiveits national judicial systems. The main
recipient of the evidence collected by the Team should
be the Iraqi authorities themselves, as explicitly set
forth in resolution 2379 (2017). We encourage them
to be given this access as soon as possible. We are
convinced that this will significantly speed up the
process of holding people accountable for international
crimes.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank the Special Adviser,
Mr. Christian Ritscher, for his briefing and welcome the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to today’s meeting.
Kenya commends the progress the Investigative
Team established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2379 (2017) has made in all aspects of inquiry,
as reflected in its eighth report (see S/2022/434). We
particularly welcome the completion of the compilation

Kenya recognizes the strides made by the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/ISIL (UNITAD) in
implementing its mandate in support of domestic efforts
to hold ISIL accountable for its crimes in Iraq, including
against women and girls, as well as minority groups,
particularly the Yazidi people. We also welcome the
efforts of the Special Adviser in line with his mandate
to promote global accountability for crimes committed
by ISIL and deliver justice for all survivors and victims,
regardless of faith, gender or ethnicity, and despite
significant security, technological, psychosocial and
resource constraints.
Kenya supports the investigative initiatives of
UNITAD to unearth key terrorist financial facilitators.
This will go a long way towards holding terror
operatives and facilitators accountable for their crimes.
We also commend the ongoing information-sharing
efforts among security agencies and the justice system
to ensure the prosecution of ISIL operatives.
UNITAD’s successes offer useful lessons
in investigating similar acts that may amount to
war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide
committed by ISIL and its affiliates in other parts of
the world. Notably, ISIL’s development and deployment
of chemical weapons, exploitation of financial systems
and use of foreign terrorist fighters have enabled it to
grow its lethal power and enhanced its ability to spread
its tentacles to other parts of the world.
In Africa, ISIL’s affiliates in Somalia, Mozambique,
the Democratic Republic of Congo, and countries
in West Africa and the Sahel continue to be inspired
to carry out complex attacks that are destabilizing
Governments,
terrorizing
civilian
populations
and exacerbating State fragilities. In East Africa,
Al-Shabaab, an Al-Qaida-linked terrorist group, is the

22-375409/18

S/PV.9059

Threats to international peace and security

premier peace and security threat. This terror group
draws much influence from foreign terrorist fighters
joining the group from ISIL and its affiliates. Kenya
therefore continues to strongly call for the application
of the full force of the counter-terrorism sanction
regimes, including the regime established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), on all terrorist groups in equal
measure and without favouritism.
In conclusion, Kenya commends the Iraqi
Government for its continued collaboration with and
support for UNITAD. We urge for enhanced funding
by the international community to address existing
operational and modern technological gaps to facilitate
expedited investigations and the full implementation
of the Team’s mandate in accordance with the highest
possible standards.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank the
Special Adviser for his briefing and his leadership
of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD), as it
carries out its challenging but critical mandate.
The United States welcomes the news that, as we
heard from the Special Adviser, UNITAD is beginning
to uncover how leaders of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) used the group’s ill-gotten funds to
finance its crimes, in particular to carry out genocide
against Yazidis, Christians and Shia Muslims in the
areas that it controlled, and crimes against humanity
and ethnic cleansing against those same groups, as well
as against Sunni Muslims, Kurds and other minorities.
The United States also welcomes that UNITAD is
reconstructing its chain of command down to the local
level in order to establish individual responsibility by
perpetrators involved in specific crimes.
We also note that the evidence uncovered by
UNITAD, including direct communications among
senior leaders, reveals the methods ISIS used to develop
chemical weapons. ISIS was intentional and thorough,
conducting experiments on humans to optimize
lethality; then the group incentivized the deployment of
those deadly weapons by providing specific financial
rewards for ISIS forces that deployed those weapons.
The United States joins others in commending the
remarkable work of UNITAD’s dedicated members
in collecting, preserving, archiving and analysing the
evidence of crimes by ISIS members. We are pleased
to hear about UNITAD’s successes in developing
10/18

08/06/2022

innovative data-harvesting and storage solutions to the
challenges posed by the millions of pages of documents
and the vast digital content that the Special Adviser is
working with.
We also welcome the reports of strong cooperation
between UNITAD and the Iraqi Prime Minister’s
Office, the Foreign Ministry and the courts, as well
as provincial authorities and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, particularly as UNITAD transitions to
developing case files to document the crimes committed
by specific individuals for use in prosecutions.
We also welcome news of the growing UNITAD
collaboration with law enforcement authorities from
outside Iraq as those States seek to prosecute their
nationals who have committed crimes as foreign
fighters. We welcome UNITAD’s support for the
Swedish Prosecution Authority during the trial of a
Swedish national for war crimes committed during her
time with ISIS, as we heard from the Special Adviser.
In the context of UNITAD’s increasing ability to
support prosecutions, the United States urges Member
States to repatriate, rehabilitate, reintegrate and
prosecute, as appropriate, their nationals who are foreign
terrorist fighters or ISIS-associated family members in
Iraq and Syria. UNITAD’s work is core to reconciliation
in Iraq. Transparent prosecutions that meet minimum
fair-trial guarantees and legal protections will ensure
accountability. The identification and return of remains
to family members can provide dignified closure and
community healing.
In conclusion, although diminished, ISIS remains
intent on achieving its abhorrent goals. Through
UNITAD’s expert support of Iraqi efforts to hold ISIS
members accountable, combined with the counterterrorism operations of Iraqi forces and the Global
Coalition to Defeat ISIS, it will be increasingly clear
to ISIS members and recruits that there is no future
for ISIS.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I also thank Special
Adviser Ritscher for his comprehensive briefing today.
Norway remains a steadfast supporter of the
mandate of United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD).
Accountability for the crimes committed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq is a
22-37540

08/06/2022

Threats to international peace and security

prerequisite for the rule of law and sustainable peace in
the country.
We are encouraged by the progress that the Team
and Iraqi partners made during the current reporting
period towards bringing ISIL perpetrators to justice.
We also commend the Team for completing its initial
case assessment report of ISIL’s use of chemical and
biological weapons, and we look forward to the final
case brief for this critical investigative track, which
should also be viewed in relation to the international
non-proliferation architecture.
We welcome the progress reported in several
other investigations, including with respect to crimes
committed by ISIL against Christians, Yazidis and
other minorities. We are pleased to note that the
Team’s priorities are beginning to shift from structural
investigations to the preparation of specific case briefs
to support the prosecution of individual perpetrators.
That development is a clear sign of the Team’s efficient
work and a crucial step towards accountability.
With regard to cross-cutting thematic priorities, we
once again applaud the Team for consistently employing
a survivor-centred and age- and gender-sensitive
approach across its work. We commend the Team for
continuing to build its capacity in specialized crosssectional areas, ensuring that investigative activities
are conducted in line with international standards.
In the context of the investigation of crimes against
Christians, we note that approach has allowed the
Team to “reach survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence … despite challenging social constraints”.
That is a critical investigative achievement , which is
also a key priority for Norway.
Similarly, with regard to the investigation of
ISIL’s use of chemical and biological weapons, we
note that the Team’s previous report described the
“underreported gender-related harms” (S/2021/974,
para. 19) suffered by those targeted by such weapons.
Upon the completion of the investigation’s initial case
assessment, we would have welcomed the inclusion of
additional gender-related information in the current
report (see S/2022/434).
Lastly, Norway is also pleased to note the robust
partnership that continues between the Team and
the Iraqi authorities, including on a wide range of
capacity-building and technical assistance measures
for strengthening national judicial institutions. We
particularly commend Iraq on its active engagement

S/PV.9059

and cooperation in that regard. We would, however, be
eager to learn more about UNITAD’s efforts to support
Iraq in the adoption of national legislation allowing for
the prosecution of international crimes — a prerequisite
for the fulfilment of the Team’s mandate.
In conclusion, let me once again thank Special
Adviser Ritscher for his briefing today. UNITAD’s
work remains key to ensuring accountability for ISIL’s
crimes, justice for survivors and sustainable peace
for Iraq. The Special Adviser can count on Norway’s
continued support.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, my
delegation would like to welcome the eighth report of
the Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) (see S/2022/434). We also wish
to express our gratitude to Special Adviser Christian
Ritscher for the valuable briefing, which brings further
understanding to the state of play of the key benchmarks
in the implementation of resolution 2379 (2017).
The Security Council knows all too well that the
hopes and aspirations of the Iraqi people, as well as
their expectation for a swift, impartial and independent
investigation into the crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and affiliated
terrorist groups against civilians and vulnerable groups
in Iraq, hinge firmly on the work of UNITAD.
We must therefore continue mobilizing the
international community to remain engaged in
seeking accountability, including by providing vital
support for the investigative team to enable it to assist
the Iraqi authorities to thoroughly carry out needed
investigations into the crimes perpetuated by ISIL,
especially the reported grave human rights violations
and abuses, war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and deliberate acts of vandalism targeted at
cultural and religious sites.
Ghana holds the view that maintaining the
momentum is necessary to hold accountable all those
who believe that they can maintain impunity for
parochial, ideological and religious gain, including
the use of violence to terrorize vulnerable groups
and individuals. Accountability is fundamental for
dealing decisively with the scourge of terrorism and
violent extremism.

22-3754011/18

S/PV.9059

Threats to international peace and security

In that context, it is imperative for the international
community not to countenance any situation that allows
the crimes committed by ISIL and affiliated groups
in Iraq or anywhere else to go unpunished. Without
effective accountability, we not only undermine
the global fight against terrorism but potentially
risk diminishing the hopes of victims and survivors
for justice.
In joining our voice to that of other Council
members in acknowledging the commendable progress
that UNITAD has made, we note that a lot more
can be done in the area of enhancing cooperation
and information-sharing between UNITAD and the
competent Iraqi authorities. In that regard, we would
like to make the following three points.
First, it is important to ensure that the Investigative
Team is mindful of the need for an Iraqi-owned and -led
process. National ownership and support for the key
strategic, operational and evidence-collection activities
of UNITAD, in line with the terms of reference, is
vital to building case files that can facilitate successful
trials. In that respect, UNITAD should not seek to
replace or act as an alternative to the Iraqi judicial
system but should complement it by providing the
requisite institutional support and resources to assist
Iraqi investigative judges and investigators in the task
of gathering and preserving evidence in order to help
them prosecute crimes effectively.
Secondly, the Iraqi political and judicial authorities
should continue to sustain the healthy cooperation and
coordination that has characterized their relationship
with the Investigative Team. We encourage the relevant
Iraqi authorities to scale up their efforts to cut through
administrative bottlenecks, red tape and bureaucracy
in order to create the conditions and environment
needed to support UNITAD’s important work. It should
not be lost on anyone, including the Iraqi officials,
that evidence-based prosecutions are fundamental to
ensuring that justice is obtained without discrimination
or selectivity for all the citizens affected, with a view to
fostering genuine national reconciliation.
Lastly, we would like to underline that international
cooperation and multilateralism remain a vital
component of any meaningful effort to degrade the
capabilities of terrorist groups and curb the serious
threats that they pose to international peace and security.
Joint and coordinated action among all stakeholders and
international partners, including the United Nations
12/18

08/06/2022

system, is the only way to comprehensively prevent and
combat terrorism, including dismantling the opaque
and clandestine operations of terrorist groups and
their leadership, structures, financing, ideology and
decision-making processes.
In conclusion, Ghana affirms its support for the
leadership of Special Adviser Christian Ritscher and
looks forward to the successful implementation of
UNITAD’s mandate.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Special Adviser Ritscher for his briefing.
The collection of evidence is an important basis
for pursuing accountability for the terrorist acts
committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
China supports the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD) in assisting the Iraqi Government with
evidence-gathering. We welcome the overall progress
that the Investigative Team has made, notably in its
investigations of the use of chemical and biological
weapons and terrorist financing, which will help to
establish the conditions for pursuing accountability for
acts of terrorism.
Iraq bears the primary responsibility for providing
justice within its territory. The international community
should show genuine respect for Iraq’s sovereignty and
jurisdiction over its territory and support it in pursuing
accountability for terrorist crimes under its domestic
law. We encourage UNITAD to continue to strengthen
its cooperation with the Iraqi Government, especially
with regard to the speedy and complete transfer of
evidence to Iraq, in line with the provisions of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. If it wants to share
evidence with other Member States, the Investigative
Team should obtain the consent of the Iraqi Government
and adhere to the principles of transparency and
non-discrimination. UNITAD should continue to
maintain constructive, cooperative relations with the
Iraqi Government and assist it with capacity-building,
evidence-collection and digitization, among other
things. Its donation of a DNA laboratory information
system to the Iraqi Government and assistance with
digitization are commendable efforts. The application
of new technologies for greater effectiveness in the area
of counter-terrorism is a useful practice and can be an
important reference point for the use of technologies in
other fields.
22-37540

08/06/2022

Threats to international peace and security

It should be emphasized that UNITAD is an
interim and transitional arrangement in support of
Iraq’s accountability efforts and should not become a
permanent United Nations body. Last year’s report by
the Team (see S/2021/974) set out some preliminary
ideas for a completion strategy, which we hope that
UNITAD will further flesh out and implement.
Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind,
and counter-terrorism transcends borders. The
international community should continue to support
Iraq in its efforts to fight terrorism and consolidate
its hard-won counter-terrorism gains. We call on the
countries concerned to expedite the repatriation of
foreign terrorist fighters in Iraq. It is also imperative
to strengthen cooperation within the United Nations
framework and oppose terrorism in all its forms. We
must combat all terrorist organizations designated as
such by the Security Council and avoid politicizing
counter-terrorism and adopting double standards.
Ms. O’Sullivan (Ireland): Before I begin, I would
like to acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Iraq and thank Mr. Ritscher for his
report (see S/2022/434) and briefing this afternoon.
He can be assured of Ireland’s strong support for the
crucial work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
in pursuing accountability for atrocity crimes
committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in Iraq (ISIL).
Ireland welcomes the progress that UNITAD made
across all its investigative lines of inquiry during the
reporting period. We recognize that the cooperation
with the Investigative Team by the Iraqi authorities,
including the Kurdistan Regional Government, was
essential to ensuring such progress. We welcome the
completion of an initial case assessment report on
ISIL’s development and use of chemical and biological
weapons, including in Taza Khurmatu in 2016. The
calculated way in which ISIL sought to produce and
deploy weapons of mass destruction is truly appalling.
There must be accountability for that.
We were pleased to see significant progress in
UNITAD’s thematic investigation into sexual and
gender-based violence perpetrated by ISIL. The
insights obtained by the Team through interviews
with older Yazidi women demonstrate the real value
and importance of both gender- and age-sensitive

S/PV.9059

investigative approaches. We also recognize the
progress in investigating crimes against the LGBTQI+
community and would like to thank civil society for
identifying witnesses to interview. While accountability
and compensation for victims and survivors are crucial,
so too is implementing psychosocial supports ensuring
that their needs are met in the long term. More broadly,
we commend the Team for its continued partnership
with civil society, which has significantly boosted its
evidence holdings.
As outlined by the Special Adviser, the Investigative
Team’s priorities have pivoted towards the identification
of perpetrators most responsible for atrocity crimes
and building targeted case files in cooperation with
the Iraqi judiciary. That is an important step in
moving from evidence-gathering to evidence-based
trials. However, the key to advancing accountability
for ISIL perpetrators and moving forward in sharing
evidence between UNITAD and the Iraqi authorities
is the continued effort to develop legislation enabling
the domestic prosecution of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. Ireland therefore calls on the
relevant actors in Iraq to form a Government as soon as
possible in order to make progress on such legislation
as a matter of priority. We also reiterate our firm view
that such legislation should not include the application
of the death penalty.
The technical assistance and support provided
by UNITAD to the Iraqi authorities is multifaceted,
ranging from evidence digitization and preservation to
forensic expertise, the excavation of mass graves and
training for judges and investigators. We note that the
European Union (EU) has played an important role in
enhancing UNITAD’s digital capacities through the
EU digitization project, and we strongly urge for the
continuation of that important technical assistance.
Beyond Iraq, we also welcome the continued
assistance provided by UNITAD in support of
investigations by national authorities in a range of
jurisdictions, including in Europe, and we note that
extrabudgetary funding remains crucial to both the
speed of investigations in Iraq and to UNITAD’s
response to assistance requests from Member States.
Ireland commends the States that have exercised
universal jurisdiction to prosecute atrocity crimes
committed by ISIL members in Iraq, and we noted
most recently the support that UNITAD provided to the
Swedish Prosecution Authority, which assisted in the
conviction of a Swedish woman for failing to protect

22-3754013/18

S/PV.9059

Threats to international peace and security

her minor son from recruitment and use as a child
soldier by ISIL.
In that regard, we encourage UNITAD to build
on progress to date and enhance evidence-sharing
cooperation with both the European Union Agency for
Criminal Justice Cooperation and the European Union
Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation.
Before concluding, allow me to reiterate Ireland’s
steadfast support for the Special Adviser’s work in
delivering justice for the victims and survivors of ISIL
atrocity crimes in Iraq.
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza (Brazil): I would like to
thank Special Adviser Ritscher and his team for their
work and for his comprehensive update on the activities
of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
ISIL (UNITAD). I would also like to welcome the
Permanent Representative of Iraq and commend the
Iraqi Government for its cooperation with UNITAD in
its work.
The serious violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq
deserve the utmost condemnation. The perpetrators’
utter disregard for the law and for civilian lives must
not go unpunished. Promoting accountability for
ISIL crimes in Iraq is key to long-term stability in
the country.
Members of all religions across the country have
suffered the consequences of the crimes of Da’esh/ISIL,
and all survivors must receive support in their efforts
to move on with their lives within their communities.
We therefore praise the progress made in investigations
concerning core crimes under international law
committed by ISIL against the Christian community,
as well as other ethnic and religious groups in Iraq.
We also welcome the Special Adviser’s conclusion
in his report (see S/2022/434) that UNITAD has begun a
new central stage of its work, namely, the development
of case files to hold ISIL leaders accountable for their
crimes. It goes without saying that, in implementing its
mandate, UNITAD must be impartial and independent
and act consistently with the Charter of the United
Nations and other relevant norms of international law.
The international rules on the allocation of
jurisdiction among States, in particular, is one such
relevant branch of international law. We therefore
14/18

08/06/2022

stress the importance of respecting Iraqi sovereignty in
the pursuit of accountability for crimes committed on
its territory, including in the sharing of information by
UNITAD with third countries.
We recall that UNITAD’s mandate to support
domestic prosecutions has the Iraqi authorities as its
primary intended recipient. In a spirit of partnership,
we commend the collaboration between UNITAD and
the Iraqi Government in the collection, storage and
analysis of evidence of the atrocities committed by
ISIL. We also acknowledge UNITAD’s efforts to build
the capacity of Iraq’s judicial system. Our collective
responsibility to promote justice and seek redress for
the victims of international crimes, including through
domestic courts assisted by UNITAD, can be addressed
properly only as part of a collective, coordinated effort.
Another important aspect of UNITAD’s activities
is oversight, which is also valid for other investigative
bodies of the United Nations that are preventive in
nature. Justice can be delivered only within the limits
of the law, and we must be able to ascertain and oversee
compliance by United Nations organs with those limits.
To conclude, we take note of UNITAD’s need to
recruit expert personnel to support its activities in Iraq
and encourage efforts to enhance geographic diversity
across UNITAD staff.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank Special Adviser
Ritscher for his briefing, and I welcome the Permanent
Representative of Iraq to the meeting.
The United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/ISIL
(UNITAD) was set up by the Security Council to assist
the Government and the people of Iraq in their pursuit
of justice for the heinous crimes committed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The victims
of ISIL’s horrific crimes in Iraq also include 39 Indian
nationals. The implementation of UNITAD’s mandate,
which includes the collection and timely sharing of
evidence of ISIL crimes perpetrated in Iraq, will
contribute to ensuring accountability for those crimes
and fighting the impunity of terror.
Ensuring accountability for ISIL crimes, especially
those committed against minority communities in Iraq,
is also critical for achieving a smooth reconciliation
process and long-term peace in Iraq. The ongoing
investigations into attacks against the Christian,
Sunni, Kaka’i, Shabak and Shia Turkmen communities
22-37540

08/06/2022

Threats to international peace and security

and the strengthening of the initial case briefs in the
attacks against the Yazidi community will support
the Government of Iraq’s efforts aimed at national
reconciliation and delivering justice.
We strongly believe that the credibility of our
collective fight against terrorism can be strengthened
only when we can ensure accountability for the grave
and inhumane acts of terror committed by terrorists
and those who foment, support and finance terrorism.
India’s financial support to UNITAD in those two
key areas of its investigation will further strengthen
that objective.
We welcome the completion of an initial case
assessment of the development and use of chemical and
biological weapons by ISIL in Iraq. The preliminary
observations of the report are deeply concerning, as
they reveal that a terrorist group with considerable
territory under its control can develop and deploy
those deadly weapons within a short period of time
by misusing the State’s educational, financial and
commercial infrastructure.
The international community needs to pay closer
attention to that issue, since such a template could
be replicated by other terrorist groups that enjoy
considerable territorial control. We encourage UNITAD
to share its findings in relation to that investigation
with the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), which has the mandate to assist countries
in preventing the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors.
ISIL’s destruction of cultural heritage in Iraq
is widely known. In its preliminary investigations,
UNITAD identified a number of such crimes, including
the destruction of shrines and culturally significant
sites belonging to Iraq’s minority communities. India’s
financial contribution to UNITAD will strengthen the
Team’s investigations in that important area and enable
prosecutions for such crimes.
UNITAD’s work in Iraq must continue to be
underpinned by close cooperation and coordination with
the Iraqi authorities and their capacity-building efforts.
We commend the Team’s joint work with the Iraqi
judiciary and its assistance projects in areas such as the
digitization of records, DNA forensics and mass grave
excavations. We also note the increase in the number of
Iraqi experts who are part of UNITAD. Augmenting the
capacities of Iraqi agencies and experts is crucial from

S/PV.9059

a long-term perspective and we encourage UNITAD to
continue its good work in that area.
We are also happy to note that the evidence
collected and shared by UNITAD with third countries
has resulted in the prosecution and conviction of ISIL
terrorists. Similar evidence-sharing with the Iraqi
authorities should commence at the earliest opportunity
in order to support trials and prosecutions in Iraqi
courts. It is unfortunate that, despite a lapse of more
than three years, UNITAD has been unable to fully
service the evidentiary requirements of the Government
of Iraq due to a differing interpretation of UNITAD’s
mandate. That needs to be rectified soon.
The people of Iraq have made immense sacrifices
in Iraq’s fight against terrorism. As a country that
has been a victim of terrorism for many decades, we
share their pain and grief. Justice should be delivered
to the victims of ISIL’s crimes and their families, but
that cannot happen until those responsible for the
atrocities are held fully accountable. The full and
timely implementation of UNITAD’s mandate would
contribute to securing justice for those affected.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Christian Ritscher, Special Adviser and Head
of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
ISIL (UNITAD), for his presentation of the Team’s
eighth report (see S/2022/434), submitted pursuant to
resolution 2597 (2021).
I welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Iraq, which once again demonstrates
his country’s commitment to working closely with the
international community and with UNITAD to ensure
that justice is delivered for all the victims of the crimes
committed by Da’esh. We congratulate all members
of UNITAD for their outstanding work, sometimes
in difficult conditions, and reiterate our support for
the Team.
Thanks to UNITAD’s actions on the ground,
together with national and local authorities, significant
progress has been made. In particular, we welcome
the completion of the first report on the development
of chemical and biological weapons and the use of
chemical weapons by Da’esh in Iraq, which is based in
particular on the crimes committed against the Yazidi
community in Sinjar dating from August 2014.

22-3754015/18

S/PV.9059

Threats to international peace and security

We also welcome the establishment of an analysis
laboratory, the progress on the financial investigation
into Da’esh’s central treasury of Bayt Al-Mal and the
excavation completed at the beginning of March of three
mass graves in and around Hardan in Sinjar district, in
partnership with the medical and legal department of
the Iraqi Ministry of Health, which led to the discovery
of more than 50 bodies. I would now like to focus on
three points.
First, the collection and preservation of evidence
are at the core of UNITAD’s mandate, and its progress
in digitizing evidence is crucial to preventing the loss
of evidence or damage to it. We encourage UNITAD
to continue that work in order to reach its goal, by the
end of 2022, of digitizing half of the evidence that it
currently holds in hard-copy format. We also welcome
the ongoing commitment of the Investigative Team to
Iraqi civil society. A dialogue between UNITAD and
civil society is essential to meeting the goals at the core
of its mandate. That dialogue has also made it possible
to collect valuable witness statements, thereby enabling
progress to be made on investigations and shedding
light on crimes committed by Da’esh.
Secondly, cooperation is essential to combating
impunity for crimes committed by Da’esh, and UNITAD’s
enhanced cooperation with the Iraqi Government has
made a considerable contribution to the progress it has
made. We also underscore the importance of continued
awareness-raising by UNITAD among the Iraqi judicial
authorities regarding the mechanism’s mandate, as
defined by resolution 2379 (2017) of 21 December 2017,
including by training Iraqi investigating judges in the
area of international criminal law and in preparing case
files and prosecutions against members of Da’esh for
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
We encourage the Iraqi authorities to continue their
dialogue with UNITAD on those issues. More broadly,
France calls on all interested States to support the
work of UNITAD through enhanced cooperation
and commensurate financial support. However, it is
also important to recall the unwavering position of
the United Nations with regard to sharing evidence
in judicial proceedings that might result in the death
penalty, regardless of location.
Thirdly, the fate of the victims must remain
our primary concern. In cooperation with the Iraqi
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, UNITAD is
currently training 80 social workers and psychologists
in providing support to victims, which is a key pillar of
16/18

08/06/2022

reconstruction and reconciliation for the Iraqi people.
That victim-centred approach, as well as the gendersensitive approach adopted by UNITAD in all of its
work, is essential.
In conclusion, France reiterates its commitment to
combating terrorism and impunity. The threat posed by
Da’esh has not disappeared. That terrorist organization
continues to carry out frequent deadly attacks. Together
with its partners, France will continue to stand with
Iraq in combating terrorism and remains determined
to continue working to ensure Da’esh’s lasting defeat.
Given the risk of Da’esh’s resurgence, the Council
must remain mobilized, including by firmly supporting
the work of UNITAD. Combating impunity for all
perpetrators of crimes is an imperative for stabilization,
reconstruction and reconciliation for the Iraqi people as
a whole.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank Special Adviser Ritscher for his work and
for the valuable information he provided to the Council
today. I also welcome the presence of the Ambassador
of Iraq at today’s meeting.
Albania commends the excellent work of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) in collecting, documenting
and preserving evidence of crimes, including sexual
violence and crimes targeting minorities, as well
as the use of biological and chemical weapons by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
We welcome the support and the strong cooperation
between UNITAD and the Iraqi authorities, as well
as their cooperation with national judicial authorities.
Sharing information with relevant Member States will
enable justice systems to prosecute those responsible
for financing, supporting and carrying out terrorist
activities worldwide. We commend the authorities for
their work to rebuild cultural heritage damaged or
destroyed by ISIL.
ISIL has been defeated. The caliphate no longer
exists. Yet dormant cells and affiliate groups still present
an imminent and global threat in various regions, and
the spread of ISIL in Africa is extremely worrying.
We need united global efforts and coordination to win
the fight against terrorism in all its forms and shapes
more than ever. Albania remains fully committed to
accountability. We reiterate that delivering justice is
22-37540

08/06/2022

Threats to international peace and security

not and should not be optional. It is a must everywhere,
including in enabling the Iraqi people to rebuild a
better and peaceful future. It is also a reminder to all
perpetrators that they will be held to account for their
actions and that they will answer for their crimes.
Regional and international cooperation is important in
that regard. We must move from evidence-collection to
extradition to judicial proceedings at the national level.
While it is vital to legally prosecute all persons
responsible for crimes against humanity, torture and
inhumane treatment, we need to ensure that all measures
taken to combat terrorism comply with international
law and international humanitarian law and fully
respect human rights. Albania urges Member States to
repatriate and prosecute, as appropriate, all individuals
involved in terrorist activities, as well as to facilitate
their reintegration into society by providing them and
their family members with secure jobs, housing options
and education. There should be a special focus on the
needs of children, and the best interests of the child
must be the guiding principle. Albania has successfully
repatriated dozens of women and children from
detention camps in Syria and Iraq and provided them
with the means they need to start a new life.
Ending impunity is imperative for Iraq’s
stabilization, reconstruction and reconciliation. The
Security Council must show unity and support United
Nations mechanisms in preventing the resurgence
of ISIL, Da’esh and their affiliate groups in Iraq and
elsewhere. Strengthening cooperation at all levels and
sharing data with all the relevant actors, encouraging
holistic civil-society engagement, supporting judicial
mechanisms for fair trials and guaranteeing and
protecting human rights are all essential tools in
winning the war against terrorism.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would again like to draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in the Council’s meetings
to deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in
line with the Council’s commitment to making more
effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I have the honour, as the representative of my
country, to convey its thanks and gratitude for the efforts

S/PV.9059

of the United Nations and its main organs through its
resolutions, recommendations and decisions, and for
all international efforts to support Iraq in combating
terrorism and bringing terrorists to justice. And I would
like to congratulate Albania on its presidency of the
Council this month. We wish you and your team every
success in your endeavours, Mr. President. I would also
like to thank Special Adviser Christian Ritscher and his
team for his briefing to the Council and for highlighting
the most important paragraphs of the eighth report (see
S/2022/434) issued by the United Nations Investigative
Team (UNITAD), which covers its activities in my
country during the reporting period.
During the implementation of resolution 2597
(2021), Iraq looks forward to continuing the work of
prosecuting all who have been involved in the terrorist
organization Da’esh and who have assisted, funded and
provided it with logistic and cyber support, as well as
of prosecuting crimes committed by Da’esh related to
smuggling oil and artefacts during the period when it
was in control.
Following Mr. Ritscher’s important briefing,
we commend his report, which addressed several
important points that ensured the progress that has been
made in the Team’s work in Iraq. That was achieved by
collaborating and cooperating with the Government of
Iraq and by opening new investigation tracks for the
crimes committed by the terrorist organization against
all the people of Iraq so as to achieve accountability in
cooperation with the Iraqi national authorities.
In that regard, we also commend the efforts of the
Investigative Team and its Head to promote universal
accountability for the crimes committed by the terrorist
organization Da’esh. At the same time, we emphasize
that criminal accountability is long overdue in Iraq and
that the victims and their families are still waiting for
justice to be served. UNITAD was established to serve
justice and provide reparations for the horrific crimes
that were committed against the Iraqi people.
It should be noted that the major challenge facing
the Team in the coming period is to deliver justice and
to submit all evidence to the Iraqi Government as soon
as possible, whether obtained by the Team or provided
by Iraq and developed using innovative technology, for
use in Iraqi national courts. UNITAD’s mandate, in
accordance with resolution 2379 (2017) and its terms
of reference, is to collect, preserve and store evidence
pertaining to the crimes that terrorist Da’esh committed

22-3754017/18

S/PV.9059

Threats to international peace and security

in Iraq and to present that evidence to Iraq to enable it
to conduct fair trials and to achieve justice and ensure
redress for the victims. UNITAD’s mandate is not
complete if it stops at collecting, preserving and storing
evidence without allowing the use of that evidence in
national legal contexts.
The eighth report mentions that the Investigative
Team has completed its investigations in four important
cases. That progress in the Team’s work and the
collection of evidence in those four cases provide a
significant opportunity that UNITAD should take up
by handing over such evidence to be used in national
trials to prosecute Da’esh elements responsible for
those crimes.
In that regard, we recall that the Team’s sixth
report explicitly mentions that those trials could be
conducted by the end of 2021 or the beginning of 2022.
That therefore represents a commitment, and we should
cooperate to fulfil it within the time limits specified
in the report. In that context, we hope and reiterate the
importance for Iraq and the international community
to take quick, effective and practical steps to submit
the evidence to the Iraqi Government and conduct
national trials.
Despite UNITAD’s efforts and the ongoing and
increasing cooperation with the Iraqi Government to
fulfil the Investigative Team’s mandate, Iraq believes
that the Team has gone a long way in collecting,
preserving and storing evidence. My country’s
Government appreciates those efforts and acknowledges
the difficulties in searching for and collecting evidence.

18/18

08/06/2022

We are aware of the scope of the challenges facing the
Team. However, the Iraqi Government is also aware of
the mounting pressure from the Iraqi people in general
and the families of the victims in particular to achieve
accountability. We highlight that the Government
of Iraq, in collaboration with the Iraqi National
Coordinating Committee, looks forward to achieving
the Team’s mandate.
The Government of Iraq reaffirms its commitment
to cooperating with the international Investigative
Team and to providing all the necessary assistance
through the Iraqi National Coordinating Committee
and to support the Team in fulfilling its mandate, in full
respect for Iraq’s sovereignty and national jurisdiction
over the crimes committed on its territory and against
its people.
In conclusion, I would like to express our thanks
and appreciation to the members of the Council and the
friendly States that have helped us to fight terrorism.
We must work together to ensure that we bring the
perpetrators to justice before national courts. We would
like also to express our thanks and appreciation to
Special Adviser Ritscher and his team for their efforts
and the progress made in UNITAD’s activities despite
the challenges facing them. We also thank them for
exchanging experiences with Iraqi national authorities
and shedding light on the violations committed by
terrorist Da’esh against the Iraqi people. We wish
Mr. Ritscher and his team every success in their work.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

22-37540
