S/2015/162

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 March 2015
English
Original: French

Letter dated 5 March 2015 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Further to the letter of the Permanent Representative of China to the United
Nations, Liu Jieyi, dated 3 February 2015, I have the honour to inform you that the
members of the Security Council have decided to send a mission to Africa from 9 to
13 March 2015. The mission plans to visit the Central African Republic, Ethiopia
and Burundi. The members of the Council have agreed on the terms of reference of
the mission, which are contained in the annex to the present letter.
I will co-lead the mission with Ambassador Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins. We
will be joined by a third co-lead, Ambassador Samantha Power, during the Council’s
visit to Burundi.
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins (Angola)
Ambassador Mahamat Zene Cherif (Chad)
Ambassador Carlos Olguín Cigarroa (Chile)
Mr. Zhao Yong (China)
Ambassador François Delattre (France)
Ambassador Dina Kawar (Jordan)
Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaitė (Lithuania)
Mrs. Siti Hajjar Adnin (Malaysia)
Ambassador Jim McLay (New Zealand)
Ambassador Usman Sarki (Nigeria)
Mr. Petr Iliichev (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Juan Manuel González de Linares Palou (Spain)
Ambassador Peter Wilson (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland)
Ambassador Samantha Power (United States of America)
Ambassador Rafael Darío Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of))
(Signed) François Delattre
President of the Security Council
15-03471 (E)

130315

*1503471*

130315

S/2015/162

Annex
[Original: English]

Security Council mission to Africa: Central African Republic,
African Union and Burundi
Terms of reference
Central African Republic
1.
To recall that the Central African Republic authorities bear the primary
responsibility to protect all populations within their territory from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity and to emphasize that any
sustainable solution to the crisis in the Central African Republic should be owned
by that country.
2.
To commend the African-led International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic, Operation Sangaris and the European Union military operation in
the Central African Republic for the work done in laying the foundation for
increased security ahead of and in support of the deployment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA).
3.
To express grave concern that armed groups continue to destabilize the Central
African Republic and pose a permanent threat to the peace, security and stability of
the country, and to further express concern at the recent increase in kidnappings and
attacks against humanitarian workers in the Central African Republic, which
impedes humanitarian access to vulnerable populations.
4.
To reiterate the appeal to all parties and stakeholders, particularly the leaders
of the ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka groups, as well as all other armed groups, to
immediately cease all forms of violence, including sexual violence, to permanently
lay down their arms, to release all children from their ranks, and to embark upon the
path of dialogue as the only viable means towards achieving lasting reconciliation
and peace.
5.
To remind all parties of their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law to ensure the immediate, full, safe and unhindered civilian-led
delivery of humanitarian assistance and the principle of safe, dignified and
sustainable return of internally displaced persons and refugees.
6.
To commend efforts by the transitional authorities to gather views of local
citizens in advance of the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation by dispatching
Government ministers and officials throughout the Central African Republic and to
welcome the holding of the Bangui Forum as an important milestone for a
comprehensive political dialogue and reconciliation process at the local and national
levels.
7.
To reiterate the call upon the transitional authorities to accelerate the transition
process and to take concrete action, with the full, effective and equal participation
of women, for the holding of free, fair, transparent and inclusive presidential and
legislative elections that allow for the full, effective and equal participation of
internally displaced persons and Central African Republic refugees, no later than
August 2015; the fight against impunity, including for crimes of sexual and genderbased violence; the formulation and implementation of a disarmament,

2/6

15-03471

S/2015/162

demobilization, reintegration and repatriation strategy; and the rebuilding of
effective State institutions, including through security sector reform.
8.
To reinforce the need for an inclusive and effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, as well as repatriation and resettlement, in
the case of foreign fighters, including women and children formerly associated with
armed forces and groups, while respecting the need to fight impunity.
9.
To stress the important role of the internal security forces (police and
gendarmerie) in the restoration of security in the Central African Republic and
encourage the Central African Republic authorities to initiate the reform process of
the Central African Republic armed forces, to include appropriate vetting
procedures in order to put in place a professional, representative and balanced army,
including through the adoption of measures to absorb elements of the armed groups
meeting rigorous selection criteria, building the capacity of the security forces to
address sexual and gender-based violence and retraining part of the Central African
Republic armed forces.
10. To welcome in this regard the decision of the European Union to establish a
one-year military advice mission based in Bangui (European Union Military
Advisory Mission in the Central African Republic), as requested by the transitional
authorities of the Central African Republic, in order to contribute to providing them
with expert advice on reforming the Central African Republic armed forces and to
underline the importance of a clear distribution of tasks and close coordination
between the international forces or missions in the Central African Republic and the
lead role of MINUSCA in this regard.
11. To assess the deployment of the military, police and civilian components of
MINUSCA; the initial work of the Mission in implementing its mandate; the
establishment of the Bangui task force; and the reconfiguration of the Mission
following the violent incidents in Bangui in October.
12. To urge MINUSCA to accelerate the deployments of its civilian, police and
military capabilities, including gender advisers and women protection advisers, in
the Central African Republic in order to reach its full operational capacity as soon
as possible and enable the Mission to effectively discharge its mandate over the
entire national territory.
13. To assess the security situation and the ability of MINUSCA to intensify the
implementation of its mandate, in particular to protect civilians under threat of
physical violence; prevent and report on all forms of violence, including sexualbased violence; support the implementation of the transition process, in particular
the reconciliation and electoral processes, with the full and effective participation of
women; facilitate the civilian-led delivery of humanitarian assistance; support the
promotion and protection of human rights; support national and international justice
and the rule of law and support the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation and security sector reform processes, in accordance with the priority
tasks set out in paragraph 30 of Security Council resolution 2149 (2014).
14. To assess the plight of vulnerable populations in the Central African Republic,
including those located in enclaves in Bangui and around the country.
15. To urge the former troop- and police-contributing countries of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African Republic that have been
rehatted to MINUSCA to expedite the procurement and deployment of remaining
additional contingent-owned equipment.

15-03471

3/6

S/2015/162

16. To call upon all international partners of the Central African Republic to
provide urgent financial contributions to support national dialogue and
reconciliation, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform processes and the restoration of the judicial and penal chains in order to fight
against impunity.
17. To further call upon all international partners to provide support to the
electoral process as a matter of urgency, particularly through financing the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) multi-donor basket fund for elections.
18. To express grave concern at the threat to peace and security in the Central
African Republic arising from the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons, and the use of such weapons against
civilians affected by armed conflict, and to recall in this regard the important
contribution that the Council-mandated arms embargo can make to countering the
illicit transfer of arms and related materiel in the Central African Republic and its
region and to supporting post-conflict peacebuilding, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security sector reform.
19. To stress the urgent and imperative need to end impunity in the Central
African Republic and to bring to justice perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law and of abuses or violations of human rights, including sexual
violence, underlining in this regard the need to bolster national accountability
mechanisms and to implement without delay the Memorandum of Understanding on
Urgent Temporary Measures of 7 August 2014, which describes, in particular, the
establishment of a national special penal court in charge of investigating and
prosecuting the serious crimes committed in the Central African Republic.
20. To welcome the ongoing cooperation of the transitional authorities of the
Central African Republic with the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
who opened an investigation on 24 September 2014, following the request of the
national authorities, into alleged crimes committed since 2012.
21. To exchange views with members of civil society, including local women and
women’s organizations in the field, in accordance with paragraph 6 of Security
Council resolution 2122 (2013).
22. To express concern that illicit trade, exploitation and smuggling of natural
resources, including gold, diamonds and wildlife poaching and trafficking, continue
to threaten the peace and stability of the Central African Republic.
23. To note the critical importance of effective implementation of the sanctions
regime, including the key role that neighbouring States and regional and subregional
organizations can play in this regard and encourage efforts to further enhance
cooperation.
24. To call upon the transitional authorities to continue their efforts to restore
sound and transparent public financial management, in line with the
recommendations of the recent International Monetary Fund mission in Bangui
(November 2014), in particular to mobilize domestic resources, particularly customs
revenues, in full respect of financial best practice, in order to meet the expenses
related to the functioning of the State; implement early recovery plans; and
revitalize the economy.
25. To express its appreciation for the international mediation led by President
Denis Sassou N’Guesso of the Republic of Congo and comprising Soumeylou
Boubeye Maiga, on behalf of the African Union, and Abdoulaye Bathily, on behalf

4/6

15-03471

S/2015/162

of the United Nations, as well as the Secretary-General of the Economic Community
of Central African States as rapporteur, in view of the Bangui Forum on National
Reconciliation and the upcoming legislative and presidential elections, and the
constructive engagement of the region in this regard.
African Union
26. To strengthen partnership and enhance cooperation between the African Union
and the United Nations through an exchange of views on issues of interest to both
the United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2033 (2012).
27. To exchange views and explore ways of reinforcing and supporting the African
Union conflict prevention tools.
28. To exchange views on situations of interest to both the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council, on the basis of
an agenda to be agreed by both Councils.
Burundi
29. To take note of the significant progress made by Burundi since the adoption of
the Arusha Agreement in 2000, notably in the restoration of security and stability in
the country, and to welcome Burundi’s contribution to and active participation in
United Nations and African Union peacekeeping operations, especially in Somalia
and the Central African Republic.
30. To stress the crucial need for a free, transparent, credible, inclusive and
peaceful electoral process in 2015, with the effective participation of women as
observers, voters, candidates and mediators, in order to ensure that the significant
progress achieved is not reversed.
31. To encourage the Government of Burundi and the Independent National
Electoral Commission as well as all stakeholders in the electoral process, including
the opposition, to continue to implement the code of conduct for political parties
and political actors and the road map towards the elections and to make further
efforts to ensure a space for all political parties and to improve dialogue between all
political actors, with a view to ensuring a conducive, free and open environment for
the run-up to the 2015 elections.
32. To stress that it is critical that the Independent National Electoral Commission
continue to take effective measures to strengthen the public’s confidence in the
electoral process, and also to encourage the opposition to play its part and remain
engaged throughout the electoral process and to use peaceful and democratic means
to address any electoral dispute.
33. To recall that the Security Council pays sustained attention to the electoral
process in Burundi and to recall the mandate of the United Nations Electoral
Mission in Burundi (MENUB) to follow and report on the electoral process before,
during and after the elections, in accordance with resolution 2137 (2014), and to call
upon the Government of Burundi, the Independent National Electoral Commission
and all relevant electoral stakeholders to ensure close cooperation with MENUB in
this regard.
34. To assess the efforts made by the Government of Burundi to improve the
human rights situation in the country and to call for further efforts to address
concerns about restrictions on freedom of expression and opinion, peaceful

15-03471

5/6

S/2015/162

assembly and association, continued threats against journalists and representatives
of civil society, including those who work on human rights, and reports of
intimidation, harassment, political violence, arbitrary arrest and detention.
35. To express concern about the insufficient progress on the fight against
impunity and call for the Government of Burundi to deploy greater efforts to ensure
that all human rights violations and abuses are seriously investigated and that
perpetrators are held accountable.
36. To stress the utmost importance of fighting against poverty and to emphasize
the need for the United Nations system and the international community to maintain
their support for peace consolidation and long-term development in Burundi, calls
upon the Government of Burundi and international and regional partners to fully
implement the mutual commitments made in the joint communiqué of the roundtable meeting held in Bujumbura in December 2014, welcoming the continued
engagement of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
37. To reiterate its call on the United Nations country team and its component
United Nations agencies to scale up their activities and to emphasize the need to
address the implications of the departure of the United Nations Office in Burundi as
identified in the Joint Transition Plan, in particular in the areas of political dialogue,
high-level facilitation and advocacy, and human rights; to ensure that women, peace
and security functions and overall efforts towards inclusion are properly embedded
and resourced within the United Nations country team and are part of the political
dialogue with the Government and MENUB.

6/6

15-03471
