A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/192
23 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 112 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/50/635/Add.3)]
50/192.

Rape and abuse of women in the areas of
armed conflict in the former Yugoslavia

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1/ the International
Covenants on Human Rights, 2/ the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, 3/ the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 4/ the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 5/ the
Convention on the Rights of the Child 6/ and other instruments of human
rights and international humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949 7/ and the Additional Protocols thereto, of 1977, 8/

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/

Resolution 260 A (III).

4/

Resolution 39/46, annex.

5/

Resolution 34/180, annex.

6/

Resolution 44/25, annex.

7/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

8/

Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.

96-76873

/...

A/RES/50/192
Page 2

Recalling its resolution 3074 (XXVIII) of 3 December 1973, entitled
"Principles of international cooperation in the detection, arrest, extradition
and punishment of persons guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity",
as well as Commission on Human Rights resolution 1994/77 of 9 March 1994, 9/
entitled "Rape and abuse of women in the territory of the former Yugoslavia",
General Assembly resolutions 48/143 of 20 December 1993 and 49/205 of
23 December 1994, both entitled "Rape and abuse of women in the areas of armed
conflict in the former Yugoslavia", and relevant resolutions of the Commission
on the Status of Women,
Reaffirming the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 798 (1992) of 18 December 1992, in which, inter alia, the Council
strongly condemned those acts of unspeakable brutality,
Welcoming the initialling of the General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto 10/ by the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and other parties thereto at Dayton, Ohio,
on 21 November 1995,
Noting with deep concern all reports of the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia, regarding rape and abuse of women in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia, particularly in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Convinced that this heinous practice constitutes a deliberate weapon of
war in fulfilling the policy of ethnic cleansing carried out by Serbian forces
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and recalling General Assembly
resolution 47/121 of 18 December 1992, in which the Assembly stated,
inter alia, that the abhorrent policy of ethnic cleansing was a form of
genocide,
Desirous of ensuring that persons accused of authorizing, aiding and
perpetrating rape and sexual violence as a weapon of war in the areas of armed
conflict in the former Yugoslavia will be brought to justice without further
delay by the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991, where appropriate,
Underlining, in this context, the need for the protection of the rape
victims and the provision of effective guarantees of privacy and
confidentiality of the rape victims, and desirous of facilitating their
participation in the proceedings of the International Tribunal and ensuring
that further traumatization will be prevented,
Deeply alarmed at the situation facing victims of rape in armed
conflicts in different parts of the world and any use of rape as a weapon of
war, in particular in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,

9/
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994,
Supplement No.4 and corrigendum (E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap.II, sect.A.
10/

See A/50/790-S/1995/999.
/...

A/RES/50/192
Page 3

Noting with appreciation the efforts of Governments and the work of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, humanitarian organizations, and
non-governmental organizations aimed at supporting the victims of rape and
abuse and alleviating their suffering,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General of 4 August 1995, 11/
submitted pursuant to resolution 49/205,
1.
Strongly condemns the abhorrent practice of rape and abuse of
women and children in the areas of armed conflict in the former Yugoslavia,
which constitutes a war crime;
2.
Expresses its outrage that the systematic practice of rape has
been used as a weapon of war and an instrument of ethnic cleansing against
women and children in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina;
3.
Reaffirms that rape in the conduct of armed conflict constitutes a
war crime and that under certain circumstances it constitutes a crime against
humanity and an act of genocide as defined in the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, and calls upon States to take all
measures required for the protection of women and children from such acts and
to strengthen mechanisms to investigate and punish all those responsible and
bring the perpetrators to justice;
4.
Also reaffirms that all persons who perpetrate or authorize crimes
against humanity or other violations of international humanitarian law are
individually responsible for those violations and that those in positions of
authority who have failed to ensure that persons under their control comply
with the relevant international instruments are accountable, together with the
perpetrators;
5.
Reminds all States of their obligation to cooperate with the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991 and also with the Office of the Prosecutor in the
investigation and prosecution of persons accused of using rape as a weapon of
war;
6.
Calls upon States to put experts, including experts in the
prosecution of crimes of sexual violence, as well as adequate resources and
services, at the disposal of the Chief Prosecutor and the International
Tribunal;
7.
Urges all States and relevant organizations to continue to give
serious consideration to the recommendations in the reports of the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights
in the former Yugoslavia, in particular the recommendation concerning
provision for the continuation of necessary medical and psychological care to
victims of rape within the framework of programmes to rehabilitate women and
children traumatized by war, as well as the provision of protection,
counselling and support to victims and witnesses;

11/

A/50/329.
/...

A/RES/50/192
Page 4

8.
Recognizes the extraordinary suffering of the victims of rape and
sexual violence and the necessity for an appropriate response to provide
assistance to those victims, and expresses its concern, in particular, for the
welfare of those victims who are currently among the internally displaced or
otherwise affected by the war and who have experienced severe trauma and
require psychosocial and other assistance;
9.
Also urges all States and all relevant intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, as well as the United Nations Children’s Fund,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and the World Health Organization, to
continue to provide to the victims of such rape and abuse appropriate
assistance for their physical and mental rehabilitation and to extend their
support to the community-based assistance programmes;
10.
Demands that the parties cooperate fully with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights and her
staff, as well as other mechanisms of the Commission on Human Rights, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the monitoring and other
missions of the European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, including by providing full access;
11.
Encourages the new Special Rapporteur to continue to pay
particular attention to the use of rape as a weapon of war, particularly in
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina;
12.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report, as appropriate,
to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session on the implementation of
the present resolution;
13.
Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its
fifty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
22 December 1995
