United Nations

A/RES/59/168

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 February 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 99

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/497)]

59/168. Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women
and full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the question, including resolution 58/148
of 22 December 2003,
Recalling also the contributions of the four World Conferences on Women,
held in Mexico City, Copenhagen, Nairobi and Beijing, to the advancement of
women and the promotion of gender equality,
Deeply convinced that the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action 1 and
the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled
“Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century”, 2 are important contributions to the advancement of women worldwide in
the achievement of gender equality and must be translated into effective action by
all States, the United Nations system and other organizations concerned,
Reaffirming its commitment to the full and effective implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome document of the
twenty-third special session, including the twelve critical areas of concern, namely
women and poverty, education and training of women, women and health, violence
against women, women and armed conflict, women and the economy, women in
power and decision-making, institutional mechanisms for the advancement of
women, human rights of women, women and the media, women and the
environment and the girl child,
Also reaffirming its commitment to overcoming obstacles encountered in the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome
of the twenty-third special session and to strengthening a national and international
enabling environment in this regard,
_______________
1

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
2
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.

04-48634

A/RES/59/168

Recognizing that the responsibility for the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session rests primarily at the national level and that strengthened efforts are
necessary in this respect, and reiterating that enhanced international cooperation is
essential for the effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session,
Welcoming the increased attention to the situation of women and girls and the
integration of gender perspectives in the work of the United Nations, in particular in
the outcomes of major conferences, special sessions and summit conferences and
their follow-up processes, as well as the review and appraisal by the Economic and
Social Council of the system-wide implementation of its agreed conclusions 1997/2
of 18 July 1997 on mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and
programmes in the United Nations system, 3 the inclusion of the question of gender
mainstreaming in its agenda, the consideration of annual progress made in gender
mainstreaming and the attention given to the gender perspective in the outcomes of
its substantive session of 2004,
Reaffirming the primary and essential role of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council in promoting the advancement of women and gender
equality, while noting the open debate on women and peace and security held in the
Security Council on 28 October 2004, 4 as well as previous debates,
Bearing in mind its relevant resolutions and Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000,
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
1.
measures taken and progress achieved in follow-up to the implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly; 5
2.
Reaffirms the goals, objectives and commitments contained in the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action1 and in the political declaration and further
actions and initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
adopted by the General Assembly at its twenty-third special session;2
3.
Stresses the need to undertake further action to ensure the full and
accelerated implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, inter alia, through the
promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, the
mainstreaming of gender perspectives into all policies and programmes and the
promotion of full and equal participation and empowerment of women and
enhanced international cooperation for the full implementation of the Beijing
Platform for Action;
Underlines the significance of the forty-ninth session of the
4.
Commission on the Status of Women, which will mark the tenth anniversary of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the fifth anniversary of the
twenty-third special session, and at which the Commission will review the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
_______________
3
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/52/3/Rev.1),
chap. IV, para. 4.
4
See S/PV.5066 and S/PV.5066 (Resumption 1).
5
A/59/214.

2

A/RES/59/168

outcome of the twenty-third special session and consider the current challenges
and forward-looking strategies for the advancement of women, as well as the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General;
Stresses the importance of strong, sustained political will and
5.
commitment at the national, regional and international levels for achieving full and
accelerated implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the outcome of the twenty-third special session;
Welcomes the opportunity provided by the forty-ninth session of the
6.
Commission on the Status of Women to demonstrate continued and full commitment
to the full and effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session;
Encourages participation in the forty-ninth session of the Commission on
7.
the Status of Women at a high political level;
8.
Invites States and the United Nations system to publicize the forthcoming
session of the Commission on the Status of Women, including through consultation
with civil society;
Calls upon Governments, the relevant entities of the United Nations
9.
system, within their respective mandates, and all relevant actors of civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, to continue to take effective action to
achieve the full and effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session;
10. Emphasizes that the creation of an enabling environment at the national
and international levels, including by ensuring the participation of women on an
equal basis with men at all levels of decision-making, is necessary to ensure the full
participation of women in all aspects of social, political and economic activities, and
in this regard calls upon States to remove obstacles to the full implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session;
11. Emphasizes also the importance of men and boys taking joint
responsibility with women and girls in the promotion of gender equality, taking into
account the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women
at its forty-eighth session on 12 March 2004; 6
12. Welcomes the contributions of the Commission on the Status of Women
to the follow-up and review of the implementation of the commitments made in the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session, reaffirms that the Commission will continue to play a central role in
this regard, and encourages Governments, the relevant specialized agencies, funds
and programmes of the United Nations system and civil society to continue to
support its work;
13. Stresses the importance of implementing the agreed conclusions adopted
by the Commission on the Status of Women since its fortieth session;
14. Reaffirms its decision that the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Commission on the Status of Women, in accordance with
their respective mandates and with General Assembly resolutions 48/162 of
_______________
6
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 7 (E/2004/27), chap. I,
sect. A; see also Economic and Social Council resolution 2004/11.

3

A/RES/59/168

20 December 1993 and 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 and other relevant resolutions,
constitute a three-tiered intergovernmental mechanism that plays the primary role in
overall policy-making and follow-up and in coordinating the implementation and
monitoring of the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session;
15. Recalls that, in accordance with resolution 57/270 B, the follow-up to the
Fourth World Conference on Women and the twenty-third special session will
continue to be undertaken within the framework of an integrated and coordinated
follow-up to major international conferences and summits in the economic, social
and related fields, and also recalls in this regard the request to each functional
commission of the Economic and Social Council to examine its methods of work in
order to better pursue the implementation of the outcomes of major United Nations
conferences and summits and report to the Council no later than 2005 on the
outcome of this examination;
16. Recognizes the importance attached to the regional and subregional
monitoring of the global and regional platforms for action and of the
implementation of the outcome of the twenty-third special session by regional
commissions and other regional or subregional structures, within their mandates, in
consultation with Governments, calls for the promotion of further cooperation in
that respect among Governments and, where appropriate, national machineries of
the same region, and welcomes in this regard the contributions of the United
Nations regional commissions to the forty-ninth session of the Commission on the
Status of Women;
17. Encourages the Economic and Social Council to reiterate its request to
the regional commissions that have not yet done so, within their respective
mandates and resources, to intensify efforts to build up a database, to be updated
regularly, in which all programmes and projects carried out in their respective
regions by organizations or bodies of the United Nations system are listed, and to
facilitate the dissemination of information on such programmes and projects, as well
as the evaluation of their impact on the empowerment of women through the
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action;
18. Welcomes Economic and Social Council decision 2004/309 of 23 July
2004, in which the Chairperson of the forty-ninth session of the Commission on the
Status of Women is requested to submit the outcome of the session, through the
Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session,
including to the high-level event of the Assembly on the review of the United
Nations Millennium Declaration; 7
19. Emphasizes that the full and effective implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the promotion of gender equality and of
women’s empowerment and participation, together with the mainstreaming of a
gender perspective, are among the essential elements for advancing the
implementation of the Millennium Declaration, with a view, in particular, to
achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including those contained
in the Millennium Declaration and the outcomes of United Nations summits,
conferences and special sessions;

_______________
7

4

See resolution 55/2.

A/RES/59/168

20. Recognizes that adequate mobilization of resources at the national and
international levels, as well as new and additional resources for the developing
countries, including the least developed countries and countries with economies in
transition, from all available funding mechanisms, including multilateral, bilateral
and private sources, will also be required;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to highlight the contribution of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action to the implementation of the
Millennium Declaration and to integrate gender perspectives in his preparations,
including reports, for the review of the Millennium Declaration;
22. Calls upon Member States to incorporate gender perspectives in their
preparations for the review of the Millennium Declaration;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his report on the follow-up
to the Millennium Declaration an assessment of the progress made in promoting the
goal of gender equality, in particular in relation to the development goals set forth in
the Millennium Declaration, and recommendations to improve the measurement and
coverage of indicators so that progress towards gender equality can be evaluated
over time;
24. Invites States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women 8 to include information on measures taken to
implement the outcome of the twenty-third special session, as well as the Beijing
Platform for Action, in their reports to the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women under article 18 of the Convention;
25. Urges States parties to comply fully with their obligations under the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and
those that have not yet done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the
Optional Protocol thereto; 9
26. Recognizes the important role of law, including legislation, in the
promotion of gender equality and the implementation of the Beijing Platform for
Action, commends the progress made by States in the area of legal reform, and calls
upon States to continue their efforts to repeal laws and eradicate practices that
discriminate against women and to adopt laws and promote practices that protect the
rights of women and promote gender equality;
27. Urges Member States to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocols thereto, 10 in particular the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;
28. Calls upon Governments, the United Nations system and all other relevant
actors to continue to integrate gender perspectives into the implementation of and
follow-up to recent United Nations conferences, summits and special sessions;
29. Affirms that, in order to ensure the effective implementation of the
strategic objectives of the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome of the
twenty-third special session, the United Nations system should continue to promote
an active and visible policy of mainstreaming gender perspectives, including
_______________
8

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
Resolution 54/4, annex.
10
Resolution 55/25, annexes I–III, and resolution 55/255, annex.
9

5

A/RES/59/168

through the work of the Division for the Advancement of Women and the Office of
the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women and the
maintenance of gender units, focal points and gender specialists, and with the active
support of all United Nations bodies, including by ensuring that all United Nations
personnel, especially in the field, receive training on gender perspectives in their
work, including gender impact analysis, and that appropriate follow-up training is
provided;
30. Recognizes the need to further include gender perspectives in the work of
its Main Committees and other intergovernmental bodies;
31. Requests all bodies that deal with programme and budgetary matters,
including the Committee for Programme and Coordination, to ensure that all
programmes, plans and programme budgets visibly mainstream gender perspectives;
32. Encourages the Economic and Social Council to continue its efforts to
ensure that gender mainstreaming is an integral part of all activities in its work and
that of its subsidiary bodies, through, inter alia, the system-wide implementation of
its agreed conclusions 1997/23 and its resolution 2004/4 of 7 July 2004;
33. Welcomes the convening of the World Summit on the Information Society
in Tunis in 2005, and encourages Governments and all other stakeholders to
integrate a gender perspective into the preparatory processes and outcome
documents, taking into account the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission
on the Status of Women at its forty-seventh session on 14 March 2003; 11
34. Recognizes the important role of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in peacebuilding, and urges Governments and the United Nations
system to take further steps to ensure the integration of gender perspectives and the
full and equal participation of women at all levels of decision-making and
implementation in all aspects of conflict prevention and resolution and peacebuilding
activities and to ensure that efforts to strengthen the rule of law and transitional justice
in conflict and post-conflict situations incorporate gender perspectives, with a view to
achieving gender equality in constitutional, legislative and judicial reform;
35. Strongly encourages Governments to continue to support the role and
contribution of civil society, in particular non-governmental organizations and
women’s organizations, in the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session;
36. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session and to disseminate those documents as widely as possible in all the official
languages of the United Nations;
37. Also requests the Secretary-General to report annually to the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Commission on the Status of
Women on the follow-up to and progress made in the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session, with an assessment of progress made in mainstreaming a gender perspective
within the United Nations system, including by providing information on key
achievements, lessons learned and best practices, and to recommend further
measures and strategies for future action within the United Nations system;
_______________
11
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 7 (E/2003/27), chap. I,
sect. A; see also Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/44.

6

A/RES/59/168

38. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the item
entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women
and of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled ‘Women
2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century’”.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004

7
