S/PV.7278

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7278th meeting

Tuesday, 14 October 2014, 10.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. King
Mr. Bante
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Cai Weiming
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Baublys
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2014/699)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-56743 (E)
*1456743*

S/PV.7278

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.

signal to Somalis and Al-Shabaab that the international
community remains committed and that more progress
is needed.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2014/699)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nicholas
Kay, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Kay, who
is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Mogadishu.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Maman
Sidikou, African Union Special Representative for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ambassador
Sidikou, who is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Addis Ababa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/699, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kay.
Mr. Kay: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council. I am particularly
pleased to be doing so alongside my new colleague Dr.
Maman Sidikou, who is joining us from Addis Ababa.
I very much look forward to our very close partnership
in the future.
When I briefed the Council in July, I focused on the
threats posed by Al-Shabaab. Since then, I am pleased
to report, that Al-Shabaab has suffered significant
setbacks and that the political process has moved
forward. The Council’s landmark visit in August was a
2/6

14/10/2014

Somalia’s challenges remain significant. Urgent
and coherent action on the part of the Federal
Government and international partners is needed in
security, development, political and humanitarian
fields. To that end, we need unity of purpose from
Somali politicians and leaders. Neither Somalia nor
the international community will have patience for
anyone who deliberately stands in the way of peace,
reconciliation and stability.
At the same time as insisting rightly on the critical
need for sustained action, we cannot and should not be
blind to the fact that Somalia, with the help of the entire
international community, is living through a moment
of unprecedented change and optimism. We need to
seize the opportunities. Somalia is a country slowly
waking from a terrible nightmare. Two days ago, we
were reminded of just how terrible, when a car bomb
killed at least 13 people in Mogadishu.
There has been important political progress, in
particular in state formation. I congratulate the President
and the Prime Minister for taking that forward jointly.
I welcome the ongoing process of reconciliation and
the establishment of interim regional administrations.
These, clearly, must be full inclusive. Women and
young people must participate in and shape them. The
capacity of these interim regional administrations also
needs to be built with international support, including
from the United Nations.
I encourage the Federal Government to accelerate
an inclusive state formation process in the central
regions. I reiterate my hope that we will have a new
map of a federal Somalia by the end of the year and,
if at all possible, by the time of the Copenhagen
high-level partnership forum next month. There also
needs to be more and faster progress in creating two
bodies — the national independent electoral commission
and the boundaries and federation commission.
Also, the Independent Constitutional Review and
Implementation Commission should quickly begin
its work in Mogadishu. The parliamentary oversight
committee should be established. I call on the Federal
Government and Federal Parliament to make the
necessary arrangements.
I remain particularly concerned about the risk of
political infighting. Twice in the past 12 months, this

14-56743

14/10/2014

The situation in Somalia

has led to bureaucratic paralysis. The President and
the Prime Minister have navigated a way out of recent
tensions, for which I heartily commend them. I appeal
to all of Somalia’s political institutions, including the
Federal Parliament, to focus on the urgent business
of establishing the institutions and processes that
will pave the way to longer-term peace, stability
and reconciliation. This parliamentary session will
be decisive. If key laws are not passed, Somalis will
not achieve their dreams for a new Constitution and
democratic elections in 2016.
In Somaliland, preparations are under way for
elections in June 2015. I am glad to report that I
visited Somaliland in August, at the invitation of the
Government, and we agreed an agenda for future
United Nations engagement, including my own good
offices role.
I warmly congratulate the African Union Mission
in Somalia and the Somali national army for progress
in Operation Indian Ocean. I pay tribute to those who
have lost their lives in bringing peace, including,
sadly, in an attack today. With the death of its leader,
Ahmed Godane, on 1 September, Al-Shabaab has been
weakened operationally and financially by these recent
advances. Planning for Operation Indian Ocean has
been joint and inclusive. It has significantly reduced
logistical problems. The United Nations Support Office
for the African Union Mission in Somalia is running an
unprecedented operation supporting, under resolution
2124 (2013), a dynamic offensive with a fraction of
the capacity that would normally be used to support
a military operation of the same size. However, key
assets, especially helicopters, are still needed, not least
to help ensure secure road access across the country.
Military action will not eradicate the terrorist threat
in Somalia. Military gains need to be consolidated
through stabilization. It is also important to focus on
strategic communication and a comprehensive and
properly funded disengaged combatants programme.
The United Nations is actively assisting with all of that.
We also need more resolute action to end the trade in
charcoal that is funding terrorism.
There has been progress in establishing local
administrations and in the deployment of Somali
police force officers in some newly recovered areas.
The Federal Government has led the strategic and
operational coordination of stabilization activities,
and that needs to be intensified to ensure a coherent
approach. The establishment of local administrations

S/PV.7278

also needs to be synchronized with the ongoing federal
State-formation process.
I remain concerned that efforts to develop
security institutions are insufficient. I welcome the
recent discussions in London, particularly on militia
integration and a more coordinated and realistic plan
for defence sector reform. I note the improvements in
the Federal Government’s reporting on its obligations
under the United Nations sanctions regime and I look
forward to further improvements with the support and
cooperation of international partners. We shall also
continue to support efforts to strengthen the rule of law.
Human rights remain a concern and a priority. I
welcome the recent visit by Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the recent commitment by
the Federal Government to put the ratification of the
Convention of the Rights of the Child before Parliament.
But I share the concerns of the Independent Expert
on the situation of human rights in Somalia about the
recent arrests of journalists, who have yet to face trial,
the closure of media outlets and the increasing use of
capital punishment. I reiterate my call on the Federal
Government to implement its pledge to establish a
moratorium on the death penalty. I also call for further
progress in establishing the independent human rights
commission.
I am very concerned about recent allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse by some AMISOM
troops. I welcome the African Union’s commitment,
reiterated in New York on 24 September by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, to a
full investigation in accordance with its zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. It is important
that it be transparent and that witnesses be protected.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) stands ready to lend our support in any way
we can.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia has
continued to deteriorate. Over 3 million people need
humanitarian or livelihood assistance in Somalia today.
That includes over 1 million Somalis who cannot feed
themselves — an increase of 20 per cent in six months.
Humanitarian assistance has been stepped up.
Over 300 metric tons of supplies for tens of thousands
of people have been delivered by air due to the lack of
secure access to recovered areas, but that still falls short
of needs on the ground. Air cargo flights simply cannot

14-567433/6

S/PV.7278

The situation in Somalia

deliver the quantities required. Secure road access is
essential. We must also urgently mobilize sufficient
resources, otherwise we face another devastating
humanitarian emergency, which could undermine the
political and security gains of the last two years.
I welcome the appointment of the independent
advisory panel to the Financial Governance Committee.
I look forward to greater transparency and better
public financial management, particularly in the
area of public-sector contracts. Donors also need to
strengthen the transparency of aid flows and activities
in accordance with commitments under the New Deal
Compact process. The United Nations is doing its part
to comply with its Compact commitments. We shall
soon sign our first integrated strategic framework with
the Federal Government. That will guide more coherent
and better coordinated United Nations efforts to achieve
the national priorities set out in the Compact.
The Copenhagen High-Level Partnership Forum,
to be held in November, will be an important moment
to take stock of the progress towards the goals of the
Somali Compact. It is important that sub-federal
administrations be given a role in the conference,
including in its preparation.
In conclusion, I remain a committed optimist. I do
not underestimate the challenges, or the urgency and
difficulty of overcoming them, but I firmly believe
that Somalia’s problems are those of a country coming
together, not a country falling apart. I know the Council
spends a lot of its time dealing with the latter.
I thank the Council for its unstinting support
for Somalia, and I welcome the many commitments
made at last month’s high-level event in New York. I
pay tribute to my United Nations colleagues, who are
working with dedication and courage to help Somalis
realize their hopes and dreams. I also want to thank
all of Somalia’s international partners, particularly
the African Union, the European Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, for
their cooperation, contributions and commitment to
Somalia, without which we would not be where we are
today. Somalia’s long night is not over, but the sky is at
last getting lighter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Kay
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sidikou.

4/6

14/10/2014

Mr. Sidikou: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council. It is particularly
gratifying to me, as I am just starting out with this very
important responsibility as the Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). I would also
like to extend my appreciation to the Council for its
historic visit to Mogadishu on 12 August 2014, a clear
demonstration of the Council’s unflinching commitment
to peace, security and stability in Somalia.
Let me start by echoing a point that was noted by my
colleague, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, Mr. Nicholas Kay. The overall
political developments in Somalia remain encouraging,
with evidence of progress in the State-formation
process, the constitutional review and the preparations
for elections by 2016. Those developments demonstrate
that the Federal Government of Somalia is functional,
has continued to make efforts in meeting its domestic
obligations and continues to receive enhanced
international recognition and support. My friend
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kay
has already provided an extensive briefing, so we will
leave it at that. I will only highlight a couple of points
from the latter part of his briefing.
On the security front, AMISOM and the Somali
National Army forces are concluding the second
phase of our joint Operation Indian Ocean, which was
launched on 25 August 2014. The primary objective
of the Operation is to seize, secure and stabilize keys
districts along the coastline. Planning for Operation
Indian Ocean was an inclusive process that involved
all our partners, including the United Nations. That
joint planning process reduced the problems faced
by the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM
in delivering logistical support to both the Somali
National Army and the AMISOM forces. To date, the
Somali National Army, supported by AMISOM forces,
have recovered eight towns, including Al-Shabaab’s
stronghold and de facto capital, Baraawe. The
populations in those newly recovered areas are now
enjoying their right to live in freedom from the fear and
cruelty of Al-Shabaab.
Al-Shabaab has suffered military reversals,
including, as Mr. Kay mentioned earlier, the loss of its
leader, Ahmed Abdi aw-Mohamed, and the recovery of
most of its remaining strongholds. It appears, however,
that the group still retains appreciable numbers of its
fighters and equipment, mainly in rural areas. That is
clearly designed to keep it in readiness for a probably

14-56743

14/10/2014

The situation in Somalia

prolonged asymmetrical fight against the Somali
Government and people. In the short term, therefore,
Al-Shabaab is likely to remain a threat to Somalia and
its immediate neighbours as well as to AMISOM’s
police- and troop-contributing countries. In terms of
internal dynamics, there are indications that the group
may break up into several factions, with some elements
pondering a shift in allegiance from Al-Qaida to the
Islamic State in order to attract resources and profit
from the Islamic State brand.
I would like to highlight and convey a number of
key messages. On the political side, I should underline
the importance of unity of purpose among the Somali
political leadership at both the federal and regional
levels, in order for us to deliver on Vision 2016. In that
regard, the State formation process that will ultimately
facilitate holding elections in 2016 must be inclusive
and must maintain the current momentum. We must
also ensure that words are translated into action,
especially in delivering services to the populations in
the newly recovered areas. On the security side, while
it is true that Al-Shabaab has been weakened, it retains
the ability to carry out asymmetric warfare and inspire
would-be terrorists in neighbouring countries, thereby
achieving its goal of striking beyond the borders of
Somalia.
Going forward, therefore, the ultimate defeat of
Al-Shabaab will require the immediate provision
of basic services to the population by the Federal
Government of Somalia and AMISOM, as well as
by international partners. Time is not on our side.
Al-Shabaab will attempt to continue to create chaos
and fear at every opportunity in order to disrupt the
people’s everyday life, prevent the resurgence of social
and economic activity and thus make the people doubt
the capacity of the Federal Government of Somalia
and AMISOM to provide security in the country. As
we go forward, therefore, AMISOM will adjust to the
asymmetrical warfare and will work with the Somali
Government and the people to neutralize the remnant
of Al-Shabaab. We will also continue to work with
our partners, especially the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, to facilitate the establishment
of governance and service-delivery structures in the
newly recovered areas.
I would like to conclude by informing the Council,
as I did earlier today when speaking to members of
the African Union Peace and Security Council, that
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,

S/PV.7278

Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, has established an
independent, multi-country panel to investigate the
allegations of rape and sexual exploitation by AMISOM
forces made in the Human Rights Watch report
entitled “The Power These Men Have Over Us: Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse by African Union Forces in
Somalia”, which was released on 8 September.
I would like to thank the Council for its support
to the African Union and AMISOM’s troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as its support for
AMISOM’s civilian personnel.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Sidikou for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Kullane (Somalia): I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October.
I am grateful for this opportunity to brief the
Council, and since this is my only opportunity to do so
ahead of its important discussions of both the situation
in our country and sanctions-related issues, I would like
to briefly address four key points, which are political
progress in Somalia, the military campaign, the
maritime interdiction of charcoal and illegal weapons
and the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group.
Two years ago, the Government of Somalia faced
several complex challenges. Today, with the support
of the Somali people and the engagement of the
international community, Somalia has undergone a
significant transformation. The Government is working
closely with international partners in implementing
the New Deal and its associated reforms. It has made
major progress in public financial management, putting
in place greater accountability measures, controls and
governance structures. Key legislation has been drafted
and budget policy developed, and the capacity of the
Offices of the Accountant General and Auditor General
has been strengthened. An annual budget, developed
against Government-wide work plans, has been
delivered. A new Governor and Board of Directors
have been appointed for the Central Bank of Somalia.
A financial governance committee has been jointly
established between the Federal Government and
international financial institutions in order to provide
greater transparency and oversight.

14-567435/6

S/PV.7278

The situation in Somalia

We are very grateful to the Secretary-General for
hosting a high-level event on Somalia during the general
debate of the General Assembly last month. Vision 2016
is the framework guiding the Government’s priorities
of achieving a successful transition to democracy and
credible elections in 2016, and we are looking forward
to the forthcoming United Nations electoral needs
assessment to support that effort.
The three key elements of the Government’s
strategy are constitutional review and implementation,
completion of the federal system/state formation, and
democratization. But we must consolidate military
progress if the political road map is to flourish. Our
clear military defeat of Al-Shabaab will be possible
only through the joint efforts of the Somali National
Army and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). The Government is committed to ensuring
that the civilian population feels the benefit of being
free from Al-Shabaab, and to that end we are working
with both the United Nations and AMISOM to ensure
that ordinary Somalis receive basic services when
towns are liberated from Al-Shabaab. I should also like
to take this opportunity to commend the bravery and
sacrifice of the AMISOM forces working alongside the
Somali forces. We will never forget their contribution
to peace in our country; while progress is being made
against Al-Shabaab, the fight is not over, and Somalia is
very grateful for all the assistance it receives. We hope
that the day when the Somali National Army can secure
the entire territory of Somalia without the support of
other forces will come sooner rather than later.
You will be aware, Madam President, that my
President has written to you and other Security Council

6/6

14/10/2014

members on the issues of charcoal and illegal weapons,
which continue to fund and supply Al-Shabaab. The
Somali Government hopes that the Council will support
his request for its further assistance in authorizing the
existing international maritime forces to take measures
at sea to prevent the export of charcoal from Somalia
and the delivery of weapons and military equipment
into Somalia, in violation of the arms embargo. We
were encouraged by the remarks at the high-level
event of Mr. David Cameron, Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom, in which he offered to take forward
discussions in the Council. Tackling this trade would
make a real difference to the lives of Somalis in the
fight against Al-Shabaab.
The Government of Somalia is fully committed
to implementing the relevant Security Council
resolutions both on sanctions and the Somalia and
Eritrea Monitoring Group. The Somali Government
has always been receptive to them and has welcomed
the reports of the Monitoring Group. We recognize
that the Government must work with the Monitoring
Group, and while we do not necessarily agree with all
of its findings, we will continue to work with it and
strengthen that relationship further during the next
mandate period. We would be pleased to welcome the
Group to Mogadishu on a more frequent basis.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

14-56743
