A /77/PV.69

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

69th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 26 April 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolutions (A/77/L.59 and A/77/L.64)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.59.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): It is my great pleasure to
introduce draft resolution A/77/L.59, entitled “Building
global resilience and promoting sustainable development
through regional and interregional infrastructure
connectivity”, a joint, cross-regional initiative of
Poland, Bulgaria, Croatia, El Salvador, Estonia,
Hungary, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania and Romania, which
has — as of now — garnered the support of over 70
countries from around the world and every regional
group. The draft resolution calls for the enhancing of
infrastructure connectivity and resilience at all levels
through the development of cross-border infrastructure
in the transport, energy and digital sectors. That, in
turn, can help reduce the risk of, prepare for, respond
to and recover from shocks and strengthen resilience
against future crises. The draft resolution thus offers a
unique angle linking sustainable development, disaster
risk reduction and security perspectives.
Connectivity has become a defining feature of
today. Transport connectivity is essential to human
mobility and efficient regional and global value chains.
The cross-border connectivity of energy systems

enhances the stability, reliability and resilience of
economies, while, in a world shifting from analog to
digital faster than ever before, digital connectivity is
embedded in every aspect of our lives and has become
a universal catalyst for socioeconomic growth.
In the draft resolution, we have strived to
highlight the value of taking a systemic perspective to
infrastructure. This means that resilience is related not
just to individual infrastructure assets but to how those
assets work together as energy, transport, water and
international technical cooperation networks and affect
each other. Currently, the world is facing multiple and
interlinked global crises with significant impacts on
infrastructure systems. Every country has experienced
disruptions resulting from climate change and natural
disasters, geopolitical tensions and conflicts, as well
as pandemics and epidemics. Disrupted supply chains,
energy insecurity, hindrances in transport or the lack
of secure telecommunications and internet connections
are problems that can be remedied or largely reduced
by regional infrastructural connectivity. I am strongly
convinced that the perspectives on infrastructure
development set forward in the draft resolution can
guide our responses to such challenges, irrespective of
the geographic location or economic status of countries.
That response is based on three pillars: first, the
development-resilience nexus; secondly, regional
responses to global challenges; and thirdly, ensuring
sustainable financing for infrastructure development.
The draft resolution promotes, first and foremost,
quality infrastructure connectivity as a tool for

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-11892 (E)

*2311892*

A/77/PV.69

building resilience for future shocks and disruptions.
Resilience-thinking and mainstreaming disaster risk
reduction in infrastructure development is essential to
minimize the impact of shocks and hazards that may
arise and to ensure the continuity of basic services.
Secondly, the draft resolution aims to stimulate
the exchange of experience and best practices on
infrastructure development among different regions.
Although crises and challenges are felt around the world,
each region is affected differently and, in response,
develops context-specific approaches. Regional
initiatives based on trust can serve as inspiration to
other regions and provide lessons learned from which
we can draw some universal guidelines. I will highlight
a few of these initiatives today.
Poland initiated the draft resolution, inspired
by a concrete, regional example of the approach just
described. That is the Three Seas Initiative, developed
since 2015 by 12 European countries located between
the Baltic, Black and Adriatic Seas. Our region, having
identified deficits in infrastructure connections,
decided to turn their limitations into an important
measure of integration and cooperation. In SouthEast Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) and its partners have worked to strengthen
connectivity in order to narrow development gaps
in the region through such initiatives as the JapanASEAN Connectivity Initiative. Meanwhile, in Central
America, members of the Central American Integration
System are implementing the Regional Mobility and
Logistics Framework Policy, focused on infrastructure,
transport, trade, border interconnectivity and the
mobility of people.
Last but not least, the draft resolution calls for
the closing of connectivity divides. The need to
boost infrastructure investments is global, but the
greatest needs tend to be in low-income countries.
The draft resolution recognizes that filling the gap in
infrastructure financing requires public and private
funds, accompanied by technical cooperation, skills
development and capacity-building, especially for
developing countries. We are aware that if infrastructure
is to fully deliver social, economic and environmental
benefits, it has to be anchored in appropriate regulatory
and policy frameworks. Developing infrastructure
of quality means ensuring its compliance with the
highest technical, environmental, accounting and
labour standards.
2/22

26/04/2023

The negotiations of the draft resolution demonstrated
the universal importance of infrastructure connectivity.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction and the New Urban Agenda all clearly
call for sustainable and resilient infrastructure.
Development of infrastructure, including cross-border
connectivity, is also prioritized in the Doha Programme
of Action for the Least Developed Countries, the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014–2024 and the Small
Island Developing States Accelerated Modalities of
Action, as a universal development objective.
It is the hope of the proponents of the draft
resolution that the adoption of this document by
consensus will highlight new avenues for reflection
and action on infrastructure development as we prepare
for the high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on the midterm review of the implementation of the
Sendai Framework, the high-level political forum on
sustainable development, and the pinnacle Sustainable
Development Goal Summit in 2023. It will also
contribute to achieving the ambitious objectives of the
Our Common Agenda report (A/75/982), as set out by
the Secretary-General.
I would like to extend words of gratitude to all
delegations that contributed to the final outcome and to
the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction,
which serves as the technical secretariat of the draft
resolution. My sincere thanks also go to the Office
of the President of the General Assembly and to the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management of the Secretariat for their support in
this process.
Reaching consensus on the draft resolution sends
a strong signal to the United Nations system that
investing in quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient
infrastructure is a common good, a universal global
priority and an underlying foundation for global
development. I would like to encourage all United
Nations Members to co-sponsor the draft resolution
now, before its adoption, which embodies the shared
commitment to promoting regional and interregional
infrastructure connectivity as a key driver of
sustainable development.
I hope that appropriate decisions by the institutions
and agencies of the United Nations system will follow
23-11892

26/04/2023

A/77/PV.69

suit, offering tools to implement this approach to
infrastructure, and support cross-border and crossregional development serving the common aim:
developing in solidarity.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolutions A/77/L.59 and A/77/L.64.
For the Assembly’s information, the
resolutions have been closed for e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

draft

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Allow me to announce
additional sponsors on the two draft resolutions.
Concerning A/77/L.59. I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become co-sponsors
of the draft: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belarus, Botswana, Chile, Costa
Rica, Dominica, Equatorial Guinea, France, Guyana,
Iceland, Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Malawi, Monaco, Mozambique,
Nepal, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, San Marino, Suriname,
Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
Turning to draft resolution A/77/L.64, I should
like to announce that since the submission of the
draft resolution, and in addition to the delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become co-sponsors: Azerbaijan, Belarus, Cambodia,
the Central African Republic, Costa Rica, Guyana,
Lesotho, Mongolia, Mozambique, Sri Lanka and Togo.
The President: Delegations wishing to make a
statement in explanation of position before the adoption
on any or both of the draft resolutions are invited to do
so in one intervention.
Before I give the floor for explanations of position
before the adoption, may I remind delegations that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to explain our
support for the draft resolution contained in document
A/77/L.59, entitled “Building global resilience and
promoting sustainable development through regional
and interregional infrastructure connectivity”.

We thank Poland for proposing the draft resolution
on an issue that is vital to the realization of the 17
Sustainable Development Goals by 2030 and the
objectives of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
The achievement of both requires a major transition to
sustainable infrastructure in energy, transportation,
housing, communications, as well as in industrial and
agricultural production and consumption. An estimated
$100 trillion–$120 trillion will need to be invested
in sustainable infrastructure over the next 30 years
to create a zero-emissions global economy by 2050.
According to the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the current infrastructure funding
gap is $2.5 trillion annually, two-thirds of that in the
developing countries.
Pakistan welcomes the commitment in the draft
resolution to realizing those vital objectives relating to
sustainable infrastructure and regional and international
connectivity. Pakistan is actively promoting those
objectives of infrastructure development and
connectivity under the China-Pakistan Economic
Corridor and in the prospective connectivity projects
with Central Asia.
In its thirteenth preambular paragraph, the draft
resolution also rightly expresses concern that “economic
losses due to disasters are rising as a result of […]
climate change”. The floods of last year that devastated
Pakistan were one of the greatest manifestations of the
loss and damage caused by climate impacts. Pakistan
has presented a comprehensive recovery plan that
would entail domestic and external funding of around
$15 billion merely for reconstruction and another
$12 billion–$15 billion to ensure resiliency in the new
infrastructure. The draft resolution recognizes rightly
that infrastructure investments are central to the
economic recovery plans of many Governments.
Clearly, as recognized in the draft resolution,
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and
the goals of the Paris Agreement, a comprehensive
plan is needed to develop sustainable infrastructure
projects in all countries, especially in the developing
countries, and to mobilize finance from all available
sources — domestic, international, private and
public — for their execution.
It is for this reason that in 2020, in my capacity
as the President of the Economic and Social Council
at that time, I proposed the creation of a permanent

23-118923/22

A/77/PV.69

26/04/2023

mechanism under United Nations auspices to promote
investment in sustainable infrastructure.

“Strengthening voluntary national reviews through
country-led evaluation”.

Such a United Nations mechanism could, first,
convene all stakeholders on a policy board and
take the lead in formulating and coordinating the
implementation of a comprehensive plan for transition
to sustainable infrastructure.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.64?

Secondly, it could develop and harmonize
national and international regulatory frameworks to
incentivize public and private investment in sustainable
development projects, especially in developing
countries, and develop modalities to de-risk such
investment through such means as green bonds, blended
finance, sovereign guarantees, insurance schemes and
first-loss mechanisms.

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after the adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

Thirdly, it could create a project unit that would
utilize the more than 130 United Nations country offices
to help the developing countries identify, prepare
and structure sustainable and resilient infrastructure
projects, thereby building a sizeable pipeline of such
projects, which could be used to mobilize the required
investment from public and private sources.
Fourthly, it could develop and maintain a database
of sustainable infrastructure projects, sources of
finance and potential execution partners and service
providers, which could be used by all stakeholders,
as needed.
As co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Sustainable
Infrastructure Investment, Pakistan will continue its
efforts to establish such a United Nations infrastructure
entity. We look forward to the cooperation and support
of all Member States, especially the sponsors of draft
resolution A/77/L.59, to realize those objectives.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.59, entitled “Building global resilience
and promoting sustainable development through
regional and interregional infrastructure connectivity”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.59?
Draft resolution A/77/L.59
(resolution 77/282).

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.64, entitled:
4/22

Draft resolution A/77/L.64
(resolution 77/283).

was

adopted

Ms. Marks (United States of America): On behalf
of the Government of the United States of America, I
would like to extend our thanks to Poland for shepherding
resolution 77/282, on sustainable infrastructure. We are
pleased to join consensus. Quality, reliable, sustainable
and resilient infrastructure is critical to achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. The United
States is committed to helping meet those needs with
transparent investments and high-standard projects
that deliver real economic benefits while protecting
the environment and workers’ rights. That is the reason
President Biden led passage of the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act and the Inflation Reduction
Act, which will make significant investments in
sustainable and resilient infrastructure in the United
States. It is also why we champion the launch of the
Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment
of the Group of Seven, which intends to mobilize
$600 billion by 2027 to help low- and middle-income
countries invest in infrastructure that serves the needs
of their communities.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our position
that trade language negotiated or adopted by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council has
no relevance for United States trade policy under the
World Trade Organization. That includes calls to adopt
approaches, such as technology transfer, that are not
both voluntary and on mutually agreed terms.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position after adoption. The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 18.
23-11892

26/04/2023

Agenda item 127 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe
Draft resolution (A/77/L.65)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland, who will introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.65.
Mr. Valtýsson (Iceland): I have the honour, on
behalf of Iceland, as current Chair of the Committee of
Ministers of the Council of Europe, and Ireland, as the
previous Chair, to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.65,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe”. I would like to thank
Member States that have joined Iceland and Ireland as
co-sponsors.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe is characterized by long tradition
and shared vision of the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy
and rule of law. First submitted to the General Assembly
at its fifty-fifth session in 2000, this biannual resolution
touches on numerous important issues. Consultations,
as customary, began in Strasbourg among Council of
Europe members during the Irish presidency last spring.
The zero draft was agreed upon in November, outlining
the issues of most importance to the Council of Europe
and its members, before being introduced to the wider
United Nations membership here in New York.
As co-facilitators, Iceland and Ireland strived to
conduct inclusive negotiations through several rounds
of informal consultations, in addition to bilateral and
smaller group discussions. Based on the previously
agreed language from resolution 75/264, adopted by
consensus two years ago, compromises were reached
on several issues in order to submit a draft that the vast
majority of members could accept. This meant that
some key elements from the zero draft, agreed upon by
the Council of Europe membership, were omitted from
the text.
Early on in the informal consultations, it became
clear that there was no ground for consensus on the ninth
preambular paragraph. The war that followed the fullscale invasion of Ukraine by the Russian Federation 14
months ago has had a devastating impact on Ukraine,

A/77/PV.69

the region and, in fact, every corner of the world. No
country has escaped the far-reaching consequences of
that unprovoked and unjust invasion. The draft resolution
before us recognizes those unprecedented challenges in
the context of regional cooperation, international law
and multilateralism. The ninth preambular paragraph
calls for strengthened cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe,
“notably in order to promptly restore and maintain
peace and security based on respect of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
any State”.
It is regrettable that we will have to vote on this
draft resolution here today. I call on all Member States
to support the text as drafted, and to vote in favour of it.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.65. For the Assembly’s
information, the draft resolution has been closed
for e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed
in document A/77/L.65, the following countries have
become co-sponsors of the draft: Antigua and Barbuda,
Israel, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands and the Federated
States of Micronesia.
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Suprunenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation cannot support the
draft resolution contained in document А/77/L.65,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe”, in its present form for the
following reason.
As members are aware, the draft resolution, like
many other resolutions on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, is always
adopted by consensus. That is logical, since resolutions
of this type serve primarily as support from the
international community for the regional organizations

23-118925/22

A/77/PV.69

themselves, as well as their efforts to cooperate with
the United Nations.
This year we cannot support the draft in its current
form, since the ninth preambular paragraph has nothing
to do with the topic of the draft resolution and is highly
politicized in nature. We shall not comment again on the
accusations made therein against our country. I would
just like to recall that in referring to “unprecedented
challenges”, the authors are deliberately keeping silent
about the eight-year war waged by Ukraine against the
residents of Donbas, to which we have consistently
drawn attention in all international forums. The authors
also ignore the flagrant act of aggression that was
indeed committed by NATO on the territory of Europe
against the former Republic of Yugoslavia in 1999.
As for Russia’s withdrawal from the Council of
Europe in March 2022, that was the only logical step we
could take in response to the blatant transformation of
the organization into an anti-Russian instrument. The
Council of Europe’s previous unifying potential was
obliterated by the countries of NATO and the European
Union, which see it merely as a means of ideological
support for their political, economic and military
expansion to the east and of imposing neoliberal
approaches to human rights and the “rules-based order”
that is advantageous to them.
The politicization of the draft resolution is yet
further proof of the willingness of Western countries to
undermine the authority of regional organizations and
to cause a rift in the General Assembly when they could
so easily have avoided doing so. A number of other
delegations joined us in drawing attention to that during
the consultations on the draft. As we see it, our former
Western partners ultimately opted for confrontation
rather than a unifying approach. In that regard, we
call on all responsible members of the international
community to vote against the inclusion of the ninth
preambular paragraph in the text of the draft resolution.
Once again, I draw the attention of the Assembly to
the fact that, by voting against it, it is not expressing
its position regarding the Ukrainian crisis, but instead
about the attempt to politicize a General Assembly draft
resolution on cooperation with a regional organization.
Mrs. Solorzano Cavalieri (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In the framework of the
agenda item on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, since 2000
the General Assembly has considered on 11 previous
6/22

26/04/2023

occasions draft resolutions that address existing
cooperation between our Organization and the Council
of Europe, based on the agreements signed between
both parties in December 1951 and November 1971.
Undoubtedly, the past 21 years have not been
exempt from situations of tension and divergence
in terms of positions and views on various issues.
However, constructive and good-faith negotiations
were always undertaken in order to reach consensus.
We therefore regret that, on this occasion, when the
peoples of the United Nations demand that their
Governments rise to the great challenges before us, and
when it is necessary to foster dialogue, understanding
and mutual accommodation, the proponents of the draft
resolution contained in document A/77/L.65 preferred
to prioritize the inclusion of elements that do not
enjoy consensus and that only contribute to increasing
tensions and further deepening divisions, as well as
to exacerbating the crisis of confidence that prevails
today in the concert of nations.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela recognizes
the added value that cooperation between the
United Nations and other regional and subregional
organizations can have with respect to, among other
things, sharing experience and good practices in
the promotion of common values, with the ultimate
purpose of achieving the long-awaited realization
of peace, security, sustainable development and the
human rights of our peoples. We reject, however, that
this noble objective should be tarnished in order once
again to insist on the disastrous practice of exploiting
a circumstantial majority to weaponize the work of
the General Assembly to advance political agendas
of a dubious nature, including in the context of the
current armed conflict in the Eastern European region.
We therefore call on the responsible members of the
international community to put an end once and for all
to this type of approach, which in no way contributes
to political dialogue, diplomatic negotiation or the
reduction of tensions, much less to the achievement
of peace.
Lastly, we hope that in the year 2025, when this
agenda item is considered again, common sense will
prevail and that the proponents of the text return to the
path of good faith negotiations, ultimately favouring
the forging of consensus and the unity of the General
Assembly on central issues, with a view to guaranteeing
the well-being of our peoples and the development of
our nations.
23-11892

26/04/2023

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.65, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe”.
A recorded vote has been requested. A separate,
recorded vote has been requested on the ninth
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands (Kingdom of the), New
Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tonga, Türkiye,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Zambia
Against:
Belarus, Central African Republic, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Eritrea,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, China,
Colombia, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Nauru, Nepal, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Rwanda, Senegal, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen

A/77/PV.69

The ninth preambular paragraph of draft resolution
A/77/L.65 was retained by 81 votes to 10, with
48 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Ghana informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
A/77/L.65 as a whole.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands (Kingdom
of the), New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, TimorLeste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Türkiye, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab
Republic
Abstaining:
Angola, Botswana, Central African Republic,
Cuba, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Honduras, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritius, Nauru,

23-118927/22

A/77/PV.69

Senegal, South Africa, Sudan, Tajikistan, Togo,
Uzbekistan
Draft resolution A/77/L.65, as a whole, was
adopted by 122 votes to 5, with 18 abstentions
(resolution 77/284).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Angola, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Ghana informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Gala López (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Cuba wishes to explain its vote on
resolution 77/284, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe” and submitted
under agenda item 127 of the General Assembly.
Regrettably, we have not been able to support the
resolution that has been adopted because we do not
approve of the introduction of divisive language in the
text, which is traditionally adopted by consensus. Said
language undermines the goal of enhancing cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe.
The adoption of a resolution through a divisive vote does
not contribute to the strengthening of that cooperation.
Looking ahead to the next opportunity when this
item will be considered in the General Assembly, we
advocate a consensus text that sets aside controversial
issues that should be discussed in other spaces.
Mr. Ríos Sánchez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico voted in favour of resolution 77/284, on
cooperation between the United Nations and the Council
of Europe, because we are convinced of the importance
of solid collaboration between our Organization and
regional entities. Mexico is also an active participant in
the debates of the Council of Europe in its capacity as
an observer State since 1999.
That notwithstanding, my delegation abstained in
the voting on the ninth preambular paragraph as the
situations in Ukraine and Georgia do not fall within the
scope of cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe. The Mexican position regarding
the conflict in Ukraine has been made clear in all our
statements and votes on the subject.
8/22

26/04/2023

We regret that the substantive issue of the
resolution has been downgraded, resulting in a growing
antagonism in which the spirit of good faith negotiation
that should characterize this General Assembly is
being lost. We therefore reiterate our call to avoid
including issues that are outside the core substance
of the resolutions in order to preserve the exercise of
multilateral diplomacy.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
taking the floor to explain the position of the Islamic
Republic of Iran regarding resolution 77/284, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe”.
At the outset, allow me to recognize the outstanding
efforts made by the Permanent Missions of Iceland and
Ireland in co-facilitating the review of today’s resolution
and in bringing together the precautious viewpoints
and contributions offered by Member States.
The Charter of the United Nations acknowledges
the importance of working with regional organizations.
In that context, my delegation would like to underline
the importance of cooperation between the Council of
Europe and the United Nations. In that understanding,
my delegation has been actively engaged in informal
meetings with the aim of bridging the existing gaps,
including with regard to addressing ongoing conflicts in
Europe. We regret that despite the numerous demands
made by the Member States, the main sponsors of the
resolution were not able to consider any alternative
proposals in the specific paragraph. The text presented
contains certain references that are not acceptable to us.
Addressing the ninth preambular paragraph,
we would like to refer to our position regarding the
ongoing conflict in Ukraine, which has been repeated
on numerous occasions since its beginning. Once more,
we reiterate our principled position regarding the need
for the peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance
with international law, and underline the need for full
respect for the sovereignty and the territorial integrity
of all States. We are of the firm belief that in order to
find long-term and sustainable solutions to such crises,
it is necessary to address their root causes. We believe
that the inclusion of this paragraph as a substantive
matter in the text falls beyond the scope of the present
resolution, which is aimed merely at addressing
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe.
23-11892

26/04/2023

Furthermore, the current text lacks impartiality
and realistic mechanisms for resolving the crisis
through peaceful means. The United Nations is
expected to maintain its objectivity and impartiality
in order to play a responsible and constructive role in
the political settlement of crises. Any action taken by
the United Nations should be truly conducive to easing
the situation, rather than intensifying the conflict and
exacerbating the confrontation. At the same time, the
Islamic Republic of Iran has rejected any political
isolation, unilateral sanctions or pressure, as well as
any provocative measures that will only aggravate the
situation and make it more complicated and difficult
to resolve. It should be emphasized that the General
Assembly is not in a position to determine the existence
of an act of aggression because, in addition to Article 39
of the Charter, resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December
1974 calls on the Security Council to determine the
existence of an act of aggression.
Lastly, while we call for adherence to the relationship
agreement without expansion of its interpretation,
my delegation would like to refer to its observation
with regard to the functioning of the European Court
of Human Rights, as well as the engagement of the
Council of Europe in the field of promoting democratic
institutions. We reiterate that the functioning of that
regional organization and cooperation between the two
organizations shall be based on common international
values and with full adherence to international law,
the United Nations Charter and full respect for the
sovereignty and principle of non-intervention in
internal and international affairs of United Nations
Member States.

A/77/PV.69

My delegation would like to clarify that the use of
the following terms in the text does not meet with our
approval. These include:
(spoke in English)
“Multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination”;
“all women and girls”; “all human rights and
fundamental freedoms”; “gender-responsive”;
“significant contribution” in paragraph 17; and
“recognizes the Council of Europe youth sector
strategy 2030”.
(spoke in French)
Consequently, Senegal dissociates itself from
those terms. In addition, my delegation would like to
recall that the concept of gender and all the terms that
could be associated with it refer, according to Senegal’s
understanding, only to the social relations between men
and women.
Mrs. Balázs (Hungary): Regarding resolution
77/284, on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe, under agenda item 127 (l),
Hungary wishes to add the following remarks.

Moreover, I would like to highlight that my
delegation reserves its position on the non-consensual
and controversial language used throughout the text,
including but not limited to multiple and intersecting
forms of discrimination, as reflected in paragraph 3. For
the aforementioned reasons, my delegation abstained in
the voting on the resolution as a whole.

First of all, we would like to thank Iceland and
Ireland for the negotiations on the resolution. Hungary
remains dedicated to its human rights commitments
and to the combat against all forms of violence against
women and domestic violence. However, we stress that
the Hungarian National Assembly decided not to include
in the Hungarian national legal system the Council
of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating
Violence against Women and Domestic Violence, also
known as the Istanbul Convention, and called upon the
Hungarian Government not to take any further steps
for the expression of recognition of the binding effect
of the Istanbul Convention. Hungary maintains that
paragraph 17, which invites States that have not yet
done so to consider signing or ratifying the Istanbul
Convention, cannot be interpreted as a commitment to
signing or ratifying the Istanbul Convention by States
that have not yet done so.

Mr. Gueye (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the delegations of Iceland
and Ireland for their hard work in the framework of
negotiating the important resolution 77/284, which
highlights the cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe, including on such subjects
of common interest as the promotion of democracy,
human rights and the rule of law.

In line with our declared national zero-tolerance
policy on violence against women, Hungary fully
agrees with the crucial aim of fighting against violence
against women and children and domestic violence.
That has been an independent statutory definition in
the new Hungarian Criminal Code since 2013. In our
view, it is not the ratification of a treaty but the tangible
results of Government actions that make prevention

23-118929/22

A/77/PV.69

and combating violence against women and domestic
violence a reality. The Hungarian Government regards
effective action against every form of violence against
women as one of its most important priorities, and
that call is continuously reflected in the Government’s
legislative efforts. Thus, Hungary can only accept
a factual reference to the existence of the Istanbul
Convention and cannot support calls and invitations for
the signature and ratification of the said Convention.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting. May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (l) of agenda item 127?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 60 (continued)
Use of the veto
Mr. Gala López (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The
Security Council is increasingly broadening the scope
of the definition of international peace and security,
to the detriment of the important functions and
responsibilities that fall to the General Assembly, the
most democratic and representative organ of the United
Nations system. We advocate that the General Assembly
fully assume the important role that the Charter of the
United Nations grants it in matters of international
peace and security. The mandate of the Assembly with
respect to those issues has been seriously affected, as a
consequence of the increasing tendency of the Security
Council to usurp its functions.
Our delegation recorded its considerations when
resolution 76/262, entitled “Standing mandate for a
General Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the
Security Council”, was adopted (see A/76/PV.69), and
from which today’s meeting arises. In Cuba’s opinion,
the provisions of paragraph 4 of resolution 76/262 on
the inclusion of the “Use of the veto” as a permanent
item on the agenda of the General Assembly as of this
session, can in no way be interpreted to the detriment
of the inextricably linked five issues addressed by the
intergovernmental negotiations process on Council
reform, under decision 62/557. We reiterate that the
question of the veto should not be analysed separately
from the rest of the issues that are under the mandate
of the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council framework, established by decision 62/557.
The comprehensive reform of the Council that we
need could not be achieved otherwise. The five key
10/22

26/04/2023

issues identified for the reform of that organ, including
the question of the veto, are closely related and form
a package.
At the same time, we consider it insufficient to limit
the submission of special Security Council reports to
cases in which the veto has been used. That would be
a clearly restrictive and selective approach to what the
Charter establishes in that regard in its Articles 15 (1)
and 24 (3). We reiterate the position of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, supported by Cuba, that the
Security Council is obliged to submit special reports for
the consideration of the General Assembly whenever
necessary and not only for issues related to the veto.
Finally, we recall that the mandate of resolution
76/262 does not replace the provisions of articles 8 (b) and
9 (b) of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly,
regarding the convening of special emergency sessions.
For that reason, we consider that the possibility for
the President of the General Assembly to convene a
debate by virtue of paragraph 1 of the aforementioned
resolution should be explicitly excluded if a vote by the
Assembly itself has previously taken place by virtue
of resolution 377 (V) A, “Uniting for peace”, in which
the majority of the Member States have ruled against
calling the Assembly to discuss the same issue.
We again advocate urgent and comprehensive reform
of the Security Council, with a view to transforming
it into the representative, democratic and transparent
body that the international community demands.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French):
After more than a year of Russian aggression in
Ukraine and in the face of the extraordinarily serious
violation of the Charter of the United Nations by a
permanent member of the Security Council, it remains
more crucial than ever to strengthen our collective
security system. My delegation will repeat what it has
said on many occasions: — the veto is not a privilege.
Its aim cannot be to paralyse the ability of the Security
Council to fulfil its mandate to maintain international
peace and security. The veto comes with duties and a
particular responsibility for the permanent members. In
that spirit of responsibility, France has used the veto
only 18 times since 1945 and has not used it for more
than 30 years.
In addition, from this same rostrum, President of
the French Republic Emmanuel Macron recalled the
need to regulate the use of the veto in the event of mass
atrocities (see A/77/PV.4). Indeed, since 2013 France
23-11892

26/04/2023

has proposed that the five permanent members of the
Council voluntarily and collectively suspend the use of
the veto in the event of mass atrocities. That voluntary
approach requires not a revision of the Charter but a
political commitment on the part of the permanent
members. France has behaved in accordance with that
line of conduct since 2015.
Today this initiative, carried out jointly with
Mexico, is supported by 106 countries. We call on all
Member States that have not done so, especially the
other permanent members of the Security Council, to
support it. In that regard, we noted with interest the
commitment of the United States to restrict its use of
the veto to rare and exceptional situations and wish to
combine our efforts for a responsible use of the veto.
France stands ready to resume an in-depth discussion
with the permanent members, as well as with all the
States Members of the United Nations, to define
the concrete methods that would make it possible to
ascertain the situation of mass atrocities and to trigger
the suspension of the use of the veto.
Finally, to strengthen our collective security
system, we must more broadly reform the Security
Council. France supports its enlargement in its two
categories of members and would like to see text-based
negotiations begin.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): Today’s debate marks the
first anniversary of the adoption of resolution 76/262,
commonly known as the veto initiative. Bulgaria is
proud to be a member of the core group of States that
introduced the resolution. I would like to especially
commend Liechtenstein for its visionary and bold
leadership. At the time when it first presented the idea,
few believed it stood a chance. As we now know, not
only did it stand a chance, it was also adopted without
a vote. That was a message that deliberate obstruction
of action by the Security Council when faced with
threats to peace and security could not and would not
be tolerated. The resolution is also a sign of the resolve
of the overwhelming majority of Member States to
strengthen multilateralism and the international rulesbased order.
A year after its adoption, we can see the positive
impact resolution 72/262 has had. First, transparency
and accountability have increased. That is of particular
importance as, through paragraph 1 of Article 24 of
the Charter of the United Nations, we Members States
have conferred on the Security Council the primary

A/77/PV.69

responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and agreed that in carrying out its duties under
this responsibility, the Security Council will act on
our behalf. On the three instances that the provisions
of resolution 76/262 have been triggered as a result
of vetoes being cast, the Security Council submitted
a special report, as envisaged in the resolution. The
respective Security Council members took part in the
debate to explain their vetoes. The veto initiative has
had some preventive power as well. While not having
eliminated the use of the veto, it has increased the
political cost of casting a veto.
Secondly, resolution 76/262 builds upon other
initiatives aimed at limiting the use of the veto and
at preventing its misuse, such as the French-Mexican
initiative and the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group code of conduct, which Bulgaria
fully endorses. In that regard, a strict implementation
of paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the United Nations
Charter — namely, that a party to a dispute shall abstain
in the voting — should be ensured. Unfortunately, that
has not been the case.
Mr. Rai (Nepal), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Thirdly, the veto initiative has enhanced the
role of the General Assembly in matters relating to
international peace and security. Given the extremely
difficult geopolitical context, it is likely that the
Security Council will continue to be prevented from
exercising its role effectively due to the misuse of the
veto. On such occasions, it is necessary for the General
Assembly to have an avenue to take action and to
deliver, because when the Security Council fails to act
it is not a failure of the Security Council alone; it is
perceived as a failure of the United Nations and of us
all. The General Assembly has delivered on a number
of instances, as in the case of the illegal, unprovoked
and unjustified aggression of the Russian Federation
against Ukraine.
Today’s debate is an opportunity for all of us to
reflect on how we can make our United Nations more
effective and fit for purpose. The veto initiative has
proven to be an important step, but we need to do more,
and the time to do it is now.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): One year ago
today, under the leadership of Liechtenstein, Member
States took the landmark decision to adopt by consensus
resolution 76/262, entitled “Standing mandate for a
General Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the

23-1189211/22

A/77/PV.69

Security Council”. Through its adoption, the General
Assembly created a mechanism to ensure accountability
among United Nations organs, in accordance with the
Charter, and to ask permanent members of the Security
Council that have cast a veto to explain themselves to
the wider membership. After all, the casting of a veto
is not a display of power, but rather an act of weakness
that shows that the caster of the veto has failed to
convince others of its position. The veto initiative was
and remains a significant achievement and one that
New Zealand believes has contributed to wider United
Nations revitalization efforts. It has strengthened
the credibility of the United Nations and the wider
multilateral system. It has also reminded us of the
important role that small States play as the custodians
of the Charter of the United Nations.
As a proud member of the core group, New Zealand
actively supported that initiative from its inception. We
did so steadfast in our belief that the General Assembly
has a legitimate interest in and political responsibility
to address situations where the use of the veto has
resulted in the paralysis of the Security Council’s
decision-making responsibilities. In the year since its
adoption, in addition to the emergency special session
on Ukraine, resolution 76/262 has been activated on two
separate occasions. Sadly, that is two times too many.
The veto is the most undemocratic element of
the United Nations. New Zealand has been a vocal
opponent of the use of the veto since its inception in
1945. Our position that the veto should never be used
remains unchanged. However, in circumstances where
it has been used, we are encouraged that the resolution
has already proven to be an important and effective
accountability mechanism. On occasions when the
resolution has been activated, the ensuing General
Assembly debate has been a demonstration of strong
and inclusive multilateralism.
There has never been a greater need for innovation
and creativity to secure the central place of the United
Nations in addressing the collective challenges facing
us, particularly as they relate to international peace and
security. That is why New Zealand actively supports
initiatives such as resolution 76/262 and participates
in the work of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group.
When we reconvene on this agenda item in one
year’s time, we hope that it will be a celebration of the
non-use of the veto in the intervening year. If, however,
12/22

26/04/2023

the resolution is reactivated as a result of the Security
Council’s failure to perform its responsibility to act
on behalf of all Member States, it will be incumbent
upon all of us, as members of the General Assembly,
to be proactive in exercising our collective political
responsibility under the United Nations Charter to
address matters of international peace and security. We
must unite for peace.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): Two days ago, we
commemorated the International Day of Multilateralism
and Diplomacy for Peace, yet today we gather to
talk about the veto power — the power to impose
unilateralism in the Security Council, granted to five
permanent Member States decades ago. Today it is
clear that the veto power in its current form needs to
be reformed since, sadly, it has been often abused.
Last year’s resolution 76/262, establishing the standing
Mechanism for a General Assembly debate when a veto
is cast in the Security Council, was a much-needed step
to ensure transparency and accountability for the use
of a veto.
Reflecting on the implementation of the resolution
over its first year, I will limit myself to five points.
First, the veto power is in no way a privilege, but
a heavy responsibility to act in the interest of securing
peace and security for people worldwide. It shall not
be used to render the Security Council dysfunctional
or serve as a tool to pursue the vetoing State’s own
political interests. Its flagrant abuse, such as that of
the Russian Federation in the position of aggressor in
the situation of Ukraine, is simply unacceptable and
in stark contrast to the responsibilities of a permanent
member of the Security Council.
Secondly, the standing mechanism for a General
Assembly debate has not in any way impaired the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for
maintaining peace and security. On the contrary, it
applies additional pressure to conduct consultations
among Security Council members and thereby
contributes to greater veto restraint and, from a
broader perspective, to strengthening the whole United
Nations system.
Thirdly, the standing mechanism has complemented
the existing regime of uniting for peace by ensuring that
no instance of preventing the Security Council from
fulfilling its mandate can escape without explanation.
That is documented by the two instances when a
23-11892

26/04/2023

General Assembly debate has been convened under the
standing mechanism.
Fourthly, Slovakia recalls other initiatives
aimed at restraining the use of veto, for example the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
code of conduct and the French-Mexican initiative.
Those continue to be equally relevant, and we call on
permanent members of the Security Council that have
not joined them yet to do so and apply them.
Fifthly, even though the standing mechanism
initiative is without prejudice to the Security Council
reform process, I cannot but conclude by underscoring
the urgent need to finally make a breakthrough in the
negotiations, which would allow us to tackle the veto
power on the systemic level.
Mr. Benard Estrada (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks President Csaba Kőrösi
for convening this debate under the agenda item “Use
of the veto”. We also take this opportunity to thank
the leadership of the delegation of the Principality of
Liechtenstein for presenting resolution 76/262 to the
General Assembly.
Unfortunately, the reality of various conflicts and
the use or misuse of the veto as a result of political or
ideological positions make clear to us the need to make
structural changes in our Organization, particularly
those related to the Security Council. In that regard, we
welcome the full implementation of resolution 76/262,
which allows us to convene a General Assembly
meeting when, due to lack of consensus among the
permanent members, the Security Council is unable
to fulfil its duties, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
From our perspective, resolution 76/262 has to date
been a useful mechanism to involve the international
community in decision-making regarding the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
demonstrates the need to democratize and increase
representativeness in matters of international peace
and security, ensuring that the maintenance of
international order does not fall solely to the unilateral
and non-representative decisions of a few States.
Likewise, in our view Member States must continue
with all efforts to carry out comprehensive discussions
on Security Council reform, which covers, among other
things, the topic of implementing measures to prevent
the irresponsible use of the veto or to mitigate its effects.

A/77/PV.69

Resolution 76/262 fulfils the purpose of holding the
permanent members accountable for the use of the veto
before the General Assembly.
Finally, Guatemala reiterates its position that,
first, the use of the veto in the Security Council is a
prerogative of the permanent members that does not
correspond to the current geopolitical reality; secondly,
in the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform, Guatemala has supported suspension
of the veto in cases of mass atrocities or crimes against
humanity; and thirdly, the working methods of the
Security Council need to be more transparent and
open to the membership. As such, if the veto power is
used, it is important that the General Assembly know
the reason for said decision, in an exercise of greater
accountability with the membership of the United
Nations as a whole.
We hope that the various discussions held within
the framework of the intergovernmental negotiations
on Security Council reform and this type of debate can
achieve substantive progress on a topic of relevance,
allowing us to have an Organization that corresponds
to the needs of the twenty-first century.
Mr. Hasenau (Germany): One year ago, we
took a major step towards greater accountability and
responsibility in the Security Council. As one of the
83 sponsors, Germany thanks Liechtenstein for the
landmark resolution 76/262, on the use of the veto,
which was adopted by consensus.
Members of the Security Council — and the
permanent members in particular — hold responsibility
for the invaluable good of international peace and
security. Abuses of the veto are antithetical to that
responsibility. Therefore, each use of the veto must be
duly justified by the issuing State, preferably in front
of the Assembly. The Security Council presidency must
heed the call under paragraph 4 of resolution 76/262 to
report on any use of the veto.
In 2022, three vetoes were issued — in May (see
S/PV.9048), July (see S/PV.9087) and September
(see S/PV.9143). They blocked action on matters of
vital importance: peace and security in Ukraine, the
situation in the Middle East and non-proliferation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Moreover,
in abusing its veto to advance its own interests in the
context of its war of aggression in Ukraine, the Russian
Federation violated paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the

23-1189213/22

A/77/PV.69

Charter of the United Nations, which states that a party
to a dispute shall abstain in the voting.
The intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform show that a growing number of States
opposes the veto power. Let us therefore do what is
possible now to advance beyond the resolution that
we adopted last year. Importantly, the use of the veto
should be limited to rare and exceptional cases. We
need clear and transparent criteria for its use, to prevent
its abuse at great cost to the international community.
Therefore, Germany strongly supports the FrenchMexican initiative on veto restraint in cases of mass
atrocity, as well as the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group code of conduct, with the aim to
define such criteria. We also support all attempts to
ensure consistency with the principles of the United
Nations Charter, including its paragraph 3 of Article 27.
Ms. Hussain (Maldives): As a small State, the
Maldives has always supported the need for strong
multilateralism, with the United Nations at its centre.
We believe that respect for the rule of law and the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations are paramount and should be respected by all
States, irrespective of their size or might. The United
Nations Charter places an obligation on all its Member
States to settle international disputes by peaceful
means, without the threat or use of force.
We know that the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security lies
with the Security Council. But when the Security
Council cannot act, the General Assembly must. The
most inclusive and representative organ of the United
Nations should strive to ensure transparency and
accountability and insist that Member States explain
and persuade instead of blocking action with vetoes. It
was for that reason that the Maldives joined more than
80 other countries in co-sponsoring resolution 76/262,
on the use of the veto. We strongly believe that the power
of the veto comes with extraordinary responsibility,
and it is therefore the role of the General Assembly to
ensure that this responsibility is used wisely.
As other colleagues have pointed out in the debates
last year and today, we should view the veto resolution
as part of a general goal of greater accountability,
transparency, coherence and collaboration among the
principal organs of the United Nations.
The Maldives is committed to finding solutions
through a multilateral approach by preserving
14/22

26/04/2023

international peace and security. The overuse of the
veto paralyses the United Nations at a time when we
need multilateralism more than ever. The veto resolution
was an innovation that helped our institution function
better. We continue to support it and encourage ideas
around further innovation to strengthen the General
Assembly and our institution as a whole.
Mr. Reed (United Kingdom): The founding
Members of the United Nations vowed to save the
generations that followed them from the scourge of
war. They conferred the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security on the
Security Council. As a part of that, permanent members
of the Security Council were given veto power.
The United Kingdom is clear _ the veto is a
heavy responsibility, to be used to avoid and resolve
conflict. The veto should be used responsibly and with
accountability. Sadly, not all permanent members agree.
In February last year, Russia used the veto to prevent
the Council from taking action in response to its illegal
and unprovoked war in Ukraine (see S/PV.8979). That
came just two months after it vetoed a draft resolution
that would have enabled the Council to take action on
climate security — a draft resolution that counted the
highest ever number of sponsors (see S/PV.8926). In
response, the General Assembly adopted resolution
76/262, which we are talking about today, to enable the
General Assembly to scrutinize the use of the veto and
to hold Council Members using the veto to account. We
were proud to co-sponsor that resolution.
Since then, of course, the Assembly has twice met
in response to vetoes: in May 2022, when China and
Russia vetoed a resolution that would have responded to
the launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
of intercontinental ballistic missiles (see S/PV.9048),
and in July 2022, when Russia vetoed a draft resolution
that sought to extend humanitarian assistance to
over 4 million people in north-western Syria (see
S/PV.9087), only to accept a resolution days later with
one change: allowing humanitarians to provide help
for six months, instead of twelve (S/PV.9089). Is that
what the veto was created for? Halving the window
for providing humanitarian assistance to people who
desperately need it?
For our part, the United Kingdom has not exercised
our veto since 1989. We listen carefully. We negotiate
with Security Council partners to try and find agreement.
The United Kingdom also remains committed to never
23-11892

26/04/2023

voting against a credible draft resolution on preventing
or ending a mass atrocity, as a proud signatory of the
Accountability, Coherence, and Transparency group
code of conduct. We encourage all Member States,
including the other permanent members of the Council,
to support that initiative.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Today we mark one year
since the adoption by consensus of resolution 76/262.
Albania was proud to co-sponsor that innovative
mechanism, along with 82 Member States, to ensure
that the Security Council acts in the interests of the
international community and for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
I would like to draw the attention of the Assembly
to the positive effects that this standing mandate has
had one year since its activation.
First, it has provided a mechanism that promotes
transparency and greater accountability of the
permanent members for their decision-making. It
gives an opportunity to the entire membership to be
included in discussions related to peace and security
by addressing concerns over the use of veto power and
making it a matter of public record and discussion.
On four occasions last year, the casting of a veto by
one or more Council members prevented the adoption
of resolutions: two on Ukraine (see S/PV.8979 and
S/PV.9143), one on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea (see S/PV.9048) and one on Syria (see S/PV.9087).
Following the adoption of resolution 76/262 of 26 April
2022, the Security Council has submitted three special
reports to the General Assembly. We believe that the
Security Council’s special reports are a very good
example of the greater transparency and accountability
of the Council. As a current elected member, Albania
will work with other Security Council member States to
make sure that this practice is reflected in the upcoming
annual report of the Council to the General Assembly.
Secondly, the veto initiative has been effective
in fostering dialogue and greater cooperation among
Member States on issues that were exclusively in the
domain of the permanent members of the Security
Council. We believe that having this debate in the
General Assembly whenever a veto is cast in the
Security Council provides an opportunity for all
Member States to express their views on the matter
and for the international community to hear a range
of perspectives on the issue. It also helps the Security

A/77/PV.69

Council’s members in that it gives them food for their
decision-making.
Thirdly, this mechanism plays a deterrent role,
increasing the needed pressure on the veto powers
in limiting their ability to the use of veto, building
consensus and seeking compromises on various
contested issues of the Security Council. By facilitating
open and constructive debate, the resolution can help
build consensus on ways to address veto use and improve
the functioning of the United Nations as a whole.
Albania is part of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency (ACT) group and supports the
initiative of France and Mexico, according to which
countries must refrain from the use of veto in cases
of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
mass atrocities. We would like to join others in calling
for a faithful implementation of the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. In paragraph 3 of Article
27, it clearly stipulates that, in decisions under Chapter
VI, and under paragraph 3 of Article 52, a party to a
dispute shall abstain in the voting.
Lastly, the standing mandate has further
strengthened the role of the General Assembly, as one
of the main deliberative and policymaking bodies of the
United Nations multilateral system, in discussing issues
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security, in accordance with the United Nations Charter.
We support ideas for a more substantial and meaningful
role of the General Assembly when addressing those
issues, including by bringing a possible outcome when
considered necessary.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We are meeting for the first time under agenda
item 60, “Use of the veto”, in the light of paragraph 4 of
resolution 76/262, which was adopted exactly one year
ago under the agenda item “Strengthening of the United
Nations system” (see A/76/PV.69).
My country, the Syrian Arab Republic, a founding
Member of the United Nations, reiterates its keenness
and commitment to strengthening the United Nations
and supporting solutions to threats against international
peace and security in the light of the established
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, which
enshrines the right to cast a veto. The use of that right,
as provided for by the Charter, has never represented
a failure to maintain international peace and security.
Rather, on numerous occasions, it has represented a
cornerstone of the international balance of powers and

23-1189215/22

A/77/PV.69

a means to contain any abuse of power and protect the
international order from arbitrary decisions that may
be taken by one or more countries. In other words,
that power realistically limits another power at the
international level.
We also wish to recall that throughout history,
since the inception of the United Nations to date, the
use of the veto has never been an issue on its own
merit. The problem actually lies in how it is used and
in the political mindset that has often been behind
the casting of a veto. Over the decades of the ArabIsraeli conflict, the United States of America and its
allies on the Security Council have always opposed
all draft resolutions calling for an end to the Israeli
occupation and all settlement projects in the occupied
Arab territories. They have even rejected all invitations
to enforce relevant Security Council resolutions that
clearly provided for an end to the Israeli occupation
of Arab territories since 1967, in Palestine, Syria and
Lebanon, even though Article 25 of the United Nations
Charter provides for the commitment of Member
States to accepting and enforcing the resolutions of the
Security Council. In other words, the United States and
its allies have cast a veto against the United Nations
Charter itself and the legitimacy of Council resolutions.
It may be important to recall here that the very first
use of the use of the veto in the history of the United
Nations took place on 16 February 1946, and it was in
favour of supporting the independence of my country,
Syria. At that time, the Soviet Union, in all its wisdom,
voted against a draft resolution sponsored by France and
Britain, with support from the United States, to extend
the mandate of the French and British troops in my
country and to make their withdrawal conditional upon
the assigning of concessions to protect the interests
of those countries, at the expense of the sovereignty
and independence of my country. However, the Soviet
veto defeated that draft resolution and contributed to
securing the full, unconditional withdrawal of foreign
troops from Syria only two months after the date that
meeting was held (S/PV.23). A review of numerous
cases in which the veto has been used in all wisdom
by Russia and China would confirm that the veto has
helped the world avert great disasters and conflicts,
the further division and destruction of countries, the
starvation of many peoples and the dissemination of
chaos and terrorism.
What needs to be addressed is not the way the veto
is cast in the Security Council, but the lack of readiness
16/22

26/04/2023

on the part of some of its permanent members to
consider and listen to other perspectives, as well as their
unwillingness to reach consensual solutions and take
balanced and wise decisions to maintain international
peace and security. Some of those members are even
adamant about imposing certain draft resolutions
and disregarding the perspectives of the countries
concerned. They act as if they were the custodians of
the United Nations or as if the Security Council were
a corporation whose board they control. That is why it
often becomes necessary to cast a veto.
It is important to indicate here that resolution
76/262, which was adopted by consensus, should
never be interpreted as being aimed at changing the
delicate balance between the General Assembly and
the Security Council, or as a means of undermining the
power and legitimacy of Security Council resolutions.
Rather, it represents an attempt to prompt the members
of the Council to make additional efforts to find
common ground for consensus and take decisions
based on greater wisdom, with a view to maintaining
international peace and security. Our objective in
supporting the resolution was to make the work of the
Security Council more transparent by enabling the
States members of the General Assembly to objectively
discuss the rationale of the member that decided to cast
a veto. Our objective was not to transform the General
Assembly into a platform to attack that country or
hold it accountable and create a state of unjustified
polarization in that regard.
In conclusion, I wish to note that the logic behind
the distribution and allocation of powers between the
Security Council and the General Assembly, as indicated
in the Charter of the United Nations since its inception,
has enabled them to work effectively to date. That is
why we find it strange today to see attempts to expand
the scope of the authority of the General Assembly at
the expense of the authority of the Security Council,
particularly when it comes to maintaining international
peace and security, and also imposing a custodial
approach related to the way decisions are reached.
Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): The Dominican Republic is grateful for the
convening of this debate, which provides the General
Assembly with a unique opportunity to fully consider
a fundamental issue in our collective commitment to
maintaining international peace and security. That
issue is the exercise of the veto in the Security Council,
a resource intended to attempt to remedy particularly
23-11892

26/04/2023

critical situations. However, with each passing day, the
value of its use, or perhaps abuse, is becoming less clear.
That is because we are facing a Security Council that in
recent decades has suffered from deep polarization on
various issues, and where a high number of decisions,
including those on humanitarian issues or on relevant
topics, have been taken by vote, during which the veto
has been applied. That unfortunate occurrence should
certainly make us think.
The goal is not to try to relieve the Security Council
of the responsibility conferred on it by the Charter of
the United Nations, but to allow the General Assembly
to assist constructively in the search for solutions so
that its members can discharge that responsibility in an
effective, relevant and non-discriminatory way, always
placing people at the centre and in accordance with
the times we are living. In that sense, the Dominican
Republic understands that the General Assembly,
together with our colleagues on the Security Council,
must focus on considering and evaluating realistic
proposals to achieve a more efficient, inclusive, fair and
agile Security Council that reflects and protects the best
interests of the most vulnerable in conflict situations.
In that vein, the Dominican Republic supports the
full implementation of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group code of conduct regarding the
use of the veto, which urges all members of the Security
Council, elected and permanent alike, not to vote
against any credible draft resolution intended to prevent
or stop mass atrocities. The Dominican Republic is
also of the view that the Franco-Mexican proposal to
obtain agreement among the permanent members of the
Council to voluntarily refrain from using their vetoes in
cases of atrocity crimes is a valid tool that deserves to
be made concrete with a political agreement among the
permanent members of the Council.
We consider the “threat of use of the veto” to be
unacceptable; unfortunately, however, it prevails in
times of tension and division in the Security Council.
We believe that there should be no room for such
pressure, not only in the Security Council but in any
area of the United Nations. We view as both healthy
and a step in the right direction the General Assembly
practice of requesting any permanent member of the
Council that exercises the veto privilege to explain the
reasons and motivations that led them to exercise it, as
agreed in resolution 76/262, which we co-sponsored.

A/77/PV.69

Looking to the future, the Dominican Republic
believes that it would be important to continue to
deepen the various proposals that have been expressed
in different forums, including empowering the General
Assembly to reverse a veto in the Security Council,
where applicable; the idea that a decision needs more
than one negative vote to be vetoed, thereby limiting
the power of the individual veto; and, finally, the notion
of restrained veto use, for which there must necessarily
be a pre-existing principled political will. We advocate
for a United Nations whose bodies enjoy the necessary
legitimacy vis-a-vis each and every person it serves,
and that is capable of facing, to the best of its ability,
the most pressing challenges facing humankind.
Mr. Mathur (India): We meet today to acknowledge
that a year has passed since the adoption of the veto
initiative (resolution 76/262) by the Assembly. India’s
position on the veto remains consistent and clear. As
we all are aware, back in the year 2008, the General
Assembly, via its decision 62/557, considered that all
five aspects of Security Council reform, including the
question of the veto, would be decided in a comprehensive
manner and therefore that no single cluster could be
addressed in isolation. The veto resolution last year,
though adopted by consensus, unfortunately reflected
a piecemeal approach to Security Council reforms,
highlighting one aspect while ignoring the root cause
of the problem.
Regarding the substantive aspects of the exercise of
the veto in the Security Council, my delegation has the
following four observations.
First, over the past 75 years, all five permanent
members have used the veto to achieve their respective
political ends. In that regard, let me flag what our
African brothers and sisters have repeatedly stated
in the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform:
“The veto as a matter of principle should be
abolished. However, as a matter of common justice,
it should be extended to new permanent members
so long as it continues to exist.”
Turning to our second observation, only five
members have been vested with the privilege of using
the veto. As rightly called out by our African brothers
and sisters, that goes against the very concept of the
sovereign equality of States and only perpetuates the
mindset of the Second World War — to the victor
belongs the spoils.

23-1189217/22

A/77/PV.69

For our third observation, either all nations are
treated equally in the context of voting rights or else the
new permanent members must also be given the veto.
The extension of veto to new members, in our view,
would have no adverse impact on the effectiveness of
an enlarged Council.
For our fourth observation, the exercise of the
veto is driven by political considerations, not by moral
obligations. As long as it exists, the member State or
member States that can exercise the veto will do so,
irrespective of the moral pressure, as we have seen
in the recent past. Therefore, we need to address all
five aspects of Security Council reform, including the
question of the veto, in a comprehensive manner, through
clearly defined timelines, in the intergovernmental
negotiations process. India remains steadfast in our
commitment to supporting any initiative that genuinely
furthers the objective of achieving meaningful and
comprehensive reform of the key elements of the global
multilateral architecture.
Lastly, the Union Territories of Jammu and
Kashmir and Ladakh have been, are and will always
be an integral and inalienable part of India. No amount
of misinformation, rhetoric and propaganda from any
country can change this fact.
Ms. Zoghbi (Lebanon): Despite its shortcomings,
preserving the spirit of multilateralism, with the United
Nations at its heart, remains a necessity. That holds
true for all of us and particularly for small States. As a
founding Member of the Organization and a nation that
has constantly turned to the United Nations, Lebanon
knows the importance of a strong and credible United
Nations system, particularly the Security Council.
Far too often, the Security Council, entrusted with
the maintenance of international peace and security, has
failed to deliver on its mandate. The veto has often been
the first focus of criticism levelled at the Council. As
expressed many times by my delegation, the veto or the
threat to use it has been an impediment to maintaining
security and to the achievement of peace. Lebanon was
therefore one of the co-sponsors of resolution 76/262,
the veto initiative, which was adopted by consensus a
year ago. We believe that the mechanism established
by the resolution represents a significant step towards
enhancing the accountability and transparency of the
Security Council. It also increases the role and authority
of the General Assembly, the most universal body of
the United Nations, and offers an opportunity for all
18/22

26/04/2023

members to engage in a necessary dialogue, regardless
of their position.
In the same spirit, my delegation reiterates
its support for two initiatives seeking to promote
necessary accountability. The first is the FrenchMexican declaration on veto restraint in cases of mass
atrocity crimes, and the second is the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct,
which calls on all Security Council members to not
vote against any credible draft resolution intended to
prevent or halt mass atrocities.
While we underscore the importance and relevance
of the veto initiative, we are aware that it will not stop
inaction and will not be sufficient to put an end to
conflicts and daily violations of international law. We are
aware that more should be done to prompt the Security
Council to act more effectively and responsibly; hence,
the need for a comprehensive reform of the Council.
In times like these, working towards more effective
multilateralism by reinvigorating the main organs of
the United Nations is long overdue.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure for us to participate in this important meeting,
the first in the General Assembly on the use of the veto,
pursuant to resolution 76/262 of April 2022. The State
of Qatar was among those members that submitted the
resolution, which was co-sponsored by a significant
number of countries, reflecting the significance of the
issue and the importance attached to it.
The State of Qatar is aware of the importance of that
issue in embodying an important role of the General
Assembly in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. The Assembly has prerogatives regarding
items pertaining to the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is high time for the General
Assembly to carry out that role so that we can openly
and sincerely discuss the use of the veto in the most
representative body of the United Nations, particularly
when it is exercised on socioeconomic, humanitarian
and legal issues. We believe that the consideration by
the General Assembly of questions that the Security
Council cannot address as a result of the use of the veto
is absolutely crucial, as it allows us to fulfil the most
important purpose for which the Organization was
established, namely, the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Two meetings were held by the General Assembly
during the first two months after the adoption of
23-11892

26/04/2023

the resolution and following the use of the veto by a
permanent member of the Security Council. A debate
within the General Assembly took place on two issues
of great importance, not only to the members of the
Security Council but to the members of the General
Assembly as well.
When resolution 76/262 was adopted, we
reaffirmed that it did not seek to trample on the
prerogatives of the Security Council. The resolution
addresses the veto pursuant to the role and tasks of the
General Assembly, in line with the mandate conferred
upon it by the Charter of the United Nations. The
resolution does not undermine the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform, in particular
the right of the veto. It does not prejudge the outcome
of those negotiations.
We believe that the meetings convened pursuant
to the resolution will be an opportunity to reach the
necessary consensus and to avoid the use of the veto
in future. That will enable the Security Council to carry
out its duties in maintaining international peace and
security. In that regard, I note that the State of Qatar
endorsed the French-Mexican initiative on restraining
the use of the veto in cases of mass atrocity crimes.
We have also endorsed the code of conduct on actions
taken by the Security Council against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes introduced by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar is well known to be
committed to multilateralism. We reiterate the central
role of the General Assembly as the most representative
body of the United Nations. We also reiterate the need
to strengthen and revive its role as part of the mandate
conferred upon it by the United Nations Charter.
Ms. Syrota (Ukraine): A year ago, Ukraine was
among the initial sponsors of resolution 77/262, which
established the standing mechanism and thereby
strengthened the role of the General Assembly in a
situation when a veto is cast in the Security Council.
We welcome the fact that in the year since its launch,
the initiative seems to be well embedded in our
working practices.
The issue of the use of the veto has always been
of particular importance for Ukraine and other
Member States that uphold the Charter of the United
Nations and its principles. Against the backdrop of the
Russian invasion of my country, with the deliberate
immobilization of the Security Council as a part of

A/77/PV.69

its aggressive strategy, this issue has become even
more relevant. Almost every draft resolution that the
Security Council has attempted to adopt in response
to the Russian aggression against Ukraine since 2014
has been blocked due to the abuse of the veto by the
Russian Federation. In particular, Russia cast a veto
on draft resolutions concerning the territorial integrity
of Ukraine in 2014, when it launched an armed
aggression and started the temporary occupation of
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol (see S/PV.7138); Malaysian Airlines MH-17,
which it shot down in 2014 over the territory of Ukraine
(see S/PV.7498); and the condemnation of its aggression
when a full-scale military invasion of Ukraine started
in February 2022 (see S/PV.8979).
The most recent case took place in September
2022, when the Security Council addressed the Russian
attempt to annex, in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, the sovereign territories of Ukraine
in the east and south of Ukraine (see S/PV.9143). The
Russian representative was the only one to vote against
draft resolution S/2022/720. That testified to the fact
that even when isolated, that country is capable of
blocking the Council from exercising its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. That is why Ukraine supports
further fine-tuning of the mechanism in response to
the use of the veto, which we are discussing today. In
particular, paragraph 3, inviting the Security Council
to submit a special report on the use of the veto in
question to the General Assembly, should be applied
regardless of how the issue is addressed — either the
holding of a debate on the situation concerning which
the veto was cast or meeting in an emergency special
session on the same situation.
As already stated today, the veto power was
designed not as a privilege but as a responsibility. It
runs counter to the spirit of the United Nations Charter
that, in recent years, the veto power has been misused to
block resolutions while ongoing aggression or atrocity
crimes — genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes — were being committed. Such vetoes prevented
the condemnation, investigation and prosecution of
crimes, as well as other measures designed to curtail or
alleviate the commission of those crimes.
Ukraine therefore is a staunch supporter of existing
initiatives aimed at limiting the use of the veto and
strengthening the responsibility for its casting, notably
the code of conduct regarding Security Council action

23-1189219/22

A/77/PV.69

against genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes, prepared by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, as well as the Franco-Mexican
initiative on suspension of veto powers in cases of
mass atrocities. We are convinced that the use of
the veto should also be restricted when a permanent
member is directly involved in the conflict under the
consideration of the Council and therefore cannot be
expected to exercise its voting rights and privileges in
an impartial manner.
The wider United Nations membership cannot
further tolerate the abuse of the veto and seek a
strengthening of accountability. We encourage the
General Assembly to translate our commitment into
action by strengthening existing mechanisms and
implementing existing initiatives.
Mr. Abesadze (Georgia): We are pleased to
participate in this much-needed debate on the
question of the veto, marking one year since the
adoption of resolution 76/262, commonly known as
the veto initiative. As one of the main co-sponsors
of the resolution, we wish to thank the leadership of
Liechtenstein once again for negotiating that vital
document. We believe that the veto initiative serves the
goal of upholding the multilateral system we all aspire
to. By adopting the resolution last year, we strengthened
the role of the General Assembly, the universal body
granting all States equal rights and responsibilities. It
also paves the way for more efficient, fair and up-todate ways of cooperation between the two main bodies
of the United Nations.
We saw resolution 76/262 in action last year when,
on several occasions, a veto was cast in the Security
Council and considerations continued here in the Hall,
providing equal opportunity to all members to take
part in the debate, regardless of their size, military or
economic strength, geographical location or any other
preconditions. We saw that the resolution proved to be
efficient, serving its main purpose and thus living up to
Member States’ expectations.
According to paragraph 1 of Article 24 of the
Charter, the Security Council discharges its mandate
on behalf of the entire United Nations membership.
However, lately it has been more evident than ever that
the Council is failing us, the entire membership, with
respect to dealing with violations of the United Nations
Charter. Russia’s ongoing aggression against Ukraine
is the latest litmus test of the inability of the Council to
20/22

26/04/2023

effectively fulfil its main role — first, to prevent and, if
not, then to stop the war and the bloodshed. All of this
comes down to the detrimental effect of the abuse of the
veto right by a permanent member.
But before Ukraine, there was Georgia. In 2008,
we felt on our skin what the inability of the Security
Council can look like. In breach of paragraph 3 of
Article 27 of the United Nations Charter, which clearly
stipulates that “a party to a dispute shall abstain from
voting”, we witnessed the exact opposite. A permanent
member of the Security Council and party to the
conflict cast a veto, thereby preventing the Security
Council from stopping aggression against Georgia, as
well as the subsequent illegal occupation of two of its
regions — namely, Abkhazia and Tskhinvali — which,
as a matter of fact, continues as we speak.
To avoid the repetition of the same scenario in the
future, the Security Council must be reformed. First
and foremost, we must address the issue of the use of
the veto. We are fully aware that the considerations on
Security Council reform are an exclusive prerogative
mandated under decision 62/557, commonly known as
the intergovernmental negotiations process, and we will
continue to address that issue in the appropriate format.
However, until there is tangible progress on the issue at
hand, our efforts should be directed towards revitalizing
and strengthening the role of the General Assembly
in cases of threat to the peace or acts of aggression,
without prejudice to the primary responsibility of the
Security Council to uphold global peace and security.
Let me conclude by stating that the resolution on
the standing mandate for a General Assembly debate
when a veto is cast in the Security Council is the right
track to follow. We will continue to contribute to the
process of strengthening this organ and, thus, the
multilateral system.
Mr. Makarevich (Belarus): I will try to be very
brief and make just a few remarks.
(spoke in Russian)
The issue of the veto is inextricably linked to the
issue of United Nations system reform. Reform is an
extremely important question and pertains directly to
the national interests of all Member States, without
exception. We believe that it is necessary to find a
comprehensive solution to current disagreements,
taking into consideration the interests and concerns
of all parties through consultations and on the basis
23-11892

26/04/2023

of consensus. I repeat in particular that this should be
based on consensus. We urge that the existing format
of intergovernmental negotiations be maintained.
There simply is no alternative to it. We recall that this
format is enshrined in General Assembly resolutions
and supported by Member States. Any arbitrary change
to the modalities of the agreed intergovernmental
negotiations process would have a serious negative
impact on both the reform and the integrity of the
United Nations system in and of itself.
Today there are serious ongoing disagreements
and divergences of opinion among Member States
regarding the use of the veto. The different approaches
to the format of the reform are fundamental in nature.
We note that none of the proposed solutions enjoys
tangible support. That fact clearly implies that in order
to achieve a mutually acceptable solution, there is a
need for ongoing, consistent movement towards it based
on mutual trust and respect.
In terms of the issue of the right of the use of the
veto, we do not believe that the institution in and of
itself needs to be viewed as a privilege of individual
countries. That right is a particular responsibility
of the permanent members when considering issues
pertaining to the maintenance of international peace
and security. The mechanism of the right of veto is
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
serves as an important instrument to develop balanced
decisions on which peace and security on our planet
depend. However, we believe that given the fact that the
results of the negotiations have not yet reached maturity,
talk about starting direct, text-based discussions
is premature.
There is a saying in our country: “More haste,
less speed”. In other words, everything comes in its
own time. Belarus would urge all Member States to
uphold that.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): My delegation commends
the President of the General Assembly for convening
this debate marking the first anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 76/262, otherwise known as
the veto initiative. As one of the core veto initiative
countries, Kenya welcomed the adoption of resolution
76/262 as a significant step in improving the work of
the United Nations by creating a form of accountability
for the use of the veto by any of the permanent members
of the Security Council. My delegation commends the

A/77/PV.69

efforts of Liechtenstein and the co-authors for that
historic achievement.
The resolution has enhanced the General Assembly’s
engagement in the maintenance of international peace
and security. It has provided a forum for Member
States to play a more active role, particularly when the
Security Council is unable to act due to the application
of the veto by one or more of its permanent members.
We believe that it has contributed to a greater sense
of accountability by making it more difficult for
permanent members to use the veto without facing
some form of scrutiny by the General Assembly. It may
also encourage greater cooperation and compromises
within the Security Council, thus leading to more
effective responses to international crises.
However, it is important to note that the General
Assembly does not have the powers under the Charter
of the United Nations to compel States to act. In
that regard, the effectiveness of the resolution will
largely depend on the willingness of Member States
to meaningfully engage with it. We encourage all
Members to do so. But more fundamentally, it should
be understood that the veto is not a privilege, but an
international responsibility to be applied responsibly,
only in exceptional circumstances and solely in the
interest of international peace and security. The
resolution is a reminder that the Security Council holds
a critical mandate in trust for the wider United Nations
membership. The Security Council should therefore, in
all its engagements, including the use of the veto, be
accountable to the General Assembly.
While appreciating the contributions of the veto
resolution, Kenya believes that a reform of the Security
Council is what is needed to comprehensively address
not just the use of the veto, but also the need to ensure
that the Council is more representative and effectively
responsive to today’s challenges. Kenya subscribes
to the Common African Position espoused by the
Ezulwini Consensus — a position that seeks to remedy
the historical injustices of the non-representation and
underrepresentation of the continent in the permanent
member category and non-permanent member category,
respectively. The Common African Position is also
clear on the question of the veto. If the pursuit of the
purposes of the United Nations Charter is based on the
principle of the sovereign equality of States, then the
veto is a contradiction that should be abolished. But if
it is to be retained in a reformed Security Council, it
must be extended to new permanent members with all

23-1189221/22

A/77/PV.69

its attributes, including the prerogatives and privileges
of permanent membership.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s continued support
for the veto initiative as an accountability instrument
that also contributes to the quest for a more effective
rules-based multilateral order.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): We thank President Csaba
Kőrösi for convening this meeting, which marks one
year since the adoption of the veto initiative (resolution
76/262). Pursuant to the initiative, the Security Council
has submitted three special reports to the General
Assembly. The debates so far have provided additional
opportunities for transparency and accountability.
We recognize the merit in the intent to encourage
the permanent members of the Security Council to
further clarify to the wider membership their positions
on peace and security matters. We should not lose
perspective, however, on the fact that the veto initiative
is limited in nature and will never be an appropriate
response to the lack of effectiveness of the Security
Council, which arises from its lack of appropriate
representation and legitimacy.
It is our firm belief, therefore, that any attempt
to improve the efficiency of the Security Council
must have the Council’s reform as the overarching
framework for discussion. The Security Council cannot
and will not be a legitimate and fit-for-purpose body
as long as developing countries remain sidelined and
whole regions, such as Africa and Latin America and
the Caribbean, are not represented in the category of
permanent members.
We acknowledge that there is growing interest
among Member States in discussing initiatives to limit
and regulate the veto. Brazil supports the FrenchMexican initiative to restrain the veto in case of mass
atrocities. As one of the main elements of Security
Council reform, any further regulation of the veto

22/22

26/04/2023

must be discussed in tandem with the other clusters
in the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform.
We should not forget, however, that a veto is not in
itself a failure to maintain peace and security. The veto
has been enshrined in the Charter as a means to contain
excesses of power and safeguard the international
system against decisions to use force taken by one
country or a group of countries. While it may cause
frustration when it is invoked, the prerogative of the
veto can help foster dialogue and negotiations. In that
sense, the consistent use of the veto can be understood
as an expression of the great divide that stalls the
Council and harms the Council’s efficiency. A veto
is cast only after diplomacy and dialogue have failed.
That is why reforming the veto alone will not solve the
main problem that affects the Security Council, which
is its anachronic membership. The lack of legitimacy
that arises from its inadequate representation makes the
Council unfit to fulfil its responsibilities.
Finally, we would like to point out that we should
refrain from changing the delicate balance between the
Security Council and the General Assembly. It is worth
mentioning that the Uniting for Peace mechanism
was adopted to respond exceptionally to situations in
which the Security Council fails to exercise its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It was officially enacted only 11
times in more than 70 years. That is not without reason.
It means that the General Assembly has been urged to
act only in extreme or exceptional circumstances. It
should remain so.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in this debate. The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 126.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

23-11892
