United Nations

S/PV.9341

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9341st meeting
Wednesday, 7 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mrs. Onanga
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Leonidchenko
Mrs. Chanda
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Letter dated 22 May 2023 from the Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2023/367)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-16180 (E)
*2316180*

S/PV.9341

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in commemoration of the
peacekeepers killed in the attack on the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia
The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I would like to
condemn in the strongest terms the heinous attack
perpetrated on 26 May against the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), which claimed
the lives of more than 50 Ugandan peacekeepers.
The members of the Security Council convey their
deepest condolences to the families of the victims, the
Government and the people of Uganda and ATMIS.
The peacekeepers were operating under a Security
Council mandate in order to provide a more secure
future for the people of Somalia. We commemorate
their ultimate sacrifice in the cause of peace. I would
therefore like to ask all present in the Chamber to stand
and join me in observing a minute of silence in solemn
commemoration of the victims.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Letter dated 22 May 2023 from the Special
Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2023/367)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Christian
Ritscher, Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/18

begin

its

07/06/2023

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/367, which contains the text of
a letter dated 22 May 2023 from the Special Adviser
and Head of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ritscher.
Mr. Ritscher: I am honoured to present the
tenth report (see S/2023/367) of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) and to inform the Council about
the activities of the Investigative Team. I am presenting
the tenth report while also highlighting the fact that it
has been five years since UNITAD, established at the
request of Iraq, began its work. As an international
team with a unique mandate to investigate the horrific
crimes of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), UNITAD works in cooperation with national
authorities while promoting accountability for the
crimes committed by ISIL throughout the world.
Today we should pause for a moment and take
stock of the progressive implementation of UNITAD’s
mandate. Today the commitment of the Iraqi
Government, in partnership with UNITAD, to advance
the fight against impunity, seek justice on behalf of
victims and survivors, most of whom are Iraqis, and
address the remaining threat posed by ISIL is stronger
than ever. Not long after the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2379 (2017), a small Team made
up of fewer than 10 people started working to advance
the UNITAD mandate. That small Team has grown
to about 150 United Nations staff members, together
with approximately 60 contractors and consultants, all
working with dedication and professionalism to achieve
the goals of the Team.
UNITAD now has eight specialized investigative
units, has established a witness-protection and -support
system, has set up a state-of-the-art forensic laboratory,
has established a specialized unit to assist with the massgrave exhumation campaigns and in the identification
of human remains and has built up a team that supports
the digitization of millions of documents, which are now
in the possession of the Iraqi judiciary. UNITAD has
constantly been developing and readjusting strategies
to improve its investigative work and the collection
of evidence, which is necessary to hold perpetrators
23-16180

07/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

accountable for the most heinous crimes codified under
international criminal law. UNITAD is committed
to supporting the efforts of our Iraqi counterparts
towards achieving the common goal of holding ISIL
perpetrators accountable through evidence-based
trials, which deal with their brutal attacks against all
communities in Iraq, its people and the country itself
for international crimes, not just for their membership
in a terrorist organization. In perpetrating their crimes
in Iraq, ISIL members focused on their victims, and the
justice process should do the same.
Over the past reporting period, my Team
has continued to expand and develop, through
professional investigative work, pioneering criminal
knowledge about ISIL and addressing the concerns
and considerations of each victim group in Iraqi
society. I have personally continued to engage with
religious and tribal leaders, representatives of affected
communities and survivors of ISIL crimes. And I have
been impressed by the support given to my Team by
the affected communities, especially the ones I recently
visited in Taza Khurmatu, Hit and Ramadi. I am also
grateful that UNITAD is able to work closely with
all affected communities and that my Team’s work is
founded on openness and trust. While in Najaf, I was
deeply touched by the wise words of His Eminence
Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Ali Al-Sistani, who said that
all ISIL victims matter equally, with no hierarchy. That
same principle is the foundation of UNITAD’s work.
We must not forget that the survivors of ISIL
international crimes are still deeply affected. I saw
that first-hand when I visited Taza Khurmatu earlier
this year, while the town marked the anniversary of the
not-so-widely-known ISIL chemical attack against the
population residing there and their agricultural land.
On 8 March 2016, ISIL weaponized several chemical
agents and deployed them in chemical rockets and
mortars, as well as improvised explosive devices, in
the vicinity of Taza Khurmatu. Over the past months,
I have prioritized and intensified that line of inquiry
into ISIL crimes. My Team’s ongoing investigation
has provided its specialized insight and analysis on
the munitions, remnants and materials that were
recovered. Significant volumes of battlefield evidence,
including ISIL payroll records and correspondence,
were discovered, enabling the Team to identify persons
of interest and establish links to possible senior ISIL
members. UNITAD has produced a case assessment on
the development and use of chemical weapons by ISIL,

S/PV.9341

which will be further detailed during a special event
organized here at Headquarters, tomorrow, 8 June, to
be co-hosted by UNITAD, the Permanent Mission of
Iraq and the Permanent Mission of India.
As Council members will have read in the tenth
report (see S/2023/367), my Team has continued to
advance its investigative work covering ISIL crimes
against all affected communities and producing the
full picture to expose the breadth of those crimes. That
includes progress in our case-assessment reports on
gender-based crimes, crimes against children and crimes
committed against the Sunni population in Al-Anbar
and against the Christian communities in Nineveh. Our
investigations into ISIL attacks against the Yazidi and
the Shia communities continue. Case briefs have also
been enhanced with additional evidence and analyses.
The investigation on the destruction of Iraqis’ rich
cultural heritage is another example of how UNITAD
has shed light upon the full range of international
crimes committed by ruthless perpetrators motivated
by a criminal ideology.
It has been five years since UNITAD commenced
its work on the ground in Iraq. For us, it is absolutely
clear that only if we work side by side with Iraqi
authorities, in particular with our counterparts in the
Iraqi judiciary, will UNITAD be successful. I think
that a legitimate question is: what constitutes success?
As a prosecutor leading an investigative team, I see
the purpose of UNITAD’s work in Iraq as not simply
to establish a record for ISIL crimes, but to hold ISIL
members who committed such heinous international
crimes accountable through evidence-based trials and
before competent courts. But what do we need in order
to achieve that?
I believe three elements are required: competent
courts, admissible and reliable evidence and an
appropriate legal framework.
First, competent courts is the easiest element of the
three. As I explained earlier, my Team already works
closely with competent investigative judges in Iraq,
who fully support our investigations. In turn, UNITAD
is enhancing their capacities and ensuring that Iraqi
courts are ready to hold ISIL perpetrators accountable
for their international crimes when the time comes.
Secondly, with regard to admissible and reliable
evidence, there is a lot of discussion on the evidence
pertaining to ISIL crimes. I can assure the Council that
there is no shortage of evidence of ISIL crimes in Iraq,

23-161803/18

S/PV.9341

Threats to international peace and security

07/06/2023

as ISIL was a large-scale bureaucracy that documented
and maintained a State-like administrative system.
The main challenge is: what should be done with that
evidence? How can the significant volume of documents
and the sheer amount of information be dealt with?
And most important, how should the integral chain of
custody for such evidence be maintained? What we aim
to do is to ensure that the evidence is admissible before
any competent court, whether in Iraq or in other States
where prosecutions of ISIL members for international
crimes are taking place. Let me be very clear: UNITAD
is assisting the Iraqi judiciary to organize and access
considerable quantities of ISIL records and battlefield
evidence, notably via a megadigitization project. Led by
my Team, digitization operations have been launched
at five courts in Iraq, and two additional Courts will
follow our lead in the coming months.

the Prime Minister, the National Permanent Committee
for International Humanitarian Law, the Iraqi State
Council and senior members of the judiciary, as well
as key parliamentarians, is an important step forward
in that regard. UNITAD remains at the disposal of the
Iraqi authorities to provide technical support, leverage
international expertise and share best practices.

As of now, an impressive amount of 8 million
pages of ISIL documents from the holdings of the Iraqi
authorities, including the Kurdish authorities, has been
digitized. The recognized result of that is the ease with
which members of the Iraqi judiciary can now make
use of their holdings. Senior Iraqi judges have informed
me that their response time in relation to case files and
requests for information have significantly improved,
signalling lasting change due to those innovative
efforts. As a next step, UNITAD is establishing a
central archive, which will be the unified repository of
all digitized evidence against ISIL. This will be located
at the Supreme Judicial Council of Iraq. As recently
agreed with the Chief Justice, my Team will begin to
launch this archive in the coming days. In the future, the
central repository will play a key role in supporting the
prosecutions of ISIL perpetrators for their international
crimes in Iraq. Moreover, it could be a milestone in
founding a comprehensive e-justice system in Iraq that
could be upheld as a leading example, not only in the
region, but also globally.

In parallel, UNITAD has already begun to
contribute to the preparation of future trials. The Team
has intensified concrete cooperation with counterparts
in the Iraqi judiciary to jointly build cases against
specific persons of interest and alleged perpetrators.
We are now prioritizing persons of interest residing in
other Member State countries. In doing so, UNITAD
will be working jointly with its Iraqi counterparts on a
daily basis, in addition to putting together information
to achieve accountability for ISIL’s core international
crimes, in line with the Team’s terms of reference.
Those case-building initiatives are designed to lead
to a series of case files that contain information and
evidence contributed by both sides, the Iraqi judiciary
and UNITAD. The jointly developed cases will pilot the
direct sharing of evidence and further strengthen the
close and trusting cooperation between my investigators
and our Iraqi counterparts. Ultimately, that will lead to
a better understanding of the investigative needs and
methods of the Iraqi judiciary and of UNITAD when it
concerns the provision of jurisdictional support globally.

The third and most important element is the
adoption of an appropriate domestic legal framework
that allows for such trials to take place. That can
be considered the main challenge that needs to be
addressed to yield the desired results in Iraq. UNITAD
remains committed to supporting the Iraq-led process
for the implementation of a legal framework that enables
the prosecution of ISIL criminal acts as international
crimes, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide before national courts. The establishment of a
joint working group in March 2023, with the Office of

As outlined in resolution 2379 (2017), UNITAD
continues to complement investigations carried out by
Iraqi authorities and, at their request, by third States.
After five years of investigative work in Iraq, UNITAD
has become a key facilitator for the global efforts to
hold ISIL perpetrators accountable for international
crimes. I also want to say that UNITAD has become
an indispensable member of the international network
created to fight impunity for ISIL crimes. My Team
is currently supporting 17 third-State jurisdictions,
conducting witness interviews and providing expert

4/18

As I have mentioned, five years ago UNITAD
began implementing its mandate and started promoting
accountability for the international crimes committed
by ISIL in Iraq. From the very first day, the legal
foundation of UNITAD’s investigations has been, and
still is, customary international law. Once appropriate
domestic legislation on international criminal law has
been enacted in Iraq, the way forward will be clearer.
I remain hopeful that that will happen sooner rather
than later.

23-16180

07/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

testimonies and technical analysis in criminal
proceedings against alleged members and supporters
of ISIL.
UNITAD can also contribute usefully to solutions
to the challenges of effectively repatriating Iraqi
nationals from camps in neighbouring countries,
including Al-Hol. UNITAD recognizes its role as an
integrated part of the United Nations and its added
value in supporting system-wide reconciliation efforts
in Iraq. Within the remit of our mandate, we stand
ready to contribute both to successfully reintegrating
returnees into Iraqi society and to providing Member
States with the information necessary to prosecute
individuals alleged to have committed international
crimes. Accountability is an integral factor in sustaining
viable reconciliation, as is support for accountability
processes, which can play a key role in encouraging
Member States to repatriate their nationals and help
resolve the complex situation in camps such as Al-Hol.
I want to reiterate that UNITAD is bridging the
gap between crime scenes, victims and survivors and
alleged ISIL perpetrators. The Team continues to
be impartial, independent and credible in upholding
United Nations best practices and policies and relevant
international law, while responding with the highest
possible standards in support of accountability efforts
and the fight against the impunity of ISIL members
and affiliates, wherever they are. As the Head of this
Investigative Team, it is not only important for me to
say that my Team continues to gather the full spectrum
of information on ISIL crimes committed in Iraq, but
also to emphasize that it supports the Iraqi authorities
by enhancing their investigative capacities.
UNITAD commenced its investigative work five
years ago. We have shown that our unique and novel
mandate to establish an international investigative
team can yield positive results and success stories.
UNITAD was designed to represent an offer from
the international community to Iraq and its people to
jointly and successfully deal with the cruel legacy of
ISIL. Let me say that UNITAD’s operations over the
past five years have succeeded because Iraq accepted
and supported that offer. However, the work is not yet
done, and UNITAD’s mission is not yet accomplished.
What we want to see in future are fair trials before
competent courts in Iraq and ISIL members convicted
on charges of international crimes, with the active
participation of victims and survivors. Without that,
UNITAD’s mandate and purpose will not be fulfilled.

S/PV.9341

Justice can be a lengthy process, and we can often
become impatient to see results. But investigations,
prosecutions and building evidence-based cases take
time, patience and perseverance, particularly in relation
to international crimes. ISIL’s crimes in Iraq are no
exception. Its criminality has committed some of the
most gruesome acts we have seen in recent history. The
individuals responsible for such acts must be identified,
tried and convicted for their crimes. Our duty is to walk
together on that path for justice with dedication and
determination. I thank the Council for its attention and
continued support.
The President (spoke
Mr. Ritscher for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I would like
to start by thanking the Special Adviser for his very
helpful update, his most recent report (see S/2023/367)
and for all the work of his Team in Iraq. I would
also like to welcome the representative of Iraq to the
Chamber. The United Kingdom highly values the
progress that the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
is making towards holding Da’esh to account for its
horrific crimes. I would like to emphasize three points
in particular.
First, we welcome the Government of Iraq’s
continued work and leadership to enable the domestic
prosecution of those responsible for Da’esh’s crimes, as
well as UNITAD’s support for that. In particular, we
welcome the establishment of a joint UNITAD-Iraq
working group this year, which will look at pathways
for the prosecution of international crimes inside Iraq.
It is essential that we build legal routes for sharing
information and evidence to support prosecutions.
Secondly, we commend UNITAD’s close
collaboration with the Iraqi judiciary, including through
the archiving and digitization project. As we have
heard, that archive will enable Iraqi judges to draw on a
much wider range of evidence when building cases and
pursuing investigations, including into the development
and use of chemical and biological weapons. UNITAD’s
continued and enhanced cooperation with the Iraqi
authorities can make a real difference in their efforts to
deliver justice for survivors of Da’esh’s crimes.

23-161805/18

S/PV.9341

Threats to international peace and security

Thirdly, the United Kingdom particularly welcomes
UNITAD’s ongoing focus on crimes committed against
Yazidis, Christians and other minority groups. There
is a terrible legacy of Da’esh crimes against those
communities, and we must address it. On her recent
visit to Iraq, Her Royal Highness the Duchess of
Edinburgh highlighted the need for further support to
the victims and survivors of conflicted-related sexual
violence, including children born of rape. We commend
the Government of Iraq for its ongoing implementation
of the Yazidi female survivors law, including the initial
pay-outs of reparations to survivors.
We must not relent in our support for victims and
survivors of Da’esh crimes. We look forward to working
closely with Iraq and our partners on the Security
Council to continue supporting the important work of
UNITAD in September’s mandate renewal. The United
Kingdom is committed to joining the Government of
Iraq, UNITAD and the wider community in the pursuit
of justice.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Before I begin my statement, I want to assure the
Security Council that Ecuador joins everyone in
condemning the attack on Ugandan peacekeepers. We
pay tribute to those who gave their lives in the struggle
to ensure international peace and security, and we stand
in solidarity with their families.
I thank the Special Adviser for presenting the
tenth report of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD) (see S/2023/367). I also wish to welcome
the representative of Iraq to this meeting.
Accountability is one of the key elements for
successful reconciliation in post-conflict societies.
Impunity, on the other hand, destroys their social fabric.
That is why Ecuador supports the work of UNITAD,
tasked with collecting, preserving and storing evidence
of the crimes committed by Da’esh in Iraq, thus laying
the groundwork for the Iraqi authorities to make
headway in the identification and prosecution of those
responsible before their courts of justice.

07/06/2023

of biological and chemical weapons, the destruction
of cultural and religious heritage and the crimes
committed against various communities in Iraq. To
a large extent, those advances have been possible
thanks to collaboration with Iraqi civil society actors
such as religious leaders, survivors’ groups and
non-governmental organizations, which has enabled
the collection of valuable testimonies and evidence.
We also note the progress made in the collection of
digital evidence, as well as the digitization of physical
evidence, which exceeds 8 million pages.
We trust that such evidence will contribute to the
establishment of individual accountability, including
in the case of investigations into sexual violence and
crimes against children, to which UNITAD has afforded
particular attention through its Sexual and GenderBased Crimes and Crimes against Children Unit. We
also urge that the needs of victims and survivors and
their families remain at the centre of our attention, as
their situation must remain a priority issue. The victimcentred and gender-sensitive approach that guides
UNITAD’s work is fundamental to achieving that goal.
Secondly, effective cooperation with the Iraqi
Government, in particular with the judiciary and law
enforcement agencies, is fundamental to the fulfilment
of UNITAD’s mandate. We are pleased to learn of the
fruitful cooperation that UNITAD has developed with
the Supreme Judicial Council and other Iraqi authorities,
which has yielded concrete results — for example, the
collection of evidence on those responsible for the mass
murder at the Tikrit Air Academy in June 2014.
Such cooperation should also include technical
assistance activities aimed at strengthening the
capacities of the national authorities to investigate and
prosecute Da’esh members in proceedings that meet
due process standards. In that regard, we welcome the
meeting held in March between UNITAD and judicial
officials, where it was agreed to establish a joint
working group to discuss ways to bring members of
Da’esh to justice.

In my briefing, I would like to highlight the
following points from the report presented by the
Special Adviser.

We also underline UNITAD’s readiness to support
national efforts to implement legislation criminalizing
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
We urge the Iraqi Government to move forward with
the adoption of legislation to enable the prosecution of
perpetrators of such crimes.

First, we recognize the progress achieved in the
lines of investigation into the development and use

Thirdly, we note with satisfaction the collaboration
detailed in the report between UNITAD and other

6/18

23-16180

07/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

United Nations agencies — such as UNESCO, the
Mine Action Service, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights — within their
respective areas of competence. We call on UNITAD
to strengthen such collaboration, as we consider that
coordinated work between the various agencies to be
an essential component to ensure the coherence of the
United Nations system and to avoid any duplication of
efforts and the consequent loss of resources.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my country’s
support for UNITAD and its contribution to the rule of
law and to reconciliation and sustainable peace in Iraq.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank the Special
Advisor, Mr. Christian Ritscher, for his presentation,
and I welcome the Iraqi delegation to this meeting.
Resolution 2379 (2017) was clear about the mandate
given to the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
by the Council. The Iraqi Government asked for
United Nations assistance to hold Da’esh accountable
for crimes committed in Iraq. That then prompted the
Council to determine the establishment of UNITAD as
a temporary mechanism with the aim of assisting the
Iraqi authorities with the collection of evidence for use
before domestic courts.

S/PV.9341

We acknowledge that the adoption of domestic
legislation in Iraq on core international crimes would
constitute important progress in enabling the Iraqi
courts to prosecute Da’esh members for the most
serious violations of international criminal law. That
remains a matter within the sovereignty of Iraq and its
domestic legal system, which can surely benefit from
technical support provided by UNITAD.
We also note that the wealth of documentation
currently in UNITAD’s possession remains primarily
tied to Iraq’s territorial jurisdiction. Additionally,
it uncovers various types of international crimes
committed within Iraq and against the Iraqi population.
The successive reports of UNITAD, including the
latest one, acknowledge that foreign countries have
been provided with expertise and information from
UNITAD, including evidence collected within Iraq.
We hope that UNITAD’s sharing of evidence with
those countries is being pursued strictly in agreement
with the Iraqi Government, within the limits of
UNITAD’s mandate.

In setting out UNITAD’s mandate, resolution 2379
(2017) also specifies that the Iraqi national courts are
the primary intended recipient of the evidence collected
in Iraq. In accordance with that same resolution, any
other use of the evidence collected by UNITAD,
including before the courts of other States, must always
be determined in agreement with the Government
of Iraq.

To conclude, we would like to express our
understanding that the coming months will be crucial
for any further extension of UNITAD’s mandate, which
is set to expire in September and conditioned upon the
renewal of Iraq’s request for assistance. For our part,
we stress the importance, already underscored by the
Security Council through resolution 2651 (2022), of
the timely sharing of evidence by UNITAD with the
Iraqi authorities. We encourage UNITAD to work
constructively with the Government of Iraq in order
to set a credible time frame for the completion of its
mandate. That would reinforce UNITAD’s commitment
to support Iraqi efforts to hold Da’esh members
accountable, as well as its commitment to all victims
who await justice to be delivered by and within Iraq.

Over the past few years, UNITAD’s reports have
been asserting that large amounts of evidence have
now been collected, stored and processed. Even though
the opening of new lines of investigation is still often
announced in successive reporting periods, we have
also been informed that many investigations have
already been concluded and are ready for trial. Yet
until now, we have not seen the necessary subsequent
steps towards the fulfilment of UNITAD’s mandate,
which requires delivery of the evidence collected by the
Investigative Team to the Iraqi authorities.

Ms. Gatt (Malta): At the outset, I want to thank
Special Adviser Ritscher for presenting the report (see
S/2023/367) of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
and his briefing this morning. Malta welcomes the
progress achieved by UNITAD across its investigative
priorities during the reporting period. I also join
others in welcoming the Permanent Representative of
Iraq. We recognize that the cooperation afforded by
the Government of Iraq, including the authorities of

23-161807/18

S/PV.9341

Threats to international peace and security

the Kurdistan Regional Government, was essential in
ensuring such progress.
UNITAD’s investigative achievements over the
past six months include the completion of preliminary
case assessment reports on crimes committed by
Da’esh against the Sunni population in Anbar and on
the destruction of the cultural and religious heritage
of all Iraq’s communities. The Team also successfully
launched new lines of inquiry on the development and
use of biological and chemical weapons by Da’esh.
In addition, we commend UNITAD for finalising a
preliminary case assessment on Da’esh crimes against
the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and
intersex community. Those abhorrent crimes included
public executions of men and boys and those perceived
as gay. Such acts underscore once again the importance
of including persons of diverse sexual orientations,
gender identities and expressions and sex characteristics
in discussions on international peace and security.
Furthermore,
Malta
welcomes
UNITAD’s
continued attention to the thematic investigation into
sexual and gender-based violence and crimes against
children. The conclusion of an analytical report on
sexual and gender-based crimes committed against
members of the Shia Turkmen community, including
children, is particularly noteworthy. More broadly, we
welcome the Team’s continued cooperation with civil
society, victims, survivors and community and religious
leaders across all aspects of its investigative work.
As we heard today from the Special Adviser,
UNITAD is making considerable efforts to identify
the perpetrators most responsible for atrocity crimes
through the building of targeted case files. That is
welcome. However, key to holding Da’esh perpetrators
accountable is the adoption of a domestic legal
framework enabling the prosecution of international
crimes, namely, genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We call on the Iraqi authorities to
progress that legislation and welcome recent steps
towards that goal, including the establishment of the
joint working group on pathways to accountability
for Da’esh’s international crimes. We also commend
UNITAD’s decision to prioritize support for the
national legislative drafting process over the coming
six months. Malta stresses that such legislation must
preclude the application of the death penalty in line
with United Nations best practices.
8/18

07/06/2023

The technical assistance and support provided
by UNITAD to the Iraqi authorities is wide ranging,
comprising evidence digitization and preservation,
forensic expertise, the excavation of mass graves and
training for judges and investigators on international
humanitarian and criminal law. That is important work,
and we urge its continuation.
Malta is pleased that UNITAD will expand
capacity enhancement support towards the Iraqi
judiciary in criminal proceedings and case-building
and encourages continued positive engagement with the
Supreme Judicial Council. We also encourage greater
cooperation between UNITAD and the Iraqi authorities
on United Nations sanctions listings. Beyond Iraq, we
welcome the Team’s efforts to enhance assistance for
ongoing investigations and prosecutions in foreign
jurisdictions, many of which are dealing with crimes
against the Yazidi community.
Before concluding, I want to once again reassure
the Special Adviser and his Team of Malta’s strong
support for UNITAD’s crucial work in pursuing
accountability for atrocity crimes committed by Da’esh
in Iraq. Impunity is not an option. In that context, we
look forward to the renewal of UNITAD’s important
mandate in September.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Mr. Christian Ritscher,
Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD), for the valuable information he
furnished the Council with today.
Terrorism cannot be justified on any grounds, and
the international community must work in unison to
eradicate it. Ensuring accountability is a critical pillar
of that effort. As the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) still poses a threat to international peace
and security, its members must be held accountable for
the acts they have committed, including war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide.
In that regard, Japan commends the excellent work
by UNITAD to support the Iraqi-led process toward
that ultimate goal. That work underscores that the rule
of law in Iraq and other countries concerned is key to
consolidating international peace and security.
We welcome the steady progress made over the
past six months in the areas that were identified
as priorities in the previous report of the Special
23-16180

07/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Adviser (see S/2022/836), including the expansion of
investigations into crimes against cultural and religious
heritage in Iraq, as well as crimes committed against
the Christian community, the Yazidi community, the
Kaka’i, Shabak and Shia Turkmen communities and
the Sunni community. Another notable advancement is
the investigation into the development and the use of
chemical and biological weapons by ISIL. Considering
the immense suffering those horrendous acts have
caused, we hope that those lines of investigation will
remain a priority for UNITAD, and we expect that
further investigations will lead to justice for victims
and survivors.
Investigative work into gender-based violence
and crimes against children committed by ISIL bears
particular importance for us in terms of punishing
perpetrators, ending the culture of impunity and
helping to eliminate gender-based violence, including
sexual violence in conflict. Japan has proudly supported
activities by the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict to support victims
of such crimes. We encourage mutual cooperation
between UNITAD and the Team of Experts along
with other relevant United Nations entities, as their
teamwork should help to ensure the overarching needs
of the victims are met.
Close cooperation between UNITAD and the
Iraqi Government, as well as the Kurdistan Regional
Government, is essential to ensuring a successful
investigative process, and we were pleased to hear
the Iraqi Government’s commitment to maintaining
strong cooperation with UNITAD. The launch of the
joint working group in March, in which pathways
towards the prosecution of crimes committed by ISIL
will be regularly discussed, was a significant step
towards eventual completion of the Iraqi-led judicial
proceedings. In a similar vein, Japan also welcomes
UNITAD’s support to strengthen the capacity of Iraq’s
judicial system, including through the provision of
tailored trainings on digital forensics.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our full support
to UNITAD and our expectation that its mandate
implementation will remain supported by a united
Security Council.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Adviser for presenting the report (see
S/2023/367) of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by

S/PV.9341

Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD).
I also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Iraq. As was underscored by other
Council members, his presence demonstrates Iraq’s
commitment to cooperating with the international
community and with UNITAD to ensure that justice
be done for all the victims of the crimes committed by
Da’esh on the country’s territory.
We commend the work of the entire UNITAD
Team undertaken in often difficult conditions, of
which we are well aware. We reiterate our support for
their work. Thanks to UNITAD’s work on the ground
and alongside national and local authorities, further
progress has been made.
New evidence has been gathered concerning the
crimes committed by Da’esh, notably concerning the
development and use of chemical and biological weapons,
crimes committed against religious minorities, serious
violations committed against women and children
and crimes committed against lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer and intersex persons.
We would like to highlight the important support
that UNITAD has continued to provide with regard
to the exhumation of mass graves at the sites of mass
crimes committed by Da’esh and the progress made with
regard to investigations into the destruction of various
cultural sites. We welcome UNESCO’s commitment to
monitoring the destruction of protected sites.
We welcome the collection of a large amount of
digital data related to the online activity of Da’esh and
the continuing efforts to digitize the data needed for
investigations. These advances are crucial to prevent
the loss or degradation of evidence and must continue.
The information gathered on the group’s funding
networks is essential.
We emphasize UNITAD’s commitment to Iraqi
civil society. I reiterate that dialogue with civil
society is essential as it has made it possible to gather
invaluable testimonies that have helped to advance
the investigations and shed light on the scale and
seriousness of the crimes committed by Da’esh.
I would like to underscore the importance of
cooperation in the fight against impunity for the
crimes committed. In that respect, we welcome the
increased collaboration between UNITAD and the Iraqi
Government. Raising awareness of the mechanism’s
mandate is key and is being done through the training

23-161809/18

S/PV.9341

Threats to international peace and security

of Iraqi investigating judges in international criminal
law, the preparation of indictments and the prosecution
of members of Da’esh for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and even genocide. We once again encourage
the Iraqi authorities to continue their dialogue with
UNITAD on those issues.
France calls on all States to support the work of
UNITAD. It is proud to support UNITAD through
voluntary contributions and technical cooperation to
help the Investigative Team in its work of gathering
evidence. However, it is important to recall the
Organization’s consistent position of non-transmission
of evidence in judicial proceedings involving the
possibility of a death sentence, wherever that may be,
in keeping with the relevant international conventions
on this issue.
We would like to reiterate here that the fate of the
victims must remain our primary concern. The victimcentred approach and the gender perspective adopted by
UNITAD in all its work are essential. The fight against
impunity for all perpetrators of crimes is imperative for
the stabilization, reconstruction and reconciliation of
the Iraqi people, as a whole.
That is why, in January 2022, France set up a joint
investigation team with Sweden, under the auspices
of the European Union Agency for Criminal Justice
Cooperation concerning the crimes committed against
the Yazidis, and is cooperating with the UNITAD teams
within that framework.
Finally, France reiterates its commitment to the
fight against terrorism and the fight against impunity.
The threat posed by Da’esh has not disappeared.
Together with its partners, in particular the international
coalition against Da’esh, which meets tomorrow at the
ministerial level in Riyadh, France will continue to
stand by Iraq in the fight against terrorism.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I thank the Special
Adviser and Head of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD), Mr. Christian Ritscher, and his team for
the briefing.
We acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Iraq in this meeting.
Mozambique commends UNITAD for the crucial
role it has been playing in combating impunity, as well
as genocide and crimes against humanity perpetrated
10/18

07/06/2023

by the terrorist groups in Iraq. Needless to say, those
crimes have further aggravated peace and security in
the country and in the region, at large.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant continues
to pose a threat to international peace and security
through its violent extremist ideology and terrorist
acts. Civilians, particularly women and children, are
the most affected groups.
We believe that the investigation and prosecution
of war crimes are effective adequate ways to protect
victims of human rights abuses by breaking the circle
of impunity. That element is a building block towards
ensuring peaceful and stable societies.
UNITAD’s work in the implementation of
resolution 2379 (2017) is fundamental as it reinforces
the commitment by the international community to
make Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
accountable for its crimes committed in Iraq. In that
context, Mozambique welcomes the progress made
by the UNITAD team on several investigative tracks
during the reporting period. The means and resources
available for the investigations naturally play a crucial
role in achieving the intended results.
In that context, Mozambique welcomes all
initiatives in support the work of UNITAD’s mandate
and mission to investigate and bring to justice the ISIL
perpetrators for international crimes committed in Iraq,
particularly against women, as well as young people.
We therefore acknowledge the importance of
adequate training of judges and prosecutors in order
to ensure their successful work. In that regard,
Mozambique encourages UNITAD to develop
capacity-building initiatives and programmes for Iraq’s
judiciary, particularly in the fields of international law
and international criminal law. We also encourage the
international community’s support of domestic legal
proceedings in Iraq and the sharing of information
between legal institutions.
We further encourage UNITAD’s cooperation
efforts with the Iraqi authorities on the adoption of a
legal framework incorporating international crimes,
in accordance with the principles of international
law. Engagement with civil society remains critical
to addressing accountability. As such, we encourage
UNITAD to continue its constructive dialogue with
civil society and consultations with the Government of
Iraq, in parallel with its interaction with the judiciary.
23-16180

07/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

In conclusion, we encourage UNITAD to continue
its work, with transparency and within Iraq’s domestic
legal framework, in order to advance the cause of peace
and justice.
Mr. Leonidchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation attaches great
importance to the issue of bringing terrorists to account
for the atrocities they have committed. This is an integral
and important part of the fight against terrorism as a
phenomenon. In that regard, we are closely monitoring
the activities of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
in collecting evidence of crimes committed by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq. We are
grateful to Mr. Ritscher for presenting UNITAD’s tenth
report (see S/2023/367).
We note the growing evidence of ISIL crimes
against the Kaka’i, Shabak, Shia Turkmen, Yazidis
and Christians.
We welcome the conclusion of work on the
preliminary assessment reports on the investigation of
crimes against the Sunni community, as well as cases of
destruction of cultural and religious sites by terrorists.
We would like to see the Team’s summary of destroyed
and damaged religious and cultural heritage sites in
Iraqi communities.
Of particular interest is the subject of terrorists’
development and use of chemical and biological
weapons in Iraq. We hope to promptly identify and
make public all cases of the use of such weapons. It
is already clear that their use was not limited to the
attack on Tazah Khurmata on 8 March 2016 or to the
territory of Iraq, in general. The systemic practice of
using chemical weapons by ISIL, which even has its
own chemical programme, simply could not have left
neighbouring Syria unscathed.
We note the opening of new lines of investigation,
including into attacks on Iraqi police and security
forces and the seizure and exploitation of Iraqi oil.
The Russian Federation supports efforts to bring
terrorists to accountability. In the reporting period, we
have made seconded specialists available to UNITAD.
At the same time, we would like to underscore that the
job of combating impunity for members of Da’esh/ISIL
does not begin and end with gathering evidence. In that
regard, we will remind UNITAD of the need to fulfil a

S/PV.9341

key part of its mandate by handing this evidence over
to the law enforcement and judicial bodies of Iraq, as
stipulated in resolution 2379 (2017).
Resolution 2379 (2017) specifies that the Iraqi
authorities, rather than third countries, are the primary
recipient of the evidence gathered by the team, and it
does not attach any preconditions in that context, in
particular the adoption of a special law on international
crimes. We sincerely hope that UNITAD will not
overlook its mandate and give Iraq access to this
evidence for the prompt launching of the process of
holding those guilty to account.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
briefing on the tenth report on the activities carried out
by the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) (see
S/2023/367) to establish the responsibility of Da’esh
for crimes committed in Iraq between 2014 and 2017,
which falls within the scope of resolution 2379 (2017).
I would also like to thank Mr. Christian Ritscher for
his very detailed information on the progress of the
investigations under way in the period under review. I
would also like to thank his team. Let me also welcome
the representative of Iraq and his delegation to the
Security Council.
Gabon condemns all acts of terrorism committed
throughout the world and reaffirms its unwavering
support for the Security Council’s counter-terrorism
efforts. We support the Council’s strategy to prevent
the proliferation and use of chemical weapons by State
and non-State actors, including terrorist organizations.
The accountability mechanism set up in Iraq, based
on criminal justice and the rule of law, is essential to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
It promotes the fight against impunity and guarantees
access to justice for local communities affected by war
crimes, crimes against humanity and crimes of genocide
committed by Da’esh against the Yazidi people in Iraq.
The material search for evidence to support the
allegations of crimes we examine is the result of a long
process involving multidisciplinary experts, judicial
institutions, civil society and witnesses, and requires
the mobilization of meticulous techniques and tools to
improve the efficiency of investigations and fact-finding.
The inclusion of experts in cross-team investigations
is essential — as Mr. Ritscher emphasized in his

23-1618011/18

S/PV.9341

Threats to international peace and security

report — particularly in the context of investigations
into crimes against cultural and religious heritage, as
that helps to ensure the credibility and relevance of
ongoing investigations. This implies setting up a single,
exhaustive framework for obtaining evidence, taking
care to remain sensitive to the culture and language
of local populations, for a better understanding of the
facts. Gabon appreciates the inclusive approach, which,
despite the many challenges, enabled us to successfully
complete the pilot stages of the fact-finding mission
in Iraq.
We welcome the significant progress made in
gathering, administering and preserving evidence, in
particular forensic evidence, which is a key element of
proof in allegations of the use of chemical and biological
weapons. To this end, the stratification of regions
and populations under investigation is necessary,
particularly in the context of crimes committed against
Christian communities. We note with satisfaction the
spirit of mutual cooperation and assistance between
UNITAD and the Iraqi Government, and between
UNITAD and concerned Member States, with respect
to these investigation procedures. This has enabled
the jurisdictions of these countries to become more
involved in the ongoing processes.
The particular emphasis placed by the team
in the field on strengthening cooperation with the
Iraqi authorities, with the support of stakeholders in
particular, concerning the crimes committed by Da’esh
against Christian communities and those relating to the
alleged use of chemical and biological weapons on the
populations of Tazah Khurmatu, is a considerable step
forward, which we support. In this respect, the new
digital evidence obtained is essential, as it clarifies
the impact of Da’esh’s chemical and biological weapon
attacks on the victims, as well as the material damage
to property and the environment. Gabon also welcomes
the close collaboration of the Supreme Judicial Council
of Iraq in carrying out these investigations in such a
sensitive context. The discovery of evidence confirming
the existence of a centre of operations orchestrated by
Da’esh, and the involvement and financial support of
criminal organizations, is undoubtedly of particular
interest in these investigations.
We welcome the judicious use of cutting-edge
technologies, in particular the new strategies aimed
at speeding up digitalization and digitization of
evidentiary documents throughout the period under
consideration, as well as the launch of the Zeteo project
12/18

07/06/2023

to facilitate the visualization of analyses and evidence
in a highly advanced process and format. This will not
only facilitate access to the documents, but also save a
great deal of time.
Continued dialogue and the cooperation of the Iraqi
Government are essential to finalizing the investigations
and reaching a memorandum of understanding, which
will help to strengthen the capacities of the Iraqi
judiciary, including with the involvement of civil
society, in particular with regard to assistance for
victims of sexual violence, as well as for children who
have suffered mistreatment and abuse as part of their
enlistment as child soldiers.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the
importance of creating the conditions for restorative
justice for the injuries suffered by the Iraqi people, in
particular the Yazidi communities, as a result of the
war crimes, crimes of genocide and crimes against
humanity committed by Da’esh. It is imperative that an
inclusive approach be adopted in order to maximize the
collection of information that will ensure the definitive
establishment of the facts.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Adviser Ritscher for his briefing. I also
thank him and his team for their valuable work.
As Iraq continues its transition from conflict to
stability and prosperity, accountability for the heinous
crimes committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIS) remains an important element
of reconciliation and rebuilding. The United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) is a key element in achieving
accountability, and the United States continues to
strongly support its work. We welcome the reports of
continued development of case files and the expanding
circle of incidents and crimes UNITAD is investigating,
including documented ISIS use of chemical weapons.
We continue to be impressed by the rigour and
technological ingenuity UNITAD has brought to bear on
the collection, digitization, analysis and catalogueing of
evidence. We welcome reports of growing cooperation
between UNITAD and the Government of Iraq, noting
ongoing consultations at the senior political level,
as well as engagement with judges, notably sharing
findings on ISIS financial networks and crimes.
23-16180

07/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

UNITAD’s training programmes on evidence
management and forensics will pay dividends in
future in the Iraqi judiciary’s handling of newly
collected evidence and in utilizing evidence managed
by UNITAD. We acknowledge the Government of
Iraq’s desire for UNITAD to turn over the evidence it
has collected for use by the Iraqi judicial system and
UNITAD’s attempt to develop a creative solution to try
to make this possible.
We encourage the Government of Iraq to adopt
legislation on international crimes, notably genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity, and to take
the steps necessary to ensure transparent prosecutions
of ISIS members that respect minimum fair-trial
guarantees and legal protections. While the number
of attacks has decreased and ISIS capability has been
significantly degraded through the efforts of Iraq and
the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS, ISIS remains
a critical threat in Iraq and globally. One way of
reducing that threat is by giving further support the
Government of Iraq in repatriating Iraqi ISIS members
from detention centres in north-eastern Syria to face
justice in Iraqi courts. UNITAD will play an important
role in that process. Similarly, UNITAD can help other
countries prosecute the thousands of ISIS foreign
fighters in detention centres in Iraq and Syria. The
detention centres are inherently unstable and pose
considerable risks to security. It is imperative that all
States repatriate and prosecute their nationals who have
committed crimes, as appropriate.
UNITAD continues to be a solid example of
how the United Nations can support transitions from
conflict to peace and security. The United States will
continue its support and will encourage UNITAD and
the Government of Iraq to take the steps needed to
expand their opportunities to collaborate. In that way,
they can accelerate progress towards delivering justice
for ISIS’s many victims.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Let me begin by thanking
Special Adviser Ritscher for his work and his briefing
today. Albania greatly values the investigations and
evidence collection carried out by the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) to ensure justice for the victims
of Da’esh. We commend the excellent work of the
Investigative Team in Iraq in pursuing accountability
for serious crimes. The collection and preservation
of evidence of crimes, as well as new findings on

S/PV.9341

development, manufacturing and use of biological and
chemical weapons by Da’esh, are very important.
UNITAD’s cooperation with Iraqi authorities,
as well as with national judicial authorities, is
commendable and we applaud it. Such cooperation
remains indispensable in enabling national justice
systems to prosecute those responsible for financing,
supporting and executing terrorist actions worldwide.
The legal proceedings to ensure accountability for
atrocity crimes committed in Iraq are encouraging and
welcome. They represent positive steps towards ending
impunity for atrocities in Iraq and serve as an example
for the world. And what makes those commendable
developments even more remarkable is that they
are taking place in a very challenging environment,
against a backdrop of political, economic and climate
crises. We remain concerned about the continuing
insecurity in Iraq, particularly in the light of ongoing
armed attacks, including those carried out by Da’esh.
Da’esh continues to be a serious threat across the
Middle East and Africa and demonstrates the vital need
for global cooperation and coordination if it is to be
eradicated for good. Albania applauds Prime Minister
Al Sudani’s commitment to restoring State authority
over armed groups in Iraq. We reiterate our firm
support for Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
and condemn all efforts to undermine its stability and
political independence.
This is an unforgiving environment, charged with
many dangers, but there can be no doubt about how
urgent it is to ensure full accountability for serious
crimes. It is equally important to ensure that the fight
against impunity never loses sight of full adherence
to international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. The fight against impunity should
be an example of legality and inspire trust in the rule of
law and justice. We encourage UNITAD and the Iraqi
authorities to redouble their efforts in bringing to justice
the perpetrators of sexual and gender-based crimes
against women and children. There should be a special
focus on the needs of all the communities affected.
In conclusion, let me reiterate once again Albania’s
unwavering commitment to accountability and a just
peace for all Iraqi people. They are vital to stabilization,
reconstruction and reconciliation in Iraq. The Security
Council must show unity and support UNITAD and
other United Nations mechanisms in order to prevent
the resurgence of Da’esh and its affiliates in Iraq
and elsewhere.

23-1618013/18

S/PV.9341

Threats to international peace and security

Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I would like to thank
Special Adviser Christian Ritscher for his presentation
of the tenth report on the activities of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (see S/2023/367), which reflects
advancements in the Team’s investigative work during
the reporting period. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Iraq to today’s meeting.
Ghana joins other Council members in
acknowledging the commendable work being done
by the Team in fulfilment of its mandate regarding
accountability for international crimes committed
by Da’esh. Ensuring meaningful accountability for
the crimes committed in Iraq remains crucial if the
international community is to win the global fight
against terrorism and fulfil its collective duty to seek
justice and redress for victims of Da’esh’s heinous
international crimes in Iraq. We were therefore pleased
to note that during the reporting period the Team made
significant progress in its investigative priorities,
including the launch of new lines of inquiry into
the development and use of biological and chemical
weapons and the destruction of cultural and religious
heritage, as well as crimes committed against various
communities in Iraq. The notable progress that has
been made in investigations into the financing of
Da’esh crimes and crimes against children is also
encouraging. Those developments continue to help
to produce dedicated case files and identify persons
potentially responsible for the crimes committed.
We also acknowledge the great strides that the Team
has been making in digitizing the physical evidence
obtained. That undertaking is particularly important,
because it represents a vital step in duly preserving
the records of Da’esh’s international crimes in Iraq and
shaping the path towards securing justice in relation to
the crimes committed.
While that phase in the work of UNITAD
represents a key step in support of the eventual
prosecution of perpetrators, it will be pivotal to move
the accountability process forward, particularly
through the timely transfer of the evidence collected
to the Iraqi authorities. We therefore urge the Team to
continue working closely with the Iraqi authorities to
achieve that objective. Ghana reiterates that continued
cooperation between UNITAD and the Iraqi authorities
remains vital in our collective quest for accountability
and in the ongoing initiatives to build and enforce the
14/18

07/06/2023

capacities of relevant Iraqi stakeholders, particularly
the Iraqi judiciary, reinforce national capacities to hold
perpetrators accountable and foster genuine national
reconciliation. In that context, we applaud the Team’s
efforts and emphasize that it is only through such
comprehensive coordination and collaborative efforts
that the effective implementation of the Team’s mandate
can be fully achieved.
With regard to UNITAD’s engagement with other
Member States, it has become increasingly evident
that the Team’s support to ongoing investigations
and prosecutions in national jurisdictions helps to
foster universal accountability. We support the call
for UNITAD to continue strengthening its ability to
support domestic proceedings in line with its mandate
in order to enable the prosecution of those who support,
finance and carry out terrorist activities worldwide.
Lastly, the work of UNITAD is contingent on the
continued support of the international community,
including the Council. It is imperative that we keep up
our efforts to sustain our involvement in the pursuit of
accountability, including by providing UNITAD with
the requisite assistance. Through those efforts, we can
contribute to the timely implementation of the Team’s
mandate, hold perpetrators accountable and help ensure
that justice is served.
In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm Ghana’s support
for the Team, under the leadership of Special Adviser
Christian Ritscher, and the relevance of its work in
the pursuit of accountability for crimes committed by
Da’esh in Iraq.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, let me begin by thanking Special Adviser
Ritscher and his team for their report (S/2023/367) and
his comprehensive briefing. Switzerland welcomes
the progress made during the period under review
by the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da‘esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD).
I would like to underscore three elements that
Switzerland believes to be critical to UNITAD’s work.
First, accountability and justice are necessary
pillars for preventing atrocities and achieving lasting
peace. UNITAD contributes to achieving those goals by
investigating and documenting the crimes committed
by Da’esh in Iraq. Impunity for those crimes prevents
justice for victims and survivors, which is unacceptable.
23-16180

07/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

In that regard, Switzerland welcomes the increased
cooperation between Iraq and UNITAD aimed at
strengthening capacities to prosecute crimes committed
by Da’esh, in accordance with international norms.
Effective cooperation with the Iraqi Government, as
well as with national partners, is a key element of the
mechanism’s mandate and activities. We commend its
innovative and technology-driven approach to evidence
collection and analysis, which will be particularly
useful in supporting future proceedings.
Furthermore, we welcome UNITAD’s contribution,
in close collaboration with Iraqi officials, to the
establishment of a joint working group on the
implementation of a national legal framework. We
recall that the mechanism does not share evidence
involved in judicial proceedings that could result in
a death sentence. Switzerland is opposed to the death
penalty in all circumstances, as it is incompatible with
respect for human rights and dignity. Not only is the
death penalty ineffective as a deterrent, but it also has
no effect on preventing criminality, violent extremism
or terrorism.
Secondly, UNITAD’s approach must continue
to include a gender perspective. Sexual and genderbased violence is particularly prevalent in terrorism
and conflict situations. It continues to be used as a
method of war by terrorists throughout the world. It
is therefore imperative that strategies to prevent and
combat terrorism go hand in hand with the fight against
sexual and gender-based violence. Switzerland has
been shocked by the many well-documented horrific
sexual and gender-based crimes committed by Da’esh,
particularly against the Yazidi community. Such crimes
continue to profoundly affect not only the survivors,
but also their families and, beyond that, entire
communities. We therefore welcome the mechanism’s
strategy to investigate crimes committed against the
various communities in Iraq, including gender-based
crimes and those committed against children. It is vital
that the people affected by such crimes, especially
children, be provided with adequate support. Their
rights and protection and the prevention of such crimes
must be at the heart of our collective efforts.
Thirdly, Switzerland welcomes the expansion
of UNITAD’s investigations into the destruction of
cultural heritage with a view to identifying those
allegedly responsible. The wilful destruction of cultural
heritage, particularly for the purpose of persecuting
populations, reduces cultural diversity, fuels conflicts

S/PV.9341

and compromises long-term security. It deprives
future generations of an integral part of their identity.
Switzerland encourages the mechanism to pursue its
efforts to develop an expanded investigation plan in
close collaboration with UNESCO, non-United Nations
entities and the Iraqi authorities.
Terrorism has inflicted, and continues to inflict,
deep wounds on the societies affected in Iraq. Women
are its first victims, which in no way prevents them
from resolutely committing themselves to building
lasting peace. We must do our utmost to ensure that
those responsible for the crimes committed by Da’esh
in Iraq are brought to justice. I would therefore like
once again to thank Special Adviser Ritscher and his
Team for their tireless work and to assure them of our
continued support.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Special Adviser Christian Ritscher for his
briefing and welcome the representative of Iraq at
this meeting.
China appreciates the recent achievements made
by the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) over
the past six months, especially the recent discoveries
concerning the alleged development and use of chemical
and biological weapons and the destruction of cultural
heritage by Da’esh. The gathering and classification of
relevant evidence are critical to uncovering Da’esh’s
terrorist acts and supporting accountability efforts
in Iraq. We are also grateful for the active assistance
provided by UNITAD in strengthening the capacity
of Iraq’s judicial system and supporting its courts’
digitalization efforts. While we acknowledge the
progress in its work, we also hope that the substantial
amount of evidence that UNITAD has collected will
translate into concrete actions to hold terrorists
accountable as soon as possible.
The transfer of evidence to Iraq is explicitly
stipulated in resolution 2379 (2017) and represents the
last step in UNITAD’s work. We expect UNITAD to
promptly initiate the systematic and complete transfer
of evidence to the Iraqi side. We do not support
linking the transfer of evidence to Iraq’s domestic
laws or legislative process. In sharing evidence
with third countries, UNITAD should obtain prior
consent from the Iraqi Government and adhere to the
principles of transparency and non-discrimination.

23-1618015/18

S/PV.9341

Threats to international peace and security

It should be noted that UNITAD was established as a
temporary and transitional arrangement in response
to the Iraqi Government’s request to support its
accountability efforts. It was not intended to be a
permanent body. As early as May 2021, the Team’s
sixth report (see S/2021/419) outlined preliminary
plans for its completion strategy. This year marks the
fifth anniversary of its establishment. We hope that it
will engage in full consultations with Iraq to promptly
develop a completion strategy, including a time frame
to be submitted for review by the Security Council.
The worldwide situation concerning terrorism
remains grave, with terrorist organizations such as
Da’esh, Al-Qaida and the Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement continuing to run rampant. As Iraq continues
to be at the forefront of international counter-terrorism
efforts, the international community should continue
to support the country in strengthening its counterterrorism capabilities, combating terrorism and holding
terrorist forces accountable under its national laws.
Relevant countries should also take responsibility for
and cooperate with Iraq in dealing with the issue of
foreign terrorist fighters in Iraq.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
I thank the Special Adviser, Mr. Ritscher, for his
important briefing, and I welcome the participation of
the representative of Iraq in this meeting.
At the outset, I would like to stress the importance
of the efforts undertaken by the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD), which has made continued
progress in collecting and analysing evidence of crimes
carried out by Da’esh in Iraq. That will allow the Iraqi
authorities to use the evidence in national prosecutions.
We also stress the need to continue holding those
criminals accountable so as to be an example for other
criminals who commit such heinous crimes around
the world. We welcome the recent progress made
across several lines of investigation, particularly those
concerning crimes carried out by Da’esh in and near
Mosul, the group’s former stronghold. We call for an
expansion of the investigations into the organizational
and financial structures of Da’esh in Mosul to help
to uncover additional leads about the identities of the
perpetrators of crimes in that area, including the Badush
16/18

07/06/2023

prison massacre, the group’s role in the development
and use of biological and chemical weapons and the
destruction of cultural and religious heritage sites and
their exploitation for terrorist and political purposes.
We support UNITAD’s continued investigations
into the most serious international crimes committed
by Da’esh, including those that targeted women and
children in Sinjar and other areas. To support those
efforts, it is important for the UNITAD Team to
share evidence with the Iraqi authorities and do so
within an appropriate time frame, in accordance with
resolution 2651 (2022). We hope that the results of those
investigations will contribute to supporting all of the
Iraqi Government’s other efforts to achieve justice for
the victims in various ways.
We also welcome the formation of a joint
working group between UNITAD and a number of
governmental institutions in Iraq and hope that those
efforts will be successful in ensuring the drafting of
national legislation on core international crimes to
form a legal framework supporting the prosecution
of perpetrators of such crimes. At the same time, we
believe it is important that the Council remain seized of
the progress in the handover of evidence in the coming
period and seriously consider all available options to
facilitate that. While we welcome UNITAD’s efforts to
support the trials of Da’esh criminals in third countries,
we stress the importance of those efforts being carried
out in advance and in full coordination with Iraq.
The United Arab Emirates commends UNITAD’s
efforts to build the capacities of the relevant judicial
and security authorities in Iraq, particularly in
conducting investigations and forensic digital support.
We also commend the achievements made by the team
in digitizing and archiving evidence and providing
training programmes related to document and evidence
management, as well as using modern technology
in its work, especially in investigations having to do
with mass graves and the exhumation of remains and
revealing details of the facts related to the excavation
of such graves. We hope that those practices will
help develop local working methods that can be used
in similar investigations in other regions around the
world. To complement those efforts, we believe it will
be important to transfer knowledge to Iraqi experts by
appointing more of them to UNITAD’s core work teams.
In conclusion, we affirm our eagerness to continue
cooperation with the members of the Council on this
23-16180

07/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

issue, especially as the date of UNITAD’s current
mandate ends in September.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Fatah (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by expressing my thanks and gratitude for
the efforts of the United Nations and its main organs
and offices through its resolutions, recommendations
and decisions, as well as for all the international
efforts supporting Iraq in combating terrorism and
pursuing terrorists. I thank the Swiss delegation
for managing the work of the Council for the month
of May, and congratulate the United Arab Emirates
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for June and wish its Mission every success.
I also thank Mr. Christian Ritscher and his team for
his valuable briefing to the Council and for reviewing
the most important paragraphs of the tenth report (see
S/2023/367) of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD),
including its activities in my country, Iraq, during the
period covered by the report.
In the context of what Mr. Ritscher reviewed in
his briefing, we commend what was stated in his tenth
report, which included several points where his work
in Iraq reached advanced stages through participation
and cooperation with the Iraqi Government and
through opening new paths of investigation for the
crimes committed by the terrorist organization Da’esh
against the Iraqi people, in addition to following up on
UNITAD’s previous investigation paths and achieving
accountability in cooperation with the Iraqi national
authorities. In that regard, I note three areas.
First, there have been preliminary investigations of
the use of chemical and biological weapons, which will
be highlighted in a side event tomorrow, as Mr. Ritscher
noted in his briefing.
Secondly, outstanding efforts have been made in
the areas of digital documentation and digitization and
training programmes for capacity-building.
Thirdly, a joint working group has been established
with the judiciary and legal experts in the Prime
Minister’s Office, the Iraqi State Council and members
of the House of Representatives to discuss the adoption
of domestic legislation on international crimes.

S/PV.9341

In the nearly six years since UNITAD began its
work, my Government has repeatedly made it clear
that the Team’s most important challenge during the
next stage is fulfilling the mandate to achieve justice
and presenting all evidence to the Government of Iraq
to be used before the Iraqi national courts as quickly
as possible. UNITAD’s tasks are based on resolution
2379 (2017) and the rules of competence in collecting,
preserving and storing evidence of the Da’esh’s crimes
in Iraq, with the duty to then present the evidence to
Iraq for the conduct of fair and just trials that help
to achieve justice and redress for the victims. The
Team’s task of preserving and storing evidence and
investigating crime after crime cannot be completed
unless the evidence is used in national legal contexts.
We therefore look forward to moving beyond the wait
for appropriate legislation to be adopted and seeing
rapid, real and practical steps taken in providing
evidence to the Iraqi Government in implementation of
the mission’s mandate. In that regard, it is important to
point out that the international community constantly
highlights the need to achieve accountability and
justice for the victims and address the reasons that have
prevented the Government of Iraq from achieving that.
In that regard, we want to point out that in its turn
the Government of Iraq has consistently affirmed
that it is directly responsible for achieving justice
for the victims, prosecuting all the perpetrators of
crimes against Iraqis and ensuring the principle of
non-impunity. The purpose of establishing UNITAD
and defining its mandate at Iraq’s request was to help the
country accomplish that, along with achieving justice
for the victims, by holding to account everyone involved
in committing, supporting or financing the crimes of
Da’esh in Iraq. Those tasks are waiting for UNITAD
to fulfil its mandate and hand over the evidence that
the Iraqi Government needs to conduct trials and find
redress for the victims. We note that the delay in the
prosecution and trial procedures could enable some
members of Da’esh to escape and find sanctuary. That
explains the increase in trials in various countries that
have accepted numbers of refugees for asylum, some
of them involved in terrorist acts with Da’esh. The
main reason for that could be attributed to delays in the
prosecution and accountability procedures for a number
of the leaders of Da’esh who managed to escape.
In the context of promoting accountability at the
global level and implementing UNITAD’s mandate,
we stress once again that any sharing of evidence and

23-1618017/18

S/PV.9341

Threats to international peace and security

information obtained by UNITAD during its tenure, and
with the cooperation, facilitation and support of Iraq,
must take place with the knowledge and prior consent
of the Iraqi Government, as per the Team’s exclusive
mandate. In that regard, we believe it is necessary to
establish a mechanism for obtaining the formal consent
of the Iraqi Government, in a clear and specific format,
in order for information to be shared with third States.
That has been overlooked in previous reports and we
therefore hope that the next report will address such
a mechanism.
Nearly six years after the start of UNITAD’s
work, and for the remainder of its mandate, we look
forward to seeing the appointment of Iraqi experts to
the Team completed so that they meet the required
specified quota, thereby achieving the important
standard included in the Team’s mandate with regard to
transferring international expertise to the Iraqi national
cadres who will complete the investigations in the
future. The Government of Iraq once again emphasizes

18/18

07/06/2023

its commitment to cooperating with the international
Investigative Team and assisting it through the National
Coordinating Committee dedicated to supporting
UNITAD’s mandate, with full respect for Iraq’s
sovereignty and jurisdiction over the crimes committed
within its borders and against its people.
In conclusion, I would like to express our thanks to
you, Mr. President, and to those friendly States that have
supported my country in its counter-terrorism efforts
and worked together to bring the perpetrators before
the national judiciary. We would also like to express our
thanks and appreciation for the efforts of Mr. Ritscher
and UNITAD and for the progress achieved through
their activities, including the exchange of expertise
with Iraqi national authorities. We want to emphasize
the magnitude of the violations suffered by the Iraqi
people at the hands of the terrorist organization Da’esh.
We wish him and his team every success in their work.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

23-16180
