1714th

United Nations

a wise
of all
, China
-loving
Power,
le vital

PLENARY MEETING

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

Tuesday, 12 November 1968,
at 3p.m.

TWENTY·THIRD SESSION

Official Records
lat the
lresent
taining
t upon
;ponsilerable
ization

•

NEW

CONTEN1':;
Page

Agenda item 97:
Celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
.
Nations (continued)
Agenda item 20:
Admission )f new members to the United Nations (continued)

. draft
ja and
itep of
and, I
of the

Before
tatives
193 to
lakers,
esday,

at the

-2,300

YORK

connexion with which two documents have been submitted
to it. The Security Council has unanimously recommended
that the General Assembly admit Equatorial Guinea to
membership in the United Nations [A/731 0]. In connexion
with this item a draft resolution [A/L.551 and Add. 1] has
been submitted to the Assembly for its consideration. It has
been sponsored by 40 members.

.

Agenda item 93:
Restoration of the lawful riglits of the People's Republic of
China in the United Nations (continued)

15

President: Mr. Emilio ARENALES (Guatemala).

5. I should like to ask the Assembly whether we can take
it that the Security Council recommendation has been
accepted and that we can consider the draft resolution
A/L.551 and Add.l, admitting Equatorial Guinea to membership in the United Nations, as adopted by acclamation.
If there is no objection, we mall so proceed.

AGENDA ITEM 97

Celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations (continued)*
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): At the
1710 plenary meeting, on 7 November 1968, the General
Assembly agreed to a proposal that the President establish a
committee to consider measures to be taken for the
appropriate celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Uluted Nations in 1970. Several representatives have
made certain suggestions to me regarding the composition of
the committee, and after having had some consultations, I
believe that it would be best to entrust the matter to the
General Committee, since that Committee has been con·
stituted on the basis of the principle of equitable geographical distribution according to a formula approved by the
General Assembly itself.
2. If I hear no objection, I shall ?ssume that the Assembly
agrees to that proposal.

It was so rJecided.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
convene the General Committee at an early date. Meanwhile, I should like to request delegations which are not
members of the General Committee to submit in writing,
and not later than 291'::1 ~i lber 1968, any suggestions that
they may have regardL'\:ul'. ~clebration of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the United·,r:.dons.

AGENDA ITEM 20

Admission of new Memlms to the United Nations
(concluded) **
4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
Assembly will now take up item 20 of its agenda in

* Resumed from the 1710th meeting.
** Resumed from the 1674th meeting.

The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation (resolution 2384 (XXIII)).
6. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
declare Equatorial Guinea admitted to membership in the
United Nations.
The delegation of Equatorial Guinea was escorted to its
place in the Gp.neral Assembly hall.
7. The PRE'SIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): On
behalf of the General Assembly I am very pleased to
welcome Equatorial Guinea as a Member of the United
Nations, and I wim to extend to its Government and
people the sincerest congratulations of tlrls Assembly on
this happy occasion, together with our best wishes for the
future.
8. On my own behalf I mould like to express my pleasure
in welcoming the fIrst Spanish-speaking African Member to
the United Nations. I should also like to congratulate Spain
on the speedy and effective manner in which it has
implemented the principles of t.he Charter.
9. Mr. DE PINIES (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, first of all, I mould like to express to you my
delegation's pleasure at seeing you conducting our deliberations once again. We are very pleased to see that you have
fully recovered, and tlrls is a source of great pleasure to us
on tlrls day when you are presiding over the deliberations of
the General Assembly as we welcome a brother Africa...'l
country.
10. On this solemn occasion for the new State of
Equatorial Guinea and for our Organization, it is a matter
of great pride and unconcealed joy for me as I take the
floor, first, to congratulate Equatorial Guinea upon its
admission to memberslrlp in the United Nations.
A/pV.1714

I

:j
\

,~

..,..me-=::t".=-,.·C;C="="",._ -

r"'"""~~C"'l,'-~-="'''''~ "~·
~

2

General Assembly - Twenty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

.~

.•~
~
.~

Jl
~

.~'.

11. A few days ago we heard all the members of the
Security Council uttering words of welcome, encouragement and hope for the new State. We share those desires. In
addition, Spain is particularly pleased at the present time
and-immodest though it may sound-it is proud to have
"lived up to its tradition as a founder of nations", to use
the words of the Foreign Minister of Spain in his recent
statement to this Assembly /1697th meeting, para. 69J.
12. Equatorial Guinea achieved independence after an
orderly process of decolonization which had special features. First of all, Spain has acted in accordance with the
standard principles of decolonization, respecting the principles of the Charter, abiding faithfully by the resolutions
ami providing the infonnation requested of us. We have
twice invited a United Nations Committee 1 to travel
through Equatorial Guinea, with the maximum facilities for
obtaining infonnation, inviting it to participate directly in
the supervision of the referendum relating to approval of
the Constitution of the new State, and the elections which
led to the constitution of the fIrst parliament and the
election of the first President of the Republic.

\

'

13. Spain has implemented the right of self-determination
as set forth in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). We
believe that indigenous peoples-and those peoples alonehave this right. For this reason only the indigenous
inhabitants participated in the process of decolonization.
Throughout the entire process Spain precluded participation of the Spanish settlers who had been in the Territory
for generations, for it was our belief that only the
indigenous inhabitants, and not those who had been
i..inported over the years, had the right to decide their own
future. Any other procedure, such as is claimed to exist in
other territories, would have been tantamount to flouting
resolution 1514 (XV).
14. Secondly, and rather unusually, the process of decolonization was carried out peacefully, with no violence, in
perfect harmony between the people of Equatorial Guinea
and the administering Power. When we know that there was
bloodshed as many countries were in the process of
attaining independence, and a cruel struggle on the part of
the indigenous inhabitants, we cannot fail to say that on
this occasion the Spanish Government and the people of
Equatorial Guinea have walked hand in hand and set a
splendid example of peaceful decolonization at this time.

s
f

f
r

e

15. Lastly, we believe that the emergence of an African
Republic enjoying cultural, spiritual and linguistic ties with
all Spanish-speaking nations of the New World is another
special feature. In order to reaffIrm this identity, Equatorial
Guinea celebrated its independence on 12 October, commemorating the date of the discovery of America by Spain.
Once again, the Atlantic Ocean does not separate us, but
serves as a bridge between the peoples of the world.
16. I should like, from this rostrum, to express my
appreciation of the words of praise by many delegations
regarding Spain's record leading to the admission of
Equatorial Guinea as the one hundred and twenty-sixth
State Member of this Organization. I would express my best

s
1 United Nations Mission for the Supervision of the Referendum
and the Eh ,~, .IllS in Equatorial Guinea.

wishes for the prosperity of the new State and my
congratulations to the people of Equatorial Guinea and to
His Excellency Francisco Macias Nguema, the President of
the Republic.
17. Equatorial Guinea has demonstrated its maturity, and
Spain is confIdent that the new State will continue to enjoy
political stability, economic prosperity and social progress.
In this way it will govern its life at the international level,
guided by the slogan on its flag: "Unity, peace and justice".
18. The wann relations which existed when Equatorial
Guinea acquired independence ensure furtller close relations which exist and will continue to exist bet "een this
Republic and my country, Spain.
19. As a sponsor of draft resolution A/L.551 and Add.!, I
am pleased indeed that this Assembly has adopted it
unanimously.
20. Mr. NJlNE (Cameroon) (interpretation from French):
My delegation wishes to join those which have already
spoken in expressing our great pleasure in your return to us,
Mr. President, after your sojourn in the hospital. We hope
that your restoration to health is complete and that you
will now be able to resume the arduous but noble
responsibilities entrusted to you.
21. It was the pleasure and the agreeable duty of my
delegation to welcome from this rostrum the accession of
Equatorial Guinea to independence on 12 October this
year: The admission today of this brother and neighbour
country to membership of the United Nations is for us, as
well as for the entire international community, a matter of
particular importance. At a time when the crystallization of
nation:li egoisms is a serious obstacle in the search for
solutions to the conflicts threatening international peace
and security, at a time when the United Nations is standing
by helpless in the face of these dangers, the happy outcome
of our Organization's efforts concerning decolonization is
for us a sign of encouragement.
22. While strengthening our firm belief in the irreversible
nature of the process of the emancipation of peoples under
colonial domination, the accession of a State to interna·
tional sovereignty emphasizes the futility of those who
claim to an outmoded outlook. The realistic and enlightened attitude and the spirit of co-operation displayed by
Spain in the case of Equatorial Guinea are matters for our
full satisfaction, and I should like to take this opportunity,
on behalf of my delegation, to congratulate the Government of Spain for its positive contribution to this chapter
of decolonization. May a new wind blow in the Iberian
Peninsula and cause the virtues of decolonization to be
appreciated by the obdurate.
23. It is for me a special privilege to welcome on behalf of
my Government the brother State of Equatorial Guinea to
the United Nations. Our good wishes are all the wanner and
our satisfaction the greater since, despite the vicissitudes of
history, age-old and brotherly ties have been forged
between our peoples. To the political leaders of Equatorial
Guinea, especially its Chief of State, H.E. Francisco Madas
Nguema, whose perseverance, courage and political wisdom
have contributed so greatly to the achievement in peace and

..
1714th meeting - 11 November 1968
harmony of the legitimate aspirations of his countrymen, to
the people of Equatorial Guinea, the Government and
people of Cameroon address their warmest congratulations
and their best wishes for happiness and prosperity.
24. Mr. ESFANDIARY (Iran): Before I make my remarks
on the happy occasion of the admission of Equatorial
Guinea to the United Nations, allow me, Mr. President, to
express to you our profound pleasure at your full and
complete recovery and your return to your seat as President
of the General Assembly at its twenty-third session.
25. It gives me great pleasure, in the name of the Iranian
delegation, to welcome the admission of Equatorial Guinea
to ;nemrership in the United Nations. We rejoice in the
birth of all new nations, especially since they add to the
universal character of the United Nations. The Iranian
delegation has not only followed Equatorial Guinea's
pathway to independence with interest and actively sought
that objective through various United Nations bodies but
has also enjoyed the special privilege of attending the birth
of that new nation. The presence of the United Nations
during the evolution towards independence accorded me, as
a member of the United Nations Mission to Equatorial
Guinea, the opportunity and privilege of assisting in the
process leading to the establishment of a sovereign and
democratic State. In that process I was particularly struck
by the mature and orderly manner in w.\ich the people of
Equatorial Guinea took actual part in establishing their
future status. The efforts of the people of Equatorial
Guinea to achieve freedom and independence have in rer.ent
years been marked by toil and travail. Its pathway to
indPpendence has been punctuated with perilous pitfalls. Its
hard-earned success therefore represents a real achievement.
26. The political leaders of Equatorial Guinea have played
a vitally important role in this venture. His Excellency
Francisco Macfas Nguema who, in an unexpected electoral
victory, emerged as the choice of the people for the
presidency of the Republic has long been associated with
his country's striving for independence. In various capacities of leadership he has consistently helped to bring his
countrymen forward in unity to their ultimate destination.
In this process he has won the admiration of those of us in
the United Nations who deal with colonial matters.
27. I was struck throughout my visit to various parts of
Equatorial Guinea~not only to the beautiful capital, Santa
Isabel, but also to Bata, the capital of Rio Muni, and the
interior-by the harmonious relations which so happily
exist between the local population and the nationals of the
administering Power. I should like here to pay a tribute to
Spain for its co-opl~ration and for enabling the United
Nations to supervise all the processes leading to the exercise
of the right of the people of Equatorial Guinea to
self-determination and independence.
28. In the wake of independence, in which the old
colonial relationship has been replaced by one based on
equality and mutual respect, it is not only fitting, but also
auspicious, that harmony should characterize the new
order. The new State has high potentials. Its rich soil, its
forests and the diversity of its people will enable it, I am
sure, to meet the challenges of independence with confidence. J have no doubt that the people of Equatorial

3

Guinea will contipue to work together as one nation for
prosperity and tranquillity throughout the country and that
this sense of purpose will be reflected here as Equatorial
Guinea takes her rightful place in the ranks of the
independent nations of Africa and Asia and in the
international community as a whole. In the name of the
Iranian delegation, I should like to extend to the people
and Government of Equatorial Guinea our warmest welcome and best wishes, and to offer them our full
co-operation.
29. Mr. NZANZE (Burundi) (intelpretatioll from French):
It is with joyful enthusiasm' that, in my capacity as
spokesman [or all the forty African delegations, I have the
privilege of welcoming the admission of Equatorial Guinea
to the world community. Thanks to the irresistible tide of
the movements of the African peoples towards the reconquest of their respective national sovereignties, in the
course of a single decade thirty-five African countries have
been able to accede to independence. Today our continent
has the happy experience of celebrating the birth of the
forty-first member of the Organization of African Unity
[OAUJ. This event is without doubt such as to evoke
certain present-day characteristics of Africa which must be
given serious consideration.

t

e
c

e

30. Despite its intrinsic weaknesses, our Organization
deserves a great deal of gratitude for its incontestable
contribution to the wave of decolonization in Africa.

31. More9ver, an objective observer must admit that our
highly respected Secretary-Gener'll, whose integrity in the
face of every trial has compelled universal admiration, has
breathed new life into an Organization threatened by
premature old age and has played a key role in the
progressive liberation of the young continent. We pay to
him a lively tribute of eternal gratitude. Africa must keep a
very special place in its heart for U Thant for having shown
himself on many occasions a steadfast supporter of both its
unity and its liberation.
32. Equatorial Guinea's accession to independence is a
source of the most exemplary lessons in many respects for
all minds that are inclined to go to the heart of things.
33. First, when the administering Power facilitates ~he
progress of its colony towards independence, once that
independence has been reconquered the relations between
the former metropolitan country and the new-born State
are in almost all cases characterized by co-operation which
is as natural as it is spontaneous. On the other hand, if the
colonial Government endeavours to obstruct that reconquest of sovereign freedom by the nationals who are
entitled to it, the ward must necessarily revolt against his
guardian and recover his dignity despite and in the face of
the latter. In such circumstances, two countries which are
compelled for historical reasons to co-operate closely find
themselves condemned to subsequent mutual misunderstandings and the young nation, despite the difficulties of
all kinds inherent in its infancy, will accept relations with
the former metropolitan country only in the absence of any
alternative. Without wishing to claim any special credit, I
had an opportunity a year ago to express similar ideas to
the present permanent representative of Spain in regard to
Equatorial Guinea. In this connexion, the Spanish Govern-

3
e
p

d
b
c
a
3

o
d
tr
la

o
se
la
w

a
s'
li
b

3
to

E
f

4
pe
ap

c

•

u

4

~,,'

•

•

J..'

""

•

./ ..

•

\'

·

.

•

. ..

General Assembly - Twenty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

ment would be entitled to propose itself as a model as
regards the processes followed for the restitution of power
to the Guinean people and also for what it has done to
facilitate the taS1-: of the United Nations Mission to the
Territory.

41. Secondly, it is my privilege to extend on behalf of the

34. Secondly, the advent of young, vital countries to the
ranks of tlle Organization of African Unity, as in the case of
its new member, cannot fail to inspire fear mingled with
bitterness among the beneficiaries of the fruits of colonization. For them, the independence regained by a single
African State represents a two-edged sword. It represents
on the one hand a reduction of their field of exploitation
and on the other a mere moratorium which is only one
stage on the way to the fatal moment when the definitive
death-knell of the colonial empire will sound.

42. The new Member State acceded to independence on
12 October in an atmosphere of harmony and mutual
regard with Spain, the former administering authority.
Equatorial Guinea is a small country, though one with
considerable resources, and, like other Member States, it
has a definite rol,~ to play in its appropriate regional
organization and in this wider world body. Like other small
countries, and in common with those which have recently
obtained independence, Equatorial Guinea faces considerable problems; and, like other Member States, it has the
right to look to the United Nations for guidance and
assistance in the solution of these problems.

35. Thirdly, for the OAU the accession of Equatorial
Guinea to the Organization of sovereign nations is a matter
of particular moment. It reflects the irreversible nature of
the era of world-wide decolonization and it is tantamount
to a newly forged-weapon, which is consequently more
effective in the hands of the OAU on its battle-field against
colonial rule, wherever it may be.
36. The young nation is doubtless aware that it has
emerged victorious from the battle, while at the same time
preparing to enrol in a much vaster war, and a war which
will perhaps last longer, the war of Africa as a whole against
foreign domination.
37. This war must be won, for there is no alternative in
the interests of the United Nations and the human rar;e; and
everythillg prompts us to hope that those who would
perpetuate the enslavement of Africa, those who wouJJ
delay if not finally frustrate the definitive reconciliation
between the young continent and the former metropolitan
countries, are now anticipating the certain failure of their
attempts.
38. If, through its growing cohesion and harmony, the
OAU has succeeded in frustrating all the attempts made to
discredit it and to undermine its achievements, if the
members of our regional organization have been able to
transcend the various ethnic, cultural, religious and other
labels which have been brought into play in order to nip the
organization in the bud, it may be noted that Africa is
searching for a true synthesis, which is an essential
launching-point for the assault against the Portuguese bases
in the colonies where colonial rule still exists: in Rhodesia,
where the political subterfugts of the administering Power
are making it possible to transfer power secretly while a
simulated war is loudly declared against a fictitious rebellion, in Namibia and in South Africa, where nazism has
been elevated into a legislative principle.
39. This is the dual ideal which the OAU has assumed:
total unity and fmal liberation. The new mission of
Equatorial Guinea is to contribute to these objectives to the
full extent of its means.
40. Mr. SHAW (Australia): May I first of all convey to you
personally, Sir, our best wishes for your recovery and our
appreciation of the determination witIl which you are
carrying on your duties in this Assembly.

group of Western European and other States a warm
welcome to the Republic of Equatorial Guinea which, by
unanimous vote, has just been admitted to Membership of
the United Nations.

43. All the Members of the group for whom I have the
honour to speak extend their best wishes to the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea on this happy occasion, to its people and
to its President and to its other leaders. We assure them of
our friendly willingness to co-operate with them in all
aspects of the work involved in their Membership of this
Organization.
44. Mr. NTOUTOUME OBAME (Gabon) (Interpretation
from French): I should like first of all on behalf of my
delegation to express the satisfaction that we feel at seeing
you, Sir, resume the conduct of our proceedings after the
illness which deprived us for a time of tIle pleasure of
working under your enlightened Presidency. We hope that
you have now been completely restored to health.
45. After the statement which has ju:>t been made by the
representative of Burundi on behalf of the African and
Malagasy countries on the occasion of the admission of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea to the United Nations, my
delegation could have refrained from taking the floor, but
because of the special bonds arising from geographical
proxinlity and ethnic affiliation which unite Gabon to the
newly-independent State, we could not let pass this
opportunity to express once again from this rostrum the
greeting of the President of the Republic of Gabon, and the
Government and the people of Gabon, to a brother country
which has recently joined the United Nations, and to
express our joy and satisfaction at welcoming that country
into the great family of the United Nations.
46. As our Minister of Foreign Affairs said in his statement on 2 October last, and I quote him:
"In a few days, Equatorial Guinea, another country
formerly under colonial domination, will be acceding to
independence. At least, that is the pledge the Spanish
Government, which is responsible for that territory, has
made before the world, and we regard everything it has
done so far to further the speedy and regular development of the decolonization process in that country as an
assurance that Spain will keep its word." [1677th
meeting, para. 111/
47. Scarcely 10 days elapsed after that statement when
Spain-whose rights to. a part of the land in tIl:: Gulf of

•

'l
•

••

'

<{

~

•

I."..

.),

1714th meeting - 12 November 1968
Guinea had been confirmed by the Berlin Act of 1885,
which enshrined the division of enslaved Africa among the
European Powers-in fact kept its wOld, and we are very
glad to see this.
48. It is pleasant and reassuring to see Equatorial Guinea
accede to full sovereignty and thus swell the ranks of the
free African countries and the free countries of the world,
thanks to the generous action of Spain. We can here and
now congratulate ourselves for having once offered assistance anci asylum to those Equatorial Guineans who had
engaged in the struggle for their political emanicipation, for
contrary to what might have been tho.'lght, Gabon has
never cherished the slightest expansionist intentions. It was
simply a response to an impulse of generosity which was in
no way divergent from the natural virtue of our people:
namely, a smiling, disinterested and uncalcula ting hcspitality.
49. It is pleasant and reas&uring to see that once again the
incessant efforts of our Organization in the matter of
decolonization have been crowned with success, and all
countries, organizations and individuals who have contributed to this happy outcome may congratulate themselves today.
50. It is pleasant and reassuring, lastly, to witness once
again the transfer of authority from an administering Power
to its former colony; in peace, friendship and dignity,
without clashes, bitterness or bloodshed; a magnanimous
example which should give pause to that other colonial
Power, Portugal-its neighbour-which in the name of an
outdated principle thinks it is its duty to perpetuate for
ever its dominion over other peoples and to maintain
indefinitely under its colonial yoke large tracts of Africa
\0' ich
it purports to present-an ironic matter-as an
IIltegral part of its territory which it calls overseas provinces. It thus unnecessarily calls down u;:on itself the
contempt and disapproval of all fair-minded and peaceloving countries, whereas it could spare itself this experience, as others have done, and as Spain has just done in the
same continent of Africa, and could thus have secured
friendship on the basis of frank and sincere co-operation,
on the basis of common history, common language,
common culture-and why not-common interests.
51. It is both surprising and depressing to see that that
country which used to be so proud and always in the van of
new ideas, is now falling behind the times and is unable to
keep up with this century, whereas it gave birth to
Magellan, to Vasco da Gama, and other distinguished
Portuguese who, through their science, their discoveries,
their universalist vision of things and of the world, helped
to add considerably to the heritage of which mankind is so
proud.

-,

.

52. I hope the representative of Spain will convey to his
Government and people the wann and sincere congratulations of the delegation of Gabon, and assure them of my
l:Ountry's friendship.
53. We welcome the young Republic of Equatorial Guinea
to the United Nations, a haven which, according to the
Preamble of its Charter, is the foundation on which rests
the maintenance of peace by saving mankind from the

I

•

...

~

I

• •

•

5

scourge of war, by reaffIrming faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large and
small, by establishing conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other
sources of international law can be maintained and by
promoting social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom.
54. May I ..:xpress the hope that Equatorial Guinea will
make good use of its newly-won freedom.
55, My delegation would not claim here to remind the
Assembly that political independence, which inspires us
with legitimate sentiments of pride, should prompt any
young nation to seek by all possible means to acquire the
other independence which is no less essential, namely
economic independence, without which the former, with its
train of obligations and enslavements, would merely be a
poor substitute.
56. It is my firm conviction that Equatorial Guinea will
draw upon the experience of other nations that have
preceded it, and in so doing, it will be delivered from some
of the disappointments that have afflicted others.
57. In conclusion, I should like to express my delegation's
gratitude for the attention you have been so good as to give
me, and to pay a deserved tribute to the United Nations
and to Spain which have allowed us to experience this
solemn ffi:lment.
58. Mr. DENNY (United States of America): Mr. President, may I first say that my delegation is delighted to
welcome you back from your recent surgery and to know
of your speedy recovery. The Genera! Assembly will benefit
greatly with the return to your strong and wise leadership. I
wish you every success in the resumption and continuation
of your work as our President.
59. One month ago today the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea became the newest sovereign State. The United
States is happy today to join in welcoming our 126th
Member, Equatorial Guinea, to the United Nations. The
passage of a people from colonial status to their full place
in the family of nations is always a moment of special pride
to the United States-the oldest of the ex-eolonies. We
warmly congratulate the people and Government of the
newest State in the world on this important occasion.
60. Our action today carries great meaning-it is the
formalization of the belief of the Members that Equatorial
Guinea is indeed a free and sovereign State; that it is
entitled to the rights that go with that status and,
specifically, to the rights of United Nations membership;
and that it is able and willing to carry out the corresponding responsibilities. Our decision is the culmination of
a long and sometimes difficult process, but a process now
consummated by all concerned with a minimum of acrimony and a maximum of statesmanship. We congratulate
the Government of Spain for the wisdom and foresight it
has displayed in helping to bring this new nation peacefully
to the point of independence. As was noted in the Security
Council, the United Nations also played a helpful role in
this process.

,I
,i

.'I

(

,.
i,~,l

·

';-.

6

.

~

..

i~ ,

.. .

.. "

,. .

.. . •

'4 ...'"

~.

•

~,

•

\

••

•

General Assembly - Twenty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

61. But it is, of course, the achievements of the people of
Equatorial Guinea that we celebrate today. They, in their
wisdom, have elected a Government of capable men who
have long sought full sovereignty for their country. They
have decided to enter the world scene as a unified country
of recognized potential. They have accomplished tlus
through peaceful and democratic means. Equatorial
Guinea's acllievement of independence attests to the
application of the high principles and purposes set forth in
the United Nations Charter, particularly the principle of
self-determination. These evenrs under~core my Government's belief that Equatorial Guinea is prepared to play a
constructive role in the United Nations and to use its best
efforts to participate in the building of a just world order.
62. The United States of America shares Equatorial
Guinea's hopes for peace and progress, because we believe
in the future of the new Africa. I am delighted to have had
tllis opporturlity personally to welcome the representatives
of Equatorial Guinea to their well-deserved seats in this
chamber.
63. Mr. TEVOEDJRE (Dahomey) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, my delegation would like to be
allowed to welcome your return among us, to express our
entire satisfaction at seeing you resume your functions as
President of the General Assembly, and to wish you better
health.
64. My· delegation is all the m\,re happy to see you here
now because we are celebrating the admission of the first
Spanish-speaking African State. This is a new and interesting event which should be duly noted.
65. The delegation of Dahomey expresses its warmest
congratulations to this new African country which has
come to swell the ranks of the independent States of
Africa, Equatorial Guinea, a country whose great pride at
this moment of its independence and of its admission to the
United Nations we well understand. We understand the
legitimate pride of the people of Equatorial Guinea in the
struggle they have waged to secure their independence, and
we warmly congratulate them on having broken the bonds
of the colorlial yoke and led their people to greater and
greater freedom.

freedom to which they are entitled. This is an opportunity
to remind Portugal that it is time for that country to make
the gesture that the international community expects of it,
before it is too late.
68. As has been emphasized, in Equatorial Guinea the
local population lives in full understanding with the
representatives of the former coloniul Power, the representatives of Spain, and it is useful to recall that Africa is
the continent of peace, the continent of dialogue, and that
Portugal is running a terrible risk, not only for itself but
also for the West, whicl~ it claims to defend, if it continues
completely outdated practices, practices wluch are fraught
with danger for international peace and security. There are
those who say that the Portuguese colonies do not yet
constitute a threat to international peace, but things may
change very rapidly, and we would hope that the friends of
Portugal wiII bring their influence to bear on that country
so that it may understand that Africa is indeed a continent
of dialogue and peace and that it would be a good thing jf
we were not forced to resort to violence to restore dignity
to the peoples of the Portuguese African colorues.
69. It is also opportune to remind the Government of
South Africa that there is a game to be played in Africa and
it is not the game wluch that country is now playing. We
would say to South Africa that its alliance with obscurantist Power~ like Portugal and Southern Rhodesia for the
continued exploitation of our African brothers represents a
grave danger. For the moment South Africa may be strong
miIitarily, but, as I say, things may change very quickly and
it w~uld be a good thing for the friends of those Powers in
Africa which seek to establish what a French writer has
called "the African counter-revolution" to see things in
their proper perspective again.
70. Africa is waiting to see how those gentlemen who do
not understand the virtue of dialogue, the virtue of African
understanding, are going to react.

06. We would greet the President of Equatorial Guinea,
H.E. Francisco Macfas Nguema, whose success at the recent
elections has made him the leader of his country, and to
wish him well.

71. Speaking of Portugal and of South Africa it is also
fitting to express the hope that the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland will
find again the tradition of decolonization which it has
already applied elsewhere in the world, including in
Africa-that that Government wiII honour that tradition
and understand the urgency and the gravity of the problem
of Southern Rhodesia, wluch is a problem of conscience
that, unfortunately today makes the United Kingdom the
"sick man" of the century.

67. May my delegation also extend its warmest congratulations to Spain on the striking example of co-operation with
the United Nations which that country has just set. Spain
deserves the approval of the Assembly, the more so since
some of its neighbour States wish to learn nothing and,
equally, to forget nothing. This is a good opportunity to
remind Portugal of the striking example wllich Spain has
just given us in Equatorial Guinea, to remind Portugal that
it is time that country co-operated with the United Nations,
that it is time it understood that its own interest, the
interest of its own people, lies in co-operating with the
United Nations and giving to its African colorlies the

72. The accession of Equatorial Guinea to independence is
a victory for the United Nations, for all Members of the
Organization. Many problems remain unsolved, but in
relation to some we do, nevertheiess, make progress step by
step, and the accession of Equatorial Guinea to independence is a triumph for us all. Once again we express great
satisfactioIl at the fruitful work done by the United Nations
Mission wrJch was sent to Equatorial Guinea to observe the
elections, undt:r the Ambassador of Niger, H:E. Adamov
Mayaki. This is In opportunity to pay a tribute to the very
fruitful work which the Mission performed in Equatorial
Guinea.

Mr. Astrom (Sweden), Vice-President, took the Chair.

...

·

.

, , < . . . . . . . . .•

......

I.

•

~

• '.

\

-

-

1714th meeting - 12 November 1968
73. Equatorial Guinea's accession to independence and its
admission to the United Nations constitute, as we have said,
new facts which are worthy of note. This is actually the
first time that a Spanish-speaking African country will be
sitting among us. We are accustomed in African forums to
hearing representatives of African States speaking French,
English, Arabic or our own, very limited loc:u tongues, but
this will be the first time that we shall be welcoming a
Spanish-speaking African State among us. We hope that this
will not only contribute to strengthening the bonds which
should normally exist between the ex-colony and its former
metropolitan country, for the greater good of both peoples-as has been seen in other parts of the world,
particularly in Africa-but that this will also help to
strengthen the fruitful bonds that should exist between the
various communities on both sides.
•,

j

74. The delegation of Dahomey hopes that this new event,
the admission of Equatorial Guin.:a to the United Nations
and its accession to independence among the other African
countries, will also help to strengthen the bonds that should
unite the African countries with the great world of Latin
America-countries speaking the Spanish or Portuguese
language, Portuguese being easily assimilated to the former.
My delegation believes that Equatorial Guinea's accession
to independence will make it possible for it to tighten its
bonds with the counlries of Latin America.
75. We often speak of the "third world". Perhaps it is time
that, slowly but surely, tluough concrete measures, we
began to understand that we have common interests and
that we should endeavour, in a much more comprehensive
manner, to solve the various problems which affect the
majority of the countries of the third world, be they in
Asia, Africa or Latin America.

..

. '

• i)

)

• -.

I

~. )., • ~

(

"

7

80. If I may say a few words about the importance of the
spirit of co-operation as we see it, we would all agree, I
think, that it has enabled our Organization to be associated
in the process of decolonization and to be represented on
the spot in order to give international public opinion the
guarantee of impartiality and to inspire the necessary
confidence am Jng the parties cO!1cerned, thus making
possible a transfer of powers in an atmosphere of complete
harmony, which is an essential basis of what we hope will
be a happy and prosperous future for the brother people of
that country.
81. My C01.ifitry feels bound to this new brother nation by
ties of friendship which we wish to reaffirm and strengthen,
not only within the framework of our common membership in the United Nations and the OAU, but also within
the framework ()f more direct and closer bilateral relations.
We have no doubt that the leaders of Equatorial Guinea
entertain similar feelings toward us. My country therefore
feels highly honoured to have been appointed by the
Secretary-General as a member of the important United
Nations mission to Equatorial Guinea. We should like to
take this opportunity of paying a well-deserved tribute to
the mission for having honourably and faithfully discharged
its responsibilities; and this, it should be emphasized, came
about thani"s to the spirit of co-operation displayed by all
the parties concerned.
82. It is ?Jso a great honour and a source of satisfaction
for my country to have been one of the countries which
today have the signal privilege of co-sponsorin~ the admission to the United Nations of Eql' 'torial Guinea-R cJuntry
to which! feel a great personal attachment. In this respect
we should like to join our voice to those preceding us from
this rostrum to express in our turn the wishes of the
Government and people of Niger for the success and
properity of the Government and people of Equatorial
Guinea, and to assure them of our deepest friendship and
solidarity.

76. My delegation is happy to welcome this brother
country of Equatorial Guinea, its Government, and its
delegation to the United Nations. We are sure that bonds of
deep friendship and brotherhood will bind my country. the
Republic of Dahomey, and the new country of Equatorial
Guinea, so that each in its own way will be able to work for
its own development with a view to the full flOUrishing of
mankind.

83. Situated west of Africa in the Gulf of Benin, with its
28,000 square kilometres and its 300,000 inhabitants,
Equatorial GuLtlea is composed of a continental portion and
many islands, the largest of which is Fernando Poo, where
the capital ofthe country, Santa Isabel, is situated.

77. Mr. MAYAKI (Niger) (interpretation from French):
May I express to Ambassador Arenales our deep satisfaction
at his prompt recovery and at his return to the Presidency
of the Assembly.

84. A country of industry and forestry, Guinea is among
the w0rld's largest producers of cocoa, a product which it
exports and which is one of its major resources. It also
produces wood, coffee, bananas and yams.

78. I am very happy, speaking on behalf of my Government and the people of Niger, to salute from this rostrum
an historic and unprecedented event for the Guinean
people: its accession to full sovereignty and its admission to
the international community.

85. Its pOPulatioJ, made up mainly of Fangs and Bubis,
consists primarily of farmers; they carry on a peaceful
existence and remain attached to work in the fields.

79. Equatorial Guinea's accession to independence has
been acclaimed in the Special Committee as well as in the
Fourth Committee and in the Security Council. Today it is
the General Assembly's turn to welcome this new State
among its Members and to pay a great tribute to the
courage and civic maturity of the Guineans, to the political
courage of their leaders, and to the spirit of co-operation
displayed by the administering Power, Spain.

:

86. Of Hispanic culture, the intellectual elite, which
constitutes the vanguard of the country, is progressive, and
is ready to shoulder its responsibilities in our Organization,
thus bringing to bear the experience of the rich culture,
open-minded yet circumspect, severe yet liberal, to which it
is proud to lay claim.
87. A profoundly Christian people, the Equatorial
Guineans aspire to peace and freedom, and respect scrupulously the Charter of the United Nations and the Charter of

.'"',....

'"

\

8

General Assembly - Twenty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

the OAU, which explains the fact that scarcely a month
after their accession to national sovereignty we see them on
the road which leads to the United Nations.
88. We are sure that the young Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, under C1e wise and enlightened guidance of its first
President, H.E. Mr. Francisco Macias Nguema, will contribute to !he extent of its means to the ever-growing
success of our work.

;,/'
"

89. Mr. DUGEl\.SUREN (Mongolia): I have come to titis
rostrum to fulfil a very pleasant duty, On behalf of the
delegations of t':le People'~ Republic of Bulgaria, the
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the RepUblic of
Cuba, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the Hungarian
People's Republic, the Polish People's Republic, the Socialist Republic of Romania, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the
Mongolian People's Republic, I have the great honour and
privilege of extendli1g warm congratulatirJfis to Equatorial
Guinea on its admission to the United Nations.

90. In welcoming that new Member State, we convey to
its people the sincere feelings of goodwill and friendship of
the peoples and Governments of our respective countries,
who rigorously champion the sacred cause of national
independence and social progress of all nations.
91. The small but militant people of Equatorial Guinea
have fought hard for their freedom and their right to
self-determination in the course of nearly two centuries of
foreign domination. It is that struggle which, in unison with
the powerful revolutionary national liberation movement of
our time, has compelled the alien rulers to grant indepen·
dence to that country.
92. On this auspicious occasion, we wholeheartedly wish
the people of Equatorial Guinea every success in developing
~heir country along the road of national reconstruction and
prosperity and in making a worthy contribution to the
cause of peace, friendship and co-operation among nations.
93. Mr. RUDA (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish):
The emergence of a new nation' as a sovereign State
following the independence of a people formerly subject to
colonial control is a "red letter day" for the international
community, and my country experiences great joy at seeing
the pattern of our own history followed so closely. That is
why my delegation has always expressed this sincere
sentiment in the Security Council and the General Assembly whenever a new State has come to claim its rightful
seat in this Organization.
94. As the draft resolution before us of which my
delegation is a spon:;or refers to a new State with which my
country has many common ties, we should like to avail
ourselves of tlUs opportunity to dwell somewhat further on
these feelings. Spain has set an example worthy of being
followed with its record in zealously abiding by the
decisions of our Organization which accompanied the
process of emancipation and established the guidelines to
be followed for the independence of Equatorial Guinea.
95. My delegation fmds it especially noteworthy that the
United Nations has been joined by a new State situated in a

contineilt far from my country. But we both have a
common language and tradition, which it has been our
privilege to inherit from Spain. We are sure that this will
serve not only to strengthen the ties already existing
between Argentina and Equatorial Guinea, but also to bring
closer together the two major regional groups of which
both countries are members and which have found in this
Organization a fertile field to make their common interests
a reality.
96. Equatorial Guinea has achieved independence in a
world that is growing even smaller. In recognition of that
reality, the preamble and the ninth chapter of the Constitution of that new State contain provisions ensuring close ties
with our world Organization, The Constitution of Equatorial Guinea, in establishing the supremacy of the Purposes
and Principles of the United Nations Charter in its
international relations, has taken a very important step and
set an excellent example with regard to the establishment
of the new international political order.
97. Finally, my delegation would like to touch on two
special features of that new State. First of all, national and
territorial integration were brought about before independent life was achieved, in accordance with the principles
embodied in the resolutions of the General Assembly.
Secondly, Equatorial Guinea will clearly take its flrst steps
as a sovereign nation, with the dynamism characteristic of a
political entity that is confldent that it is functioning well.
Both those features should serve as an exanple for colonial
Powers, which have not always correctly put into practice
the principles of our Organization,

i
..i

98. The reasons that I have set forth here very briefly
account for the joy of my Government and people as iliey
enthusiastically welcome Equato:lal Guinea to membership
in the United Nations.
99. Mr. fEON DEL VALLE (Mexico) (interpretation from
Spanish): Allow me to associate myself with those delegations that have expressed pleasure at noting the recovery
of Mr. Arenales and seeing him resume his functions as
President of the General Assembly.

100. On behalf of the Government of Mexico, my
delegation wishes to offer warm congratulations to the
Government of Equatorial Guinea and to its delegation on
the occasion of the entry into the United Nations of this
new Republic and its vigorous people.
101. For us this is a particularly happy event. Equatorial
Guinea and Mexico have close social ties, we have a
common language, and we are sure that both of us support
respect for human dignity, which was at the very origin of
our independence and freedom.

102. The United Nations is enriched and further strengthened in welcoming this new nation to membership. We can
expect from Equatorial Guinea a valuable contribution in
furthering the principles of our Organization, as a result of
its own experience, and especially in the arduous and
difficult process of general decolonization, but we are
convinced that it will not be only in this field that the
Organization will be assisted and strengthened by the
contribution of Equatorial Guinea.

I

A

1714th meeting - 12 November 1968

9

'l<:
',)

-··"l'.i
d

······.·.i
...

103. Mexico has constantly advocated respect for universality in the purest sense in the United Nations and did so
even before thi: San Francisco Conference, at which our
Foreign Minister submitted his views on the Cumbarton
Oaks draft, and we have always felt that this idel.lI of
universality would signify an Organization made up of
sovereign States, based on the right of self-determination of
peoples, which should enjoy the guarantees provided for 1)y
our Charter and should also make their opinions heard in a
community of independent nations.
104. After acquiring independpnce, Equatorial Guinea has
set an example of what an independent nation can do,
which we feel is the basis for proper international civic
responSibility, and we bid this new nation welcome.
105. Mr. LOURIE (Israel): Mr. President, first allow me to
convey through you to the President of the General
Assembly an expression of the great joy with which we saw
him resume his duties in the Assembly. In the Jewish
liturgy there is a special prayer for those who have happily
emerged from grave danger. It is in that spirit that we
record with thankfulness and relief the return of
Mr. Arenales to health and to the leadership of the
Assembly.
106. It is with a sense of profound satisfaction that we
add our vcice to those of the representatives who have
welcomed Equatorial Guinea as a new sovereign and equal
Member of our Organization. Ever since the forward
march of Africa towards freedom and dignity began a
decade ago, Israel, true to the philosophy underlying its
own re-emergence into sovereignty after centuries of
dispersion and persecution, has taken an active interest in
the process of self-emancipation of the peoples of Africa.
The presence among us of a new Member State of Africa,
added to the two otller African countries, Mauritius and
Swaziland, which have happiiy joined us recently, constitutes an encouraging sign that this process, yet to be
completed, has not come to a standstill. The independence
of Equatorial Guinea has instilled in us the hope that a
correct understanding of historic trends will cause the boon
of freedom to be enjoyed by all.
107. I take great pleasure in extending, on behalf of my
delegation, a fraternal welcome to the delegation of
Equatorial Guinea and giving expression from this tribune
to our sincere wishes for the progress, in peace and
prosperity, of the people and Government of Equatorial
Guinea.
108. Mr. VELA (Guatemala) (interpretation from Spanish): The delegation of Guatemala has already stated that it
wishes to sponsor draft resolution A/L.551 and Add.!,
containing the recommendations of the Security Council
[A/7310J regarding the request for admission to membership submitted by Equatorial Guinea [A/7306J. The
involuntary omission of our name from the list of sponsors
has fortunately been corrected, and now we are pleased to
reaffirm our complete support for the admission of a State
which forms part of the African community and also of the
Spanish-speaking community.
109. It has been said that speaking in a mother tongue
means thinking within a cultural tradition. This prompts us

to say that there are strong ties between Central America,
Latin America and Equatorial Guinea, a nation which, as
our Secretary-General correctly pointed out, achieved
independence as a single entity in peace and harmony.
110. It is with great pleasure that Guaterr31a welcomes
this new Member of our democratic system and we look
forward to its co-operation in the work of the United
Nations. We trust that internal peace and friendly international relations will preside over the prospelity which
should come from its natural resources and particularly its
human resources.
Ill. Mr. REYES (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
First of all we would like to say how pleased we are to see
Dr. Emilio Arenales Catalan presiding over the first part of
this session.

I
!l\'

~..

Jk

~,~,

.f

:~.
"i
;.

'''':

,',
I
....

, .

112. Just one month ago it was our pleasure to celebrate
Equatorial Guinea's day of independence-12 October. This
territory made up of the islands of Ferrumdo Poo, Corisco,
Elobey and Annob6n and Rio Muni on the mainland, is, to
be sure, a small nation, but we are convinced that because
of its moral significance it will bring its influence to bear in
this Assembly just as we all do.
113. These people have come together to create a nation
and in that process Spain, the mother of many peoples,
acting in accordance with the principles of decolonization
contained in the Charter, has facilitated the self-determination of Equatorial Guinea.
114. This is a particularly significant occasion for us in
Chile. In 1966 we took part in the delegation of the
Committee of Twenty-Four which initiated the talks
leading to today, and in 1968, this year, together with
Syria, Iran, Niger and Tanzania, we witnessed the success of
the referendum and the elections which were recently held.
By the free decision of the people H.E. Francisco Macias
Nguema is now President of the Republic and a legislative
assembly is now gUiding this new nation. Chile, which has
always maimained the best of relations with African
nations and shares the concerns of all developing nations,
feels that these bonds will be strengthened by the independence of this new Spanish-speaking nation in that vast
continent.
115. Our best wishes for prosperity and happiness in
justice and peace go to the people of Equatorial Guinea.
116. Mr. HAMID (pakistan): As this is the first time my
delegation has taken the floor since the recovery of the
President of the General Assembly we take this opportunity
of expressing our great pleasure at seeing him back at the
helm of affairs of this Assembly. We congratulate the
President for the courage and devotion to duty he has
shown in assuming the heavy burden of the office of
President so soon after a major operation. We extend to
him our warmest wishes for a long and fruitful life.
117. It is with a great deal of pride that my delegation
welcomes the admission of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea to membership of this august assembly of nations.
The fact that the Security Council una..'1imously endorsed
the resolution on the question of the admission of

t';

}
i~

~..

I

ID

General Assembly - Twenty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

Equatorial Guinea, a resolution of which Pakistan was a
co-sponsor, is a matter of deep satisfaction to our delegation. The admission of this new State to the United
Nations not only is ,. positive step forward and a vindication of the principle of universality-which is perhaps one
of the most fundame;ltal ideals of this Organization-but it
underscores the reality that colonialism is irrevocably dead.
,. <'

lIB. In this regard we would also like to take this
opportunity of expressing our sincere appreciation to the
former administering Power in its efforts to bring about the
accession to independence of Equatorial Guinea in a spirit
of co-operation and justice. In making it possible for the
United Nations presence to be established in the Territory
in accordance with the wishes of the General Assembly,
Spain has set an important precedent which will serve as a
valuable model in the decolonization process. We than.1c
Spain for this perception in understanding the realities and
wishes ot the century .
II9. The admission of the pef'ple of Equatorial Guinea to
the United Nations is a step which my delegation wholeheartedly supports. We extend our warmest congratulations
to the President and the Government and the people of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea on this occasion. We
reiterate our firm conviction that the participation of this
independent republic in the work of the United Nation.,
will make a significant contribution to the promotion of
world peace and respect for human rights. The admirable
role that the United Nations has played in accelerating its
progress to independence has now culminated in the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea being a sovereign amI equal
Member of this great Organization.

120. Mr. JOUEJATI (Syria): I wish first to congratulate
His Excellency the President of the Assembly on the
recovery of his precious health and to express the wish that
his high office will not place too heavy a burden on him.
121. Equatorial Guinea is an African country small in size
but right in the qualities of its people, the potential of its
land and the maturity of its leaders. Thus its entry into the
United Nations acquires special significance and its experience and con~ribution will not be minor. What must add to
the satisfaction of the international community is the fact
that its accession to independence has been achieved in
splendid conditions of unity, peace, freedom and harmony.
Both the maturity of its people and the warm and
unreserved co-operation of Spain have contributed to the
creation of such an excellent atmosphere.
122. From the very beginning the goal was set on
independence and unity and both were achieved. The
United Nations, in whose missions to Equatorial Guinea my
country had the honour to participate, played a constructive role in this process of independence. Not only did
Spain, by fully co-operating with the United Nations,
admirably fulfU its obligations as the then administering
Power, but it also set an examplc of how this process of
decolonization need not be controversial., violent, or entail
blood and suffering and, in the last analysis, ne<,' not deny
the fundamental bases of right and justice.
123. The happy result, as exp~cted, is evident in the
excellent relations now prevailing between Spain and

Equatorial Guinea as equal and sovereign partners, and
indeed in the warm welcome reserved for Equatorial Guirrea
in the United Nations and the universal appreciation of the
conduct of Spain.

124. On behalf of the Arab States, we wish to express to
the people and Government of Equatorial Guinea, and
especially to its valiant President, Mr. Francisco Macias
Nguema, our best wishes for a prosperous future. To the
people and Government of Spain, its great leader and its
active delegation in the United Nations, we wish to reiterate
our high appreciation. To our Secretary-General we wish to
express our appreciation for the vigilant and constructive
role he played so successfully all through the various phases
leading to this historic event.
125. Finally, to the delegation of Equatorial Guinea, all
the Arab delegations wish to extend their welcome, the
guarantee of their sincere brotherhood and the pledge of
their full co-operation.
126. Mr. PEREZ GUERRERO (Venezuela) (interpretation
from Spanish): Like other delegations the delegation of
Venezuela is indeed genuinely pleased at the speedy
recovery of President Arenales and his return to his post of
leadership in the GeneI'al Assembly.
127. On behalf of the delegation of Venezuela and on
behalf of its people and Government, we wish to cOilgratulate very warmly the people of Equatorial Guinea on having
achieved independence with the effective support of Spain
in cpmpliance with the rules governing our conduct in this
Organization.
128. We warmly welcome the delegation of Equatorial
Gu~ea to the ~neral Assembly. We wish to express our

sincerest best wishes for Equatorial Guinea's prosperity as
the first Iberian colony to achieve independence in tlus
century. This is a source of pride for countries of Iberian
origin which achieved independence in th;; last century.
This is a new bond between Latin America and the African
continent. It is an example for those colonial Powers which
do not yet realize that the status of a colony is transitory,
and that only independence is genuinely lasting.

129. Mr. KANO (Nig(:ria): My delegation would like to
join all other delegations in showing its pleasure at seeing
the President of the General Assembly back in his office,
presiding over its deliberations.
130. I have asked to speak particularly because of the
special ties that have existed between Nigeria and the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea. It is with a deep sense of
pride and honour that, on behalf of my Government, I
congratulate Equatorial Guinea on its adrl.ission to full
membership of the United Nations. Nigeria was also highly
delighted to co-sponsor its application for admission. The
birth of a new nation naturally gives us tremendous
satisfaction and joy not only because it is a fulfilment of
the high purposes and principles of our Charter, but also
because every time a new nation is born in Africa, it is a
signal that colonialism is on the way out. Its admission to
membership of this Organization i3 further proof that all
nations of the world can and should contribute towards the
attainment of the principles and purposes of its Charter

1714th meeting - 12 Novemb~r 1968
which are international peace and security, respect for the
dignity and worth of the human person and a decent regard
for the equal rights of men and women and of nations large
anrl ~mall. In the case of Equatorial Guinea, the Governm
and people of Nigeria take special satisfaction that it
has today jomed the world Organization as a sovereign and
independent country.
131. In his mes3age of congratulations to His Excellency
Mr. Francisc0 Macias Nguema, President of Equatorial
Guinea, Major General Yakubu Gowon, Commander-inChief and Head of the Federal Military Government of
Nigeria, expressed the sincere hope of the Government and
people of Nigeria that Nigeria and Equatorial Guinea would
fmd increased strength in the charter of the Organization of
African Unity which would bring both countries LO the goal
of African unity.
132. For generations Nigeria and Equatorial Guinea have
maintained very cordial and fraternal relations. Many
nationals of Nigeria live and work in the beautiful island of
Fernando Poo and in the other integral territories of
Equatorial Guinea. Their presence, happiness and contributions have enriched and will continue to enrich the ties
which bind the two sister States.
133. I cannot conclude my statement without paying a
tribute to Spain whose enlightened policy has led to the
birth of another African State and its subsequent ad'll~ssion
to membership of the United Nations. In the days ahead
my delegation hopes that Equatorial Guinea anu Nigeria
will continue to enjoy the very cordial and fraternal
relations which historically exist between our countries.

I
I.

134. Mr. CUHRUK (Turkey) (interpretation from
French): On behalf of my delegation and of the members
of the Asian group, it is my pleasure to welcome the
delegation of Equatorial Guinea to the General Assembly.
In full unanimity we congratulate Equatorial Guinea on its
accession to independence and its admission to the international community as a sovereign and independent State.
The members of the Asian group are alsc happy to see that
Equatorial Guinea's accession to independence and the
process of the peaceful transfer of powers by Spain took
place in conformity with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV).
135. It is my pleasant duty on this historic occasion to
extend to this new State Member of the United Nations the
congratulations of the members of the Asian group and, on
their behalf, to extend our best wishes for the well-being
and prosperity of the noble people of Equatorial Guinea.
136. Mr. KOUYATE (Guine~) (interpretation from Spanish): Sir,ce the representative of the Republic of Burundi
has already spoken on behalf of 40 independent African
nations, it is not really necessary for my delegation to speak
on this occasion. However, on behalf of the Government of
the Republic of Guinea, I wish, in the language of
Cervantes, to convey to the people of Equatorial GuiP.ea
our most sincere congratulations on its entry into the
international community.
137. As a sovereigll independent State, we are confident
that Equatorial Guinea will make an effective contribution

11

not only to the United Nations, but also to the OAU in its
constant struggle against imperiali8m, Portuguese colonialism and neo-colonialism throughout the world.
138. In conclusion, I should like to convey to the
delegation of the Republic of Equawr;al Guinea the fact
that the people, the Governlllent and the chief of State of
Guinea, Mr. Sekou Toure, will always stand by it in the
future.
139. The PRESIDENT: I take pleasure in inviting His
Excellency Mr. !bongo, special representative of the President of Equatorial Guinea, to address the General Assembly.
140. Mr. mONGO (Equatorial Guinea, Special representative of the President of Equatorial GUinea) (interpretation
from Spanish): First of all, on behalf afmy delegation and
Equatorial Guinea, I should like to say how pleased we are
at the return to hea!th of President Arenales. I have had an
opportunity to know him, and have enjoyed fme personal
relations with him, ii1. addition to our more official
relations.
141. To my brother from Guinea-the Guinea which is
above the equator-I should like to say that in my country
on parle [rancais as well, but at present I should like to
speak our official language, Spanish.
142. On behalf of the sovereign and independent people
of Equatori~ Guinea and of the first President ~)f the
Republic, H.E. Francisco Nacias Nguema, and his Government, it is my great honour to preside over the Equatorial
Guinean delegation on this occasion which will go down in
the history of our country: the admission of the independent, free and sovereign nation of Equatorial Guinea to the
United Nations.
143. A few moments ago, after the vote, the community
of sovereign nations welcomed Equatorial Guinea as a
full-fledged Member, not only within the limits of international law-art objective attained on 12 October last-but
also unde.- the tel1ets of the Charter of the United Nations.
For us, and for the Organization, the presence of the one
hundred and twenty-sixth State is significant in the trend
towards universality which has asserted itself in the United
Nations in the last decade. This trend has exceeded the
fondest expectations 'Jf any who atte:l.ded the San Francisco Conference.
144. Prompted by this universalist spirit and believing that
genuine independence entails full acceptance of the great
and small obligations of the modern world, the leaders of
Equatorial Guinea, in a letter signed by our President on
25 October last, requested admission to membership in this
Organization [A/7306] and accepted the obligations imposed by the Charter, pledging themselves to abide by the
Charter's principles.
145. Our internatio:-lal vocation should astonish no or.e. It
was through this Organization and its Committee on
decolonization that the slow but decisive process which led
to the independence of Equatorial Guinea took place. For
this reason, on this occasion when the voice of independent
Equatorial Guinea is heard for the first time in this

12

General Assembly - Twenty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

gathering representing most of the sovereign nations of the
world, we wish to express our gratitude to the United
Nations. We would pay a tribute to what it represents and
to what is being achieved here to make a reality of the
principles contained in Article 73, Chapter XI, of the
Charter and Gc,leral Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), which
deal with the liberation of colonial peoples.

146. We have come to the United Nations at a timP when
decolonization is considered by some to be a kind of
cC'llspiracy promoting disorder and by others to be a topic
which should be abandoned, given the vicious opposition of
some countries to the idea of freeing their oppressed
colonies. Those who, like us, have thrown aside the psychic
and physical traces of colonization know that this process is
not one concerning which it is appropriate to speculate
whether it is right or wrong for some peoples to acquire
independence. The indivisibility of independence and
justice require!; the setting in motion of all human and
political resources to free the oppressed peoples. There can
be no room for silence, or for the principle of compromise.
Independence cannot be replaced ..
147. The action of an international organization in a given
field is t..~e result of the common efforts of its members in
that field. The independence of Equatorial Guinea has been
the result of the work of many and on this happy occasion,
as we assume our future responsibilities, we carmot fail to
pay a tribute to those efforts.
148. On behalf of my country and my Government, I wish
to pay a special tribute to our brothers in Africa and Asia.
The struggle of those who were the first to free themselves
was our struggle. Their triumph, leading to the independence of their countries, we praised in silence. Today we
offer the fruit of our efforts to 'them since we have
benefited from their support in the Fourth Committee, in
particular since 1962, when for the first tinle our present
Foreign Minister, Atanasio Ndong Miyone, brought our
claim to independence before this Organization.
149. Only a few days ago Equatorial Guinea was admitted
to membership in the OAU. Thus we achieved the first of
our goals-to join our brothers in Africa in a common
continental effort to pursue the political, economic and
social unity of our respective peoples. For reasons beyond
our control we have been kept aside from the spiritual
mainstream of that great continent, which is still exploited
by racism and colonialism. On achieving full sovereignty we
have wished to join other nations with whom we have the
same human roots and common experience as well as the
same approach to the future. We shall continue to work for
African unity in a forward-looking way, through regionalism or gradual integration. Everything that is designed to
harmonize the human, economic and social resources of our
continent will find our country and people ready to
co-operate.
150. In this spirit of co-operation our country has offered
humanitarian assistance to provide some relief from the
horrors of the conflict the sound of whose guns, forty miles
away, reaches our ears.
151. Our Government co-operates closely with all peacelOVing African nations which seek the independence of

peoples. To those our brothers we pledge this co-operation.
We shall not sacrifice the sovereignty of our country for the
sake of military bases which upset the political and strategic
balance of the region. We trust that our territorial integrity
and our independence will be respected, and our Government, supported by the Charter, will take the necessary
preventive action to safeguard our sovereignty and ensure
tl)e continuity of our State and our institutions.

152. There is a gr0up of countries, to which the President
belongs as a S01\ of that hemisphere, to which I would give a
special message. We desire close economic and cultural
co-operation with the utin American peoples. They
understand our cause, the cause of independence. Speaking
the same language and having had the same administering
Power. W~ ,1ave very powerful spiritual ties although our
colonial experience is different. Four centuries ago our
forefathers left our shores, and their influence can now be
felt in the history, literature and arts of most of the
countries of Latin America. In Ameiica, our former
administering Power created a cosmic race which enabled
us, without losing our African personality, to enrich that
race and make it one of the most universal human and
cultural forces in the world, where influence is felt
throughout four continents. This is not mere wishful
thinking; it is not nostalgia for the past; it is a real hope for
the future. We wish to be a bridge between Latin America
and Africa.
153. Our appreciation goes to all nations which love
peace, progress and the freedom of peoples. We pay a
tribu'te to all those Powers which supported decolonization
in our country and we promise them our forthright
co-operation within and outside this Organization.
154. Our decolonization has one special feature: the final
stage witnessed full co-operation between the United
Nations and the administering Power. At this sombre
moment in the colonial proces~, when intransigence and
lack of understanding have taken a more concrete form in
some states which have colonized Africa, we must express
our appreciation to Spain for having gUide( us towards
independence. It was an arduous and difficult Cl . -:. AS in
all human undertakings, the inlportant thing is the fmal
result, regardless of shortcomings along the way.
155. There was an open dialogue, which has been referred
to by one African representative, between our leaders and
officials in Spain, and this we welcomed because our leaders
have always believed that the inlportant thing is not to
reject colonization but to surpass it.
156. Our independence from Spain has broad human
significance over and above its political benefits which, in
the short term, may be a subject for speculation. Our
independence is the result of a genuine humanistic revolution: action to liberate the people politically, economically
and socially. If a nation is to be liberated, it must liberate
itself. This is one aspect of 'decolonization which has been
overshadowed by other aspects to the detriment of true
human values. The wind which has blown across Spain
towards Guinea is not a strong wind: it can also blow
towards the Atlantic and not become a tornado.

157.
decolo
thy to
anachr
cising
histori
with S
exists
other's
158 . .
As~eml

Nation
of our
like to

159.
life at
serious
nomic
corom
the co
of irra
more t
influe
with a
indepe
the w
serious
the m
indepe
the'lp
into t
dinlen
quarte
Counc
scepti
the so
relatin

160.
turbul
our p
becaus
unhesi
maint
pared
the eq
They
social
such g
conce
been
Unite
paragr
world
nation
andf
peace

w

1714th meeting - 12 November 1968
157. A decolonizing nation has the right to demand
decolonization. The people of Guinea extend thei!"sympathy to all those who are the victims of colonization, or
anachronistic situations which prevent them from exercising their territorial supremacy in areas where their
historical sovereignty entitles them to do so. Our relations
with Spain will be based upon the kind of friendship that
exists between two peoples both of which respect each
other's independence.
158. A Latin American Foreign Minister, speaking in this
this very rostrum, said that the United
Nations was the Organization of last resort. Perhaps because
of our enthusiasm, due to recent independence, we should
like to say that it is the OrganiLtion of great expectations.
As~embly, from

159. We are conscious that we have entered int;,;rnational
life at a time of serious political crises, when there is a
serious imbalance in the distribution of power and economic forces, as a result of which the international
commmiity must search for new ways and means of settling
the conflicts which become more acute every day because
of irrationality and passion. We are living at a time when
more than ever before egoistic efforts to expand areas of
influence and a narrow view of national interests, identified
with a unilateral interpretation of national sovereignty and
independence, are increasing the imbalance which exists in
the world. We are aware that in the future we must face
serious problems, many of which we hardly suspected in
the many years during which we were fl ihting for our
independence. We are also aware that, perh,lps because of
the ?pparently apocalyptic situation of the wo,ld, the entry
into the community of nations of a cour. try of our
dimensions might give rise to some scepticism. in certain
quarters. I am pleased, however, that neither in the Security
Council nor in the General Assembly have we found any
scepticism. In spite of everything, some doubt the ability of
the so-called small nations to take part in solving problems
relating to international peace and security.

7

160. The irony is that the only cases of peace in this
turbulent world so lacking in tolerance are the countries of
our physical and political dimensions. It is they who,
because of their love of peace, are called upon to comply
unhesitatingly with the principles of the Charter. They can
maintail1 international peace and security. They are prepared to encourage friendly relations based on respect for
the equality of rights and the free determination of peoples.
They advocate international co-operation in economic and
social fields and can hannonize common efforts to attain
such goals. Provided that the requirement that the entity
concerned be a State, a subject of international law, has
been met, there should be no conditions for entry into the
United Nations other than those set forth in Article 4,
paragraphs 1 and 2, of the Charter. On a few occasions
world peace has been threatened by the arrogance of small
nations. We believe that although, in the last resort, power
and force may be the monopoly of a few, participation in
peace should be the privilege of all.
161. In that connexion, I should like to bring before you
the following words uttered by a distinguished African
diplomat not so very long ago in the Security Council. The
statesman said:

13

id

"When there is a conflict between two small States, the
conflict disappears. When the conflict is between a major
Power and a small country, the small country disappears.
When there is a dispute between two major Powers, then
the United Nations disappears."

r

162. We have said that this Organization is an Organization of great expectations because even the narrowest
interpretation of its Charter leaves the way open to search
for means of enduring international peace and security,
take collective action to protect peace and do away with
acts of aggression and other threats to the international
order.

16
pr
op

163. A careful consideration of the Charter shows that
there are four cardinal points which guided its drafting in
San Francisco. First, the question of peace and collective
security and peaceful means of settling disputes arising as a
result of conflicts of national interests; secondly, promotion of economic, social, cultural and educational activities
as a means of promoting world peace; thirdly, faith in
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the rights of men
and women and of nations large and small. Finally, respect
for the concepts arising from customary and conventional
international law and the general principles of law. Each of
these principles is expressed in various articles of the
Charter of the Organization. The first principle concerns
the Security Council, which reflects the influence of each
of the Powers concerned with the matters falling within the
competence of the Council: peace and security, when they
are threatened by a dispute or situation which might lead to
a violent conflict. The sanctions which are prOVided there
are justified by the fact that some nations bear major
responsibility for a violent breach of international peace.
164. The equilibrium I mentioned €arlier can be achieved,
on the one hand, by granting special treatment to the
nations which assume the main responsibility in the case of
a violent breach of the international order, and on the
other, by ensuring participation on the basis of a system of
representation which respects the geographical and cultural
composition of the world.
165. Trying to judge the United Nations solely by
Chapters VI and VII of the Charter would be to minimize
the great undertakings of this Organization, which is one of
the great achievements of history: the establishment of a
world forum where countries large and small and human
beings of all creeds, races and origins discuss the whole
range of problems presented by life.
166. The Charter is also an instrument for economic and
social development, for it a~signs the Organization an
important role, namely that of creating conditions of
stability and well-being and promoting human rights,
parallel to its obligations to maintain international peace
and security. Perhaps this is one of the most important
points relating to the presence of so-called small countries
in this Organization.
167. My delegation, on entering the United Nations,
believes that this part of the Charter is of major importance. Ten years ago the world picture showed a longitudinal confrontation along the line of the meridians
between different economic systems with well-defmed

17
tra
bal

. "·.··.·..1'
~.".
.'.

tl:1
"".i

;;.'0'.1'
-!

1

172.
shad
that
righ

14

General Assembly - Twenty-third Session -- Plenary Meetings

ideological concepts. Today, the confrontation follows the
line of the parallels, and is a confrontation between north
and south. There is no longer an ideological struggle per se,
and there is no longer a conflict between the "haves" and
the "have nots". Today the movement is more dramatic.
There is a conflict between those who have more and more,
on the one hand, and those who have less and less, on the
other.

guarantee the rights and freedoms of the individual recognized in 'the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
proclaim respect for freedom of conscience and religion,
association, meeting, expression, residence and domicile,
the right to property, education and proper conditions of
work ...". The State also promotes the development of
unions and co-operatives and ensures the rights of the
workers.

I68 . These lines diverge with regard to growth and
productivity but converge when the tensions generated by
opposing interests intensify.

175. Article 4 of our Constitution states that any act of
racial, ethnic or religious discrimination or any act which is
in violation of the internal or external security of the State
or which infringes the territorial integrity of the State will
be punishable by law.

169. Many speakers, not necessarily from our hemisphere,
have described the economic and commercial imbalance in
the world of today; the results of New Delhi left a bad taste
in the mouths of many, including those who were not even
present there. Those speakers have spoken in favour of a
better and fairer distribution of the commodities produced
by developing countries and of a liberalization of customs
and protectionist policies of a monopolistic nature on an
international scale. Many have said they were in favour of
legislating questions relating to freight charges and other
invisible income. This is one of the problems which wiII be
of direct concern to my Government as a natural consequence of our economic infrastructure. The weakness of the
position of the countries in our area vis-a-vis the large
ecq,nomic units involved in international trade can be as
great a threat to international peace and co-operation in the
long term as can a militaristic or aggressive policy in the
short term.
170. It is therefore necessary to develop new methods of
trade and trade regulations aimed at redressing the present
balance, which is unfavourable to our countries.
171. In the face of an exclusively bilateral approach
imposed in the light of interests alien to our own national
interest the Government of Guinea wiII go along with these
bilateral agreements when its interests are protected, and
wiII promote multilateral relations through international
organizations. We know that the development of our
country cannot depend on passive hopes of foreign assistance. We wish to be the first to help ourselves by
developing our humaf' and natural resources to the maximum.

176. On our continent, 23 years after the United Nations
was founded, 20 years after the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, in the southern part of Africa more than 20
million Africans live under the yoke of the vilest form of
exploitation: thecolonialist dystem, imposed with impunity
on our brothers in Angola, Mozambique, Silo Tome and
Principe and Portuguese Guinea (flissau) and the inhuman
situation of the Africans in Rhodesia, Namibia and South
Africa.

180.
zatio
We
kind
princ
tant
itself
State
law i

._)

181.
spirit
Equ
same
to e
tion
coml
that
Equ
Gov

177. Very little can be said here at the present time by my
delegation which has not been said by others regarding
those areas of human and political conflict in the southern
part of our continent. We can only say that we, too, are
indignant and endorse the criticism which other peaceloving and freedom-loving peoples have expressed. Together
with the joy which we feel on becoming a Member of the
United Nations we have a feeling of gloom, caused by the
agony of our brothers in that areJ of South Africa, to
whom we convey an expression of our support, encouraging
them to continue the struggle until they have completely
freed themselves of exploitation and the cancer of racism.
It has been said that some may be incapable of abiding by
the principles of the Charter. In that region the Charter has
been flouted. World opinion has been silent. The advocates
of that situation, more than anyone else, are the real
mini-States.

173. Decolonization for Equatorial Guinea will be incomplete if it does not go hand in hand with a more openminded, more dynamic and more humane society.

178. We in Equatorial Guinea are prepared to make of our
small country a great nation. We have assumed the
responsibility of participating in international affairs. We
have agreed to abide by the norms of international
co-existence. In Article 9 our Constitution contains some of
the most advanced legal tenets of the twentieth century. In
Article 55 it provides that the juridical order in Guinea will
be in accordance with the generally recognized norms of
international law. Article 57 refers to international treaties
and states that the provisions cannot be modified, derogated from or suspended except as provided therein or in
accordance with general international law .

174. Joining the United Nations in this International Year
for Human Rights, designated by General Assembly resolution 2339 (XXII), places upon us obligations which go
beyond the stipulations of our Constitution. Our Constitution clearly reflects that. In Article 3 we read: "The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea shall promote the political,
economic and social development of its people and ensure
equality before the law for all its people, regardless of
origin, race, sex or religion. The State shall recognize and

179. To many who take a selfish view of international
relations, this advanced step towards the rule of the
principles of international law over internal law , or so-called
municipal law , may seem to be a kind of act of suicide. It is
not. It is an expression of our desire to participate in
everything that is happening in the world today; in history,
which cannot allow anyone to move backwards. On fre
other hand, we are concerned at the fact that small nations,
on joining international society, have found principles and

172. The United Nations Charter was drafted in the
shadow of two spectres, that of the Second World War and
that of the horrible memories of thp. violation of human
rights dUring and after the war.

pract
custo
areas
be a
impo
princ
princ
beca
impo
princ
of th
and

182.
cony
varie
to p
cult
mu
awa

c

•

" "

Re

184
rem
obje
yes

~~~~~_~~~~.,~ .. · c c _ .• ~'.~.,c~
c~._~
•
_
_____,
,_,_,__" _._. __'-.
.....;...., - .• ~_~L-,_. _.~_

"=,i.",-aii':::::

il

1714th meeting - 12 November 1968
practices which are not widespread but which have become
customary among certain Powers and in certain cultural
areas. International society is decentralized. Principles must
be accepted by way of a consensus and must not be
imposed by one cultufal area on others. The elementary
principle of the voluntary acceptance of the general
principles of international law is not valid when one Power,
because of its economic or physical force, endeavours to
impose a unilateral view on others under the guise of a
principle generally accepted in international practice. One
of those principles concerns the succession of sovereignty
and all that that entails.
180. The succession of sovereignty, applied to decolonzation, is perhaps the final expression of legal colonialism.
We believe that with independence there emerges a new
kind of sovereignty, fitting the new circumstances. The
principle of rebus sic stantibus becomes even more important when not only the circumstances but also the subject
itself change. A new State is different from the predecessor
State and the emergence of a new subject of international
law is in and of itself a new circumstance.
181. On joining the United Nations we believe that in the
soirit of the Charter there are three ways in which
Equatorial Guinea can participate with full rights and the
same capacity for action as any other PowP.r. I am referring
to economic, social and cultural development, the promotion of human rights and the creation of furtherance of
common values in the acceptance of the legal principles
that are to govern international relations. The people of
Equatorial Guinea do not have expansionist desires and its
Government does not pursue adventurist policies.
182. We have requested membership in this Organization
convinced that our needs can b~, met in the many and
varied operations of the United Nations. Our contribution
to peace will be a contribution to economic, social and
cultural development: we shall extend means of communication, implement a progressive labour policy and do
away with the iplleritance of colonialism.
183. Our Government's programme reflects the aspirations
of its people: to free man from exploitation by other men
or by State machinery. We are a people in motion. Freedom
and justice are the programme of our executive branch. As
our ,President said, our Government will be a Government
of law and justice, but it will be a Government essentially
of freedom. We shall not sacrifice freedom for order. Our
regime cannot be described in terms of "isms" or in
pompous phrases. This is Equatorial Guinea. Our slogan is
"Unity, peace and justice". We are the one hundred and
twenty-sixth Member of the United Nations; on this great
occasion for many and for Africa, this is one more day of
hope in the great hope which is the United Nations.

AGENDA ITEM 93
'. ...

Restoration of the lawfu! rights of the People's Republic
of China in the United Nations (continued)
184. Mr. SHAW (Australia): Before commencing my
remarks on the item under discussion, I would join in the
objections raised by the representative of the Philippines
yesterday [1711 th meeting} to the wording under whit-h

15

the General Assembly is asked to discuss the quest:'on of
the representation of China in the United Nations. Th('
supporters of Communist China have chosen, as is their
custom on such issues, to put forward a highly tendentious
title to their item which in itself purports to prejudge the
issue.

~

. :~I
it

ii

.;1

185. The title of this item was accepted by the General
Committee in the terms presented to it by its sponsors
because the disposition of the Committee is noUo interfere
with the wording which co-sponsors choose to use. But the
result is that once again we have an agenda item which
reflects the abuse by a certain group of delegations of the
tolerance of the General Committee and of the Assembly.
186. We are not today debating "the restoration of the
lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the
United Nations". We are discussing the question of the
representation of China in the United Nations and that is
how the item should be presented to us. As Confucius said:
"If language is not used rightly, if what is said is not
what is meant, then what ought to be done will be left
undone. Morals and art will be corrupted, justice will go
awry and the peoples will stand about in helpless
confusion."
187. Having registered this objection, I would go on to say
that the Australian delegation welcomes the opportunity to
speak about China in the General Assembly. Although for
some delegations this question has become a sort of hardy
perennial and therefore to an extent stale and uninteresting,
yet for Australia and the countries of the Asian and Pacific
region which live in proximity to China, the questions
raised in the item under consideration are amongst the most
important matters facing the world of today. In the Gene...al
Assembly we tend to be preoccupied with questions of
deep and indeed emotional concern to certain groups of
members elsewhere. We understand the concern of any
group about regional issues close to their hearts and homes.
But we think that we speak from a world perspective when
we put this question of China in the forefront of the
matters which require consideration by the international
community.
188. Indeed, in each of the interventions made so far in
this debate, there has been one common denominator. All
speakers have emphasized the importance of the matter
under debate, no matter what solution they themselves
advocated. Over a number of years this debate has gone on
in varying degrees of intensity and no one has ever regarded
it as a trivial or procedural matter. It is self-evident
therefore that, whatever views one may have about the
representation of China, it is certainly an important
question and one which falls under Article 18 of the
Charter.
189. A number of those who, in this Assembly, advocate
the summary expulsion from the United Nations of
representatives of the Republic of China and the extension
of an invitation to the Peking regime, make the charge that
those opposing such action are blind to the realities of life.
I would deny that. None of the co-sponsors of draft
resolution A/L.548 and Add.1, or of those who we hope
will vote for that resolution, are ignorant of realities.

19
be
ut
at
tio
2

16

General Assembly - Twenty.third Session - Plenary Meetings

190. I, myself, lived two years in the heart of the Chinese
mainland at a critical time in its history and I know
something of the people and the country of China.
Australia does not pretend that the mainland of China does
not exist, nor have we sought to isolate ourselves from it.
Where it has be~n possible to develop relations, principally
through trade but also in other ways, the Australian
Government has not sought to prevent this. Indeed, in
recent years there has been a significant extension in
Australia's peaceful trade with the mainland of China. We
will continue to be alive to the possibilities of exploiting
such other avenues towards peaceful accommodation as
may present themselves from time to time.
191. To us the question is not simply one of realizing that
the people of mainland China exist. H is a more difficult
and complex quesHon. Let us examine some of the wider
complexes of the problems which have to be disposed of
before we come to any simple decisions about changLTlg the
representation of China in the United Nations.
192. First of all, we cannot ignore, as do so many of the
protagonists of Peking, the words and deeds of the Chinese
Communist regime itself. Their first demand is for the
expulsion from the General Assembly and Security Council
and all other organs of L'1e United Nations nf the Republic
of China. This is a condition which is unaccel- t.able to those
of us who recognize the Republic of China as a founder
member of the United Nations and a member in good
standing. More people live in Taiwan than in two-thirds of
the States represented in the United Nations, including
Australia. Both the standard of living of those people and
their example of help to others are enviable in terms of
what other countries have achieved. We are not impressed
at all by arguments sometimes advanced on the lines that
thirteen million people living in the island of Taiwan should
be sacrificed to the over-riding objective of reaching !>0me
accommodation with the 700 million people living on the
mainland. Such a proposition is objectionable both in
principle and as a practical means of ensuring peaceful
evolution in East Asia.
193. The second requirement of Peking has been formulated quite simply by Marshal Chen Yi on 29 September
1965. I quote:
"The United Nations must rectify its mistakes and
undergo a thorough reorganization and reform. It must
admit and correct all its past mistakes. Among other
things, it should cancel its resolution condemning China
and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea as
aggressors and adopt a resolution condemning the United
States as the aggressor; the United Nations Charter must
be reviewed and revised jointly by all countries, big and
small; all independent States should be included in the
United Nations; and all imperialist puppets should be
expelled. "2
194. These hectoring demands by Peking are not going to
be met. Indeed, we are unable to find anything in the
utterances of Peking to indicate that the communist regime
at this time seriously seeks membership of the Organization. Furthermore, not even those countries which have
2 Peking Review, 8 October, 1965, p. 12.

diplomatic representatives in Peking are able to give us any
clear account of what is going on there. If the Assembly
were to decide to invite the Chinese communist regime to
send representatives to the United Nations do we know in
fact whom we would be inviting? It is difficult for any of
us to see wherein lies the unified and effective leadership in
Peking today. This is important because those who demand
that China should be represented by Peking must have in
mind certain authorities who would be able and wiIling to
assume the obligations contained in the United Nations
Charter.

20
Pe
ob
reI
U
zi

195. Some Members tend at times to overlook what the
Charter says, and does not say, about membership. I find
no reference to any principle of universality in the United
Nations Charter. This may be the proper aim of our
Organization, a "consummation devoutly to be wished".
But, considering the Charter as an international treaty with
binding obligations, this concept is not incorporated in it.
Universal membership of the United Nations, if and when it
is achieved, wiIl imply universal willingness to accept and
carry out the obligations of the Charter.
196. This may be a theoretical point, but we do have in
Article 4 a description of the sort of States to which
membership in the United Nations is open.

2
R

"Membership ... is open to all ... peace-loving States
which accept the obligations contained in the present
Charter and, in the judgement of the Organization, are
able and willing to carry out these obligations."
197.. Now, how does the regime in Peking measure up to
this description? Its record since 1949 must be our main
guide, and this gives us grounds for concern. In the Korean
war, and in India in 1962, we witnessed examples of
Peking's readiness to use its armed forces against its
neighbours. In Tibet we have seen the tragic fate of a
people, which despite its historical ties with China, was
brave enough to resist conformity with all the dictatorial
dogmas of Maoism. In many other countries of Asia we
have been given demonstrations of Peking's encouragement
of and participation in a number of terrorist campaigns,
acts of infIltration and subversion, and so-called wars of
national liberation which, in fact, are not genuine wars of
liberation at all but the activities of militant minorities,
supported from outside.

"

.

198. Indeed, we would be blinding ourselves to the most
relevant consideratior; in this debate were we to overlook
the backing given by communist China to the indirect
aggression which has plagued Malaya, Indonesia, Burma,
Laos, the Philippines, Thailand and Viet-Nam for the past
twenty years. Such a record is not the result of accident,
but of deliberate policy, as thp following quotation from
Mao Tse-tung, reported in the Peking publication "Red
Flag" of March 1964, indicates:
"Revolution and revolutionary wars are inevitable in
class society ...". "The seizure of power by armed force,
the settlement of the issues by war, is the central task and
the highest form of revolution. This Marxist·Leninist
principle of revolution holds good universally, for China
and for all other countries."3
3 Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-Tung (peking, Foreign
Languages Press, 1966), pp. 60-62.

'. ,..

1714th meeting - 12 November 1968
199. And these other countries to which this revolutionary
process is to be applied in particular include, according to
current Chinese communist official statements, the countries on China's periphery: Burma, India, Indonesia,
Malaysia and Thailand.
200. A further opinion bearing on this question of the
Peking regime's willingness to carry out international
obligations was contained in an article circulated as a press
release on 12 June this year in New York by the permanent
mission of another country on China's periphery, the Soviet
l!nion. It reproduces views expressed in a Russian magazme, and the following is a quotation:
"There is no support in Peking for the idea of
inviolability of State borders and settlement of territorial
issues only by negotiations. The Mao group makes use of
territorial issues to exacerbate relations between countries
and to fan nationalistic moods in the Chinese people.
Peking propaganda and the Chinese leaders have been
giving the Chinese and other peoples constant reminders
of China's old frontiers, which used to run over the
territory of many neighbouring States."4
201. I quote again from the views expressed in that
Russian magazine:

"

.

"Another cover for the great power aims of the Mao
group is the theory of 'people's war', which is being
widely advertised by the Chinese leaders as the 'cure-all',
as a 'universal truth which is applicable everywhere and at
all times'. Peking's reckless calls to, and acts against, a
number of Afro-Asian countries in the summer of 1967
showed that this theory ignores the real tasks confronting
the peoples and is designed to impel them to overthrow
Governments which for various reasons do not suit the
Maoists."s
202. In the light of the foregoing analysis of the foreign
policy now being pursued by the leaders in Peking, it is
difficult to see how that regime can be described as
qualifying under Article 4 of the Charter or how it could be
said to be likely to be willing to accept the obligation of the
peaceful settlement of disputes as contained in the Charter.
203. More important, any action by this Assembly which
could be interpreted as endorsing or sanctioning the policies
and practices of Peking would be directly contrary to the
interests of the velY numerous and diverse peoples of the
Asian and Pacific region.
204. In this great area there have been developments the
significance of which is not perhaps sufficiently understood
within this Assembly. Efforts have been made to develop a
community of nations each of which in its own way is
making great strides in applying technical innovation and
economic development as a means of bringing about
peaceful social change and progress. These efforts to build
up tlle independent, diverse and peace-loving nations of
Asia and the Pacific are threatened by the aggressive claims
and acts of Peking. The peoples of that vast and significant
4 G. Apapin, "Ideological Bases of Maoist Foreign Policy",
"Internatiofllll Affairs, No. 6, June 1968, p. 50.
5 Ibid.• p. 52.

17

region are well aware of the facts of their environment and
they would fmd it hard to understand declarations by this
Assembly which would hamper them in the attainment of
their objectives.
205. An immense task confronts the peoples and nations
of the Asian and . pacific region who wish to live in peace
with one another llfld with all the people of China. I repeat:
no one in that area ignores China. The problem for those
countries-and amongst them I include Australia-is how to
come to terms with mainland China in a relationship which
will be one of respect, freedom from fear and non-intervention in the internal affairs of others. That is the major
task of our diplomacy, perhaps for the next few decades,
and it is a task which requires firmness and patience.
206. We cannot abandon the search for accommodation in
Asia, on which the peace of the region and indeed
ultimately of the world may depend; but the difficulties
which lie in the path of progress are largely of Peking's
making. Too many of those who intervene on behalf of the
communist regime call for concessions to be made and risks
to be run by others rather than by Peking. Accommodation
cannot be a one-sided affair. Peking must also indicate a
readiness to live in harmony with its neighbours, to accept
international obligations and to enter into arrangements for
their effective performance. Those are some of the considerations which the Australian delegation keeps in mind
in considering the three draft resolutions now before the
Assembly.
207. The frrst proposition on which this Assembly will be
called to express itself is that contained in draft resolution
A/L.548 and Add.!, which is co-sponsored by the delegation of Australia. This asks the Assembly to confrrm what
it most recently reaffrrmed last year, namely, that any
proposal to change the representation of China in the
United Nations is all. important question requiring a
two-thirds majority in accordance with the provisions of
Article 18. We consider this proposition to be self-evident
and we urge that members of the Assembly support it.
208. The second draft resolution, which was introduced
by Albania and a number of other sponsors, is contained in
document A/L.549 and Add.1. This calls for the expulsion
of the representatives of the Republic of China from the
United Nations and their replacement with representatives
from Peking. For reasons which I have given, we cannot
support, and we shall vote against, that draft resolution.
209. The delegation of Italy and scme other delegations
have put forward a third draft resolution, contained in
document A/L.S50. We understand and respect the reasons
which prompted those delegations to present that draft
resolution. In opposing a similar draft resolution last year
the Australian delegation stated that the time was not then
opportune for the sort of action that the draft proposed.
We know of no developments over the past year in the
policies or practices of Peking which alter that judgement.
We do not believe that the passage of such a resolution at
this stage would help us to arrive at the goal we are seeking,
that is, a situation in which all countries of Asia and the
Pacific accept a relationship of mutual respect and understanding, free from threats and deeds of interference in one
another's internal affairs. We consider that the views of the

I

.~j

!~ I

I'

,'I

18

General AssemUy - Twenty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

parties concerned are well enough known and ,lie doubt
that any forma! proceeding of the kind proposed wO\lld add
to Members' knowledge of the situation or that it would of
itself, at this stage, make it more likely that we should have
favourable developments in 1hat situation.
210. In conclusion, permit me to quote from the statement made by the Australian Minister for External Affairs,
Mr. Hasluck, in the general debate on 9 October. He was
referring to that part of the world with which we in
Australia are intimately concerned and of which we have
direct knowledge, and where we are making a contribution,
namely, Asia and the Western Pacific, and he spoke as
follows:
" ... developments in Asia are of vital importance to
the whole world. Enormous populations live there,
growing in numbers as the problems of disease are
overcome.... In Asia are ancient civilizations, the source
of much that is prized in the civilization of the rest of the
world, and the human talent in Asia could be a precious
asset to all mankind.

"I have said many times, and I repeat again today, that
I see as the greatest task for us in Australia-and I suggest
for other countries too-the task of seeing the mainland
of China fitted into the family of nations. But that is not
a task to be attempted from one side only. The mainland
Chinese too have to make moves of conciliation and
peace. Hitherto, unfortunately, they have threatened
their neighbours, whether to the south or east or to their
west and north. Along their borders are unease and
apprehension and even, on occasion, armed clashes. Their
neighbours have found within their borders interference
in internal affairs and an overflow of the 'cultural
revolution'. Communist China has not been willing to
make any reciprocal move to overcome its s~paration
from much of the diplomatic life of the world, and those
nations which are in diplomatic relations with Peking
have had their representatives in very many cases subject
to humiliation, harassment and isolation.... the problems of relations with the mainland have to be seen in a
wider context than simple recognition of Peking or the
seating of Peking in the United Nations." f1687th
meeting, paras. 116-121.j

"
this region is important to the rest of the
If the countries in it cannot <,olve their social
world
and economic problems and work out stable and peaceful
relationships with one another, then the peace and
prosperity of the rest of the world will be in jeopardy.
But if they do solve those problems, then the rest of the
world will fmd that its other problems have also been
eased.

211. Mr. KJARTANSSON (Iceland): First of all I wish,
with your permission, Mr. President, to start my brief
declaration by thanking the Ambassador of Italy for his
excellent statement of yesterday when he introduced draft
resolution [A/L.550] sponsored by Belgium, Chile, Iceland,
Italy and Luxembourg [1711 th meeting]. Because of his
very clear and concise presentation I can be very brief.

"Those Asians who have become free and independent
are making a valiant and hopeful attempt to share the life
of their own peoples in their own countries according to
their will. Throughout the face of Asia today the positive
and constructive element is nationalism. These free and
independent newly-emerged nations want to keep their
freedom and independence. They want an Asia that is not
under the domination of any Power, and not under the
threat of the domination of any Power, an Asia where
free and independent countries can make their own
decisions and carry out their own decisions. We in
Australia ... also want Le' see that. That requires an Asia
where there is security anc political stability and, with
political stability, some real opportunity for the Governments to get on with the main job of making life better
for their own peoples. It will be an Asia of change-of
great economic and social changes, where the standards of
living can rise, and where the economies will be economies of progress and growth, both in the way ir. which they
affect the people who live there and the way in which
they affect the outside world.

212. This is the eighteenth year that the General Assembly
is discussing the important question of the membership of
China in this Organization. It is indeed most regrettable
that we should now find ourselves practically at the same
stage as when we started tackling tltis problem without
finding the slightest constructive or positive direction out
ef our dilemma. In other words we have made hardly any
progress whatsoever in this important matter in the past
seventeen years.

"What does disturb the free countries of the region is
the possibility that they will not be allowed time and
opportunity to build their independent national institutions, to carry out economic development, and to weld
their regional relationships and their harmonious dealings
among themselves. What they fear are outside threats, or
armed attack, or, more likely, subversion from outside.
The principle source of threat today is seen as communist
China; the current area of active conflict is Viet-Nam.

213. However, some time ago at the General Assembly a
new element was introduced through the tabling of the
aforementioned draft resolution. That draft resolution
proposed the setting up of a committee appointed by the
President of the Assembly to study:
", .. the situation in all its aspects in order to make the
appropriate recommendations to the General Assembly at
its twenty-fourth session for an equitable and practical
solution to the question of the representation of China in
the United Nations, in keeping with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations."
214. That simple resolution asking for the setting up of a
committee to study the matter does in no way prejudice
the case in question. It does not visualize either the present
situation or the expulsion of a present Member but the
committee should have a completely open mind on the
whole matter. We cannot possibly see what harm such a
resolution can do. On the contrary it may bring out some
new ideas acceptable to all and, above all, it attempts to
move the matter off dead centre where it has been all too
long.

•

•

1714th meeting - 12 November 1968
215. People might ask what possible way a small committee might fmd that the whole membership of the
Assembly has not seen. We think it is very obvious that a
small group talking to all parties concerned is more apt to
obtain every possible idea and thought, much more so than
the parties involved could directly or indirectly bring out in
a large meeting such as at the plenary of the General
Assembly.
216. Those then are the main reasons why Iceland is a
co-sponsor of draft resolution A/L,550. We do hope that
the Members of this body will realize that we are at a
completely dead end and that we must make some move
now. There may 'u.: other ways than that envisaged in our
draft resolution but if there are we have not heard of them.
Therefore, we urge all Members to consider this modest
step very carefully and we hope that they will come to the
conclusion that one of the ways to break the present
deadlock is to vote in favour of draft resolution A/L,550.
217. Carrying this matter slightly further, we can imagine
that if matters proceed as they have in the past, some
member or members will table a resolution asking that draft
resolution A/L,550 be considered an important matter and
consequently requires a two-thirds majority to be carried.
We must say that we fail to comprehend the logic in this
and cannot see that the setting up of a committee can be
considered an important matter. If such a resolution is
tabled we shall vote against it.
218. Now allow me to turn shortly to draft resolution
A/L,549 and Add.! tabled by Albania, and fifteen other
States regarding the seating of the People's Republic of
China and the expulsion of the Republic of China from the
. United Nations. Previously, in my statement when talking
about the resolution of which we are co-sponsors I
mentioned the importance of a committee envisaged
therein as having a completely open mind on all ideas and
propositions. Therefore, we shall not go into this matter in
substance but only declare that in order to be completely
consequential we shall abstain on the draft resolution in
A/L,549 and Add.!.

,

.

219. Mr. SANI (Indonesia): Before beginning my remarks
on the subject on our agenda, allow me to take this
opportunity to welcome the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
to the United Nations on behalf of my Government and to
wish it well on its accession to statehood as an independent
and sovereign Member of the world community. My
delegation has every confldence that Equatorial Guinea will
play a constructive role in this international body.

Litho in United Nations, New York

19

220. Once again this Assembly has before it the issue of
the representation of the People's Republic of China with
which it has been burdened for so many years. My remarks
on the subject are going to be very brief. The Indonesian
delegation has found no reason to change its position as set
forth in its statement of last year [1609th meeting].
Nothing has changed as far as Indonesia's basic position is
concerned, neither has there been any change in the
situation of Indonesia's relations with the People's Republic
of China in so far as that country has continued its hostile
and aggressive attitude towards Indonesia. Its sustained
abusive attacks against the people and the Government of
Indonesia and the subversive activities it continues to
sponsor and promote in Indonesia continue to demonstrate
this attitude.
221. Last year I outlined my Government's position on
the question of the representation of China before this
Assembly. In brief, the position was that the People's
Republic of China should be seated in this world body.
That position has not changed. The basis of our position
then, as now, is a firm dedication to the principles and
purposes of the United Nations Charter. We remain
convinced that the ideal of universality of membership is
essential to the fulfIlment of our goal of mutual cooperation in pursuit of the cause of peace and security in
the world and especially in South-East Asia.
222. My delegation remains equally firm in its conviction
that the question of the representation of Cbina is a matter
of great importance to the General Assembly. The representation of the most populous nation on earth and the largest
in Asia is clearly a subject of grave concern. Of even greater
consequence is the fact that China has in recent years
become the fifth world Power to have harnessed t}.1e power
of the atom for military purposes. That fact carries with it
great responsibilities and obligations and makes the subject
of the representation of a nuclear Power one of the most
serious we have to face.
223. My delegation therefore is of the opinion that the
representation of the People's Republic of China in the
United Nations should be considered an important question. Those are the remarks which my delegation wishes to
make at this stage.
224. The PRESIDENT: May I remind the Members that,
as decided this morning [1713th meeting], the list of
speakers in the debate on item 93 will be closed at 1 p.m.
on Wednesday, 13 November.

The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

68-77001-August 1975-2,300

1-.:

I ... '
