A/77/397

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 October 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 44

Effects of atomic radiation
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)
Rapporteur: Ms. María Noel Beretta Tassano (Uruguay)

I. Introduction
1.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of
its seventy-seventh session the item entitled “Effects of atomic radiation” and to
allocate it to the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee).
2.
The Fourth Committee considered the item at its 10th meeting, on 17 October
2022. The Committee held a general debate and took action on the item at the same
meeting. Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee’s
consideration of the item are reflected the relevant summary record. 1
3.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation to the
General Assembly on its sixty-ninth session (A/77/46).
4.
At the 10th meeting, on 17 October, the Chair of the United Nations Scientific
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation (Canada) introduced the report of that
Committee.

II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.4/77/L.5
5.
At the 10th meeting, on 17 October, the representative of Canada introduced a
draft resolution entitled “Effects of atomic radiation” ( A/C.4/77/L.5). Subsequently,
Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cyprus,
Czechia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Kazakhstan, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Monaco,
Montenegro, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Singapore, Slovakia and Thailand joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
__________________
1

22-24068 (E)

A/C.4/77/SR.10.

211122

*2224068*

A/77/397

6.
At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Committee read out an oral statement
on programme budget implications in connection with the draft resolution.
7.
Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.4/77/L.5,
without a vote (see para. 8).

2/6

22-24068

A/77/397

III. Recommendation of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee)
8.
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution:

Effects of atomic radiation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955, by which it established
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and its
subsequent resolutions on the subject, in which, inter alia, it requested the Scientific
Committee to continue its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on present and future
generations resulting from the levels of radiation to which human kind and the
environment are exposed,
Conscious of the continuing need to examine and compile information about
atomic and ionizing radiation and to analyse its effects on humankind and the
environment, and conscious also of the increased volume, complex ity and diversity
of that information,
Acknowledging the concerns about the radiological consequences of nuclear
accidents,
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its work,
and welcoming the increased commitment of States m embers of the Committee,
Emphasizing the vital need for sufficient, assured and predictable funding, as
well as efficient management of the work of the secretariat of the Scientific
Committee to arrange the annual sessions and coordinate the development of
documents based on scientific reviews of the sources of ionizing radiation and its
effects on human health and the environment,
Recognizing the increasing importance of the scientific work of the Scientific
Committee and the need to carry out unforeseen additional work, such as after the
accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station,
Considering that the high quality of the work and the scientific rigour of the
Scientific Committee need to be maintained in the future,
Recognizing the importance of disseminating the findings of the Scientific
Committee, in particular to the public, and widely publicizing scientific knowledge
about atomic radiation, and recalling in that context principle 10 of the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development, 1
Noting the need for the resources of the Scientific Committee to be sufficient,
assured and predictable, and recognizing the importance of voluntary contributions
to the general trust fund established by the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme to support the work of the Committee,
Commending the secretariat of the Scientific Committee for its ongoing efforts
to ensure the sustainable and effective work of the Committee, and encouraging all
States in a position to do so to provide support to the secretariat of the Committee,
__________________
1

22-24068

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
3/6

A/77/397

Recalling the support expressed by the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the World Health Organization for the Scientific Committee’s work in producing the
most reliable and comprehensive sources of scientific information about the levels
and effects of ionizing radiation, without which safety guidance and safety standards
could not be developed and maintained and priorities for research in the areas of
sources and effects of ionizing radiation could not be determined,
Recognizing the importance of close cooperation between the Scientific
Committee and other relevant international organizations,
Recognizing also that sufficient staffing of the secretariat is essential to support
the work of the Scientific Committee,
Recognizing further the challenges faced by the Scientific Committee in
undertaking its important work throughout the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic,
Welcoming Algeria, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Norway and the United Arab
Emirates as members of the Scientific Committee and their attendance at the sixty ninth session of the Committee in May 2022,
1.
Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation for the valuable contribution that it has been making since its
inception to wider knowledge and understanding of the levels, effects and risks of
exposure to ionizing radiation and for fulfilling its original mandate with scientific
authority and independence of judgment;
2.
Reaffirms the decision to maintain the present functions and independent
role of the Scientific Committee;
3.
Re-emphasizes the need for the Scientific Committee to hold regular
sessions on an annual basis so that its report will be able to reflect the latest
developments and findings in the field of ionizing radiation and thereby provide
updated information for dissemination among all States;
4.
Commends the Scientific Committee and secretariat for its ongoing efforts
to fulfil its mandate throughout the COVID-19 pandemic;
5.
Notes with appreciation the work of the Scientific Committee, takes note
of the report on its sixty-ninth session, 2 including the update on the Committee’s longterm strategic directions, 3 and encourages the Committee, over its coming sessions,
to continue to work towards implementing strategies to support its long -term efforts
to serve the scientific community, as well as wider audiences;
6.
Also notes with appreciation the updated strategy to improve collection,
analysis and dissemination of data on radiation exposure aimed at seeking widespread
participation in the Scientific Committee’s surveys and ensuring that future surveys
adapt to changing data sources and use of radiation across the world;
7.
Welcomes the continuation of the ad hoc working group on effects and
mechanisms and the ad hoc working group on sources and exposure to assist the
Scientific Committee in supporting and monitoring progress in the implementation of
its programme of work, to evaluate new scientific developments relevant to the
Committee, to implement the updated strategy for data collection and to work with
the secretariat to continue the preparation of the future programme of work of the
Committee for 2025 to 2029;
8.
Also welcomes the publication of four substantive scientific reports
adopted by the Scientific Committee during its sixty-seventh and sixty-eighth
__________________
2
3

4/6

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 46 (A/77/46).
Ibid., chap. II, sect. B.
22-24068

A/77/397

sessions, on biological mechanisms relevant for the inference of cancer risk from lowdose and low-dose-rate radiation exposure, the levels and effects of radiation
exposure due to the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station:
implications of information published since the 2013 report of the Committee, the
evaluation of medical exposure to ionizing radiation and the evaluation of
occupational exposure to ionizing radiation;
9.
Continues to encourage the secretariat of the Scientific Committee to
disseminate the findings of the Committee’s updated evaluation on the accident at the
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station, released on 9 March 2021, in particular to
the public;
10. Notes the progress of the ongoing evaluations on second primary cancer
after radiotherapy, on epidemiological studies of radiation and cancer, on evaluation
of public exposure due to ionizing radiation from natural and other sources and on
evaluation of diseases of the circulatory system from radiation exposure;
11. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its work, including its
important activities to increase knowledge of the levels, effects and risks of ionizing
radiation from all sources, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session;
12. Supports the Scientific Committee in continuing to conduct its programme
of work of scientific review and assessment on behalf of the General Assembly, in
particular its global survey and evaluation of public exposure due to ionizing radiation
from natural and other sources and its assessments of second primary cancer after
radiotherapy, epidemiological studies of radiation and cancer, and evaluation of
diseases of the circulatory system from radiation exposure, which are being conducted
in close cooperation with other relevant organizations, and requests the Committee to
submit plans for its ongoing and future programme of work to the Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session;
13. Requests the secretariat to monitor the timely publication of approved
reports and to strive to publish them within 12 months of their approval;
14. Invites the Scientific Committee to continue its consultations with
scientists and experts from interested Member States in the process of preparing its
future scientific reports, and requests the secretariat to continue to facilitate such
consultations;
15. Welcomes, in this context, the readiness of Member States to provide the
Scientific Committee with relevant information on the levels and effects of ionizing
radiation, and invites the Committee to analyse and give due consideration to such
information, particularly in the light of its own findings;
16. Recalls the strategy of the Scientific Committee to improve data
collection, encourages in this regard Member States, the organizations of the United
Nations system and non-governmental organizations concerned to provide further
relevant data about levels, effects and risks of radiation exposure from various
sources, which would greatly help in the preparation of future reports of the
Committee to the General Assembly, and encourages the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the World Health Organization, the International Labour Organization and
other relevant organizations to further collaborate with the secretariat on
arrangements for the collection, analysis and dissemination of data on radiation
exposures of patients, workers and the public;
17. Notes the memorandum of understanding signed between the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Scientific Committee in May 2022 in Vienna, and the
framework of cooperation signed between the World Health Organization and the
Committee in September 2022 in Geneva;
22-24068

5/6

A/77/397

18. Welcomes the use and ongoing development by the secretariat of an online
platform for collecting data on the exposure of patients, workers and t he public, and
urges Member States to take part in the Scientific Committee’s global survey of public
exposure and to nominate national contact persons to facilitate coordination of the
collection and submission of data on the exposure of patients, workers and the public
within the country;
19. Also welcomes the Scientific Committee’s outreach strategy for the period
2020–2024, in particular the enhancement of the website of the Committee and the
planned publication of information for the general public in all the official languages
of the United Nations, continues to encourage that consideration be given to
publishing the website in all of those languages, and notes that the dissemination of
the Committee’s findings and further enhancements to the website would depend on
the financial and human resources made available to the secretariat;
20. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue, within
existing United Nations resources, to service the Scientific Committee and to
disseminate its findings to Member States, the scientific community and the public
and to ensure that the administrative measures in place are appropriate so that the
secretariat is able to adequately and efficiently service the Committee in a predictable
and sustainable manner;
21. Encourages the Scientific Committee to stand ready to carry out unplanned
additional work, in strict compliance with its mandate, and in coordination with the
International Atomic Energy Agency and other relevant international organizations, a s
appropriate, including in the context of military actions;
22. Acknowledges the Scientific Committee’s ongoing and increasing concern
with respect to the Committee’s continued decline in regular budget funds allocated
to engage expert consultants for performing the Committee’s scientific evaluations,
and notes that in the past 10 years, the annual budget allocated for consultants has
decreased by about 50 per cent;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen support for the secretariat in
order to adequately and efficiently provide service to the Scientific Committee in a
predictable and sustainable manner, and to effectively facilitate the use of the
invaluable expertise offered to the Committee by its members, and to report to the
General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session on these issues;
24. Understands that the present extrabudgetary support is expected to expire
by 2023 and the timely implementation of the programme of work to deliver on the
mandate of the Committee would require the provision of additional professional and
administrative secretariat services;
25. Acknowledges that contributions to the general trust fund by Member
States (through funding support and mostly in-kind contributions of cost-free experts
and technical officers) have augmented the regular budget;
26. Encourages Member States in a position to do so to make voluntary
contributions to the general trust fund established by the Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme and also to make contributi ons in kind, in
order to support the work of the Scientific Committee, and the dissemination of its
findings, in a sustainable manner.

6/6

22-24068
