S/PV.8519

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8519th meeting

Tuesday, 30 April 2019, 10.55 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heusgen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Elé Ela
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Albanai
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Sabelo
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei (S/2019/319)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-12397 (E)
*1912397*

S/PV.8519

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei (S/2019/319)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of South Sudan and the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations; and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/319, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
and its support to the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism, as set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/319) before the Council. I shall
also update Council members on recent developments
since its publication.
Despite sporadic incidents of violence, the situation
in Abyei remained generally calm and stable. That is
evidence of the efforts of both Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
communities to preserve peace in the area. In that regard,
I would like to emphasize that this was first migration
season since 2015 for which the situation no longer
necessitated the implementation of the disengagement
line, which I would recall was instituted by UNISFA
to prevent large-scale intercommunal violence during
the annual migration of the Misseriya and their cattle
through the Abyei Area. That situation has been made
possible by the communities’ commitment to engage in
dialogue in order to de-escalate tensions, together with
2/19

30/04/2019

UNISFA’s proactive engagement with the communities
and its robust military posture, particularly along
possible flashpoints. At the same time, regrettably, there
was no tangible progress to further political dialogue
between the Sudan and South Sudan on the issue of
Abyei since the Council’s previous consultations on the
matter. The Abyei Joint Oversight Committee has not
met since November 2017.
Let me now touch on the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism. I welcome the adoption of
resolution 2465 (2019) renewing UNISFA’s support to
the Mechanism. The parties made notable progress on
five of the seven benchmarks outlined in the previous
resolution 2438 (2018). The parties maintained standing
clearance for all UNISFA patrols. Two team sites were
established in the 14 Mile Area of the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone within the reporting period following
extensive sensitization efforts by the South Sudanese
local authorities to allay fears of border communities
in the area.
The Joint Political and Security Mechanism
convened in ordinary sessions in October last year
and March this year, meaning that they were not held
under the auspices of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, as in past instances. That points
to an improved relationship between the Sudan and
South Sudan. The border demarcation discussions
were markedly advanced, with the parties deciding to
demarcate agreed sections of the boundary line between
the Sudan and South Sudan. Regrettably, no progress
was made on verifying border-crossing corridors or on
establishing customs and migration offices. In addition,
the redeployment of forces from the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone remains a challenge.
In December last year, the team site at Tishwin
noted the replacement of Sudanese military with police
personnel at a camp within its areas of responsibility,
while the Safaha/Kiir Adem and As Sumayah/Wierayen
team sites within the 14 Mile Area continued to observe
a South Sudanese military presence.
Let me now turn to UNISFA’s operational
challenges. With regard to the changing situation in
the Sudan, thus far there has been no visible adverse
impact on UNISFA’s operations. It is too early to
say whether that will provide opportunities for the
settlement of the Abyei dispute. The mission maintains
contact with interlocutors at the working level to ensure
continuity of operations. However, it and Headquarters
19-12397

30/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

remain watchful of any issues that might hinder
mandate implementation.
With regard to the Council’s request in resolution
2445 (2018) for the reconfiguration of UNISFA,
particularly the troop reduction and police increase,
there have been delays in the process. In the first phase
of reductions, 360 troops were set to be repatriated
by 15 March. That has not yet taken place for certain
reasons, including the helicopter crash on 9 February,
which created a shortage in air assets, and the current
situation in the Sudan. I will take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the peacekeepers from Ethiopia who lost
their lives as a result of that tragic incident. There are
plans to start the repatriation process on 12 May, to be
completed within a week. As for the increase in police
personnel, while the selection of individual police
officers and a formed police unit has been completed,
the 130 visas from the Government of the Sudan
necessary for their deployment remain outstanding.
That particularly affects the team from Jordan needed
to conduct a technical reconnaissance mission to Abyei
before the deployment of the formed police unit from
that country.

S/PV. 8519

UNISFA continues to play a stabilizing role in the
Abyei Area and along the border regions. However, the
mission can provide only a conducive environment for the
parties, whose own efforts remain essential to progress.
I am encouraged by the significantly improved relations
between the two countries in the past year, as evidenced
by the Sudan’s role in facilitating the revitalized peace
agreement reached by the South Sudanese parties and
the resumption of joint oil operations. The Sudan and
South Sudan should continue that positive trajectory
and extend their cooperation to move forward on the
resolution of their disputes.
In closing, let me reiterate that it is imperative that the
gains achieved by UNISFA, as well as the communities
in Abyei, be preserved and used to advance towards
a political resolution of the border issues between the
Sudan and South Sudan. I seek the continued support
of the Security Council for the Secretary-General’s
recommendations, as set out in the report before the
Council, to continue the reconfiguration of the mission
and extend its mandate by another six months.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.

As criminality remains the biggest challenge in the
Abyei Area, I request the Council to urge the parties
to take further steps to address law and order matters.
I would like take advantage of this meeting to request
the Sudan to issue visas expeditiously to facilitate the
deployment of UNISFA’s police personnel. In the same
regard, I ask South Sudan to move forward with the
joint planning exercise for the establishment of the
Abyei police service.

Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): Allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your excellent presidency
of the Council during the month of April. I would like
to thank you for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council, for the first time, on the implementation of
resolution 2046 (2012), on the outstanding issues
between South Sudan and the Sudan, on the one hand,
and in the states of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile,
on the other hand.

Also, pursuant to the request in resolution 2445
(2018), the report before the Council proposes an
augmented civilian component in UNISFA to support
the political process. The proposed civilian component
would enable the mission to support the parties, the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel and
the African Union Commission to advance day-today solutions. That modest shift in the mission’s role
is necessary to match the reality on the ground. The
proposed support is particularly pertinent given the
difficult internal circumstances in both countries. It
is important to prevent the dispute over Abyei and the
border regions between the Sudan and South Sudan
from becoming another frozen conflict and to preserve
the gains achieved by UNISFA.

I would like to begin by thanking the national
authorities and representatives of the States in the Horn
of Africa for their warm welcome. I am also grateful to
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, with whom I intend to continue the
strategic partnership between our two institutions
with the full support of the Security Council and all
stakeholders in the region, particularly the Gulf and
Red Sea States.
(spoke in English)
Both the Sudan and South Sudan are at a crossroads,
with critical political processes under way. They face the
challenges surrounding the effective implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and the

19-123973/19

S/PV.8519

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

uncertainties of the delicate political transformations
occurring in the Sudan. Indeed, since the briefing by my
predecessor in October 2018, the Sudan has witnessed
dramatic changes following the demonstrations that
started in December 2018. The protests culminated in
the removal of President Al-Bashir on 11 April. The
Sudan is now reflecting, as the Sudanese stakeholders
still need to agree on transitional and institutional
arrangements. The current situation in the Sudan does
not preclude a consolidation of the recent improvement
of bilateral relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan. However, the new authorities in the Sudan may
need some time to resume active engagement in such
bilateral relations, including concerning the border, the
Two Areas and Abyei.
The gains in the relations between the Sudan and
South Sudan should not be lost. During the reporting
period, those gains were enabled notably by the
Government of the Sudan in facilitating the signing
and subsequent implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement in South Sudan in September 2018. In
return, President Kiir accepted President Al-Bashir’s
request to assist in the resolution of the conflict between
the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-North). Since then,
Juba has hosted meetings of the SPLM-North, initially
to help unify the different factions of the movement.
Following the outbreak of unrest in the Sudan last
December, talks between the factions were suspended
and no date has been set for their resumption.
With the ouster of President Al-Bashir, there
is concern that the absence of one of the principal
guarantors of the revitalized peace agreement
on South Sudan may have a negative impact on
its implementation. There also seem to be concerns
that the peace efforts in South Kordofan and Blue
Nile states may be affected. Taking into consideration
these concerns, both countries should be encouraged to
stay the course. The Sudan should continue to provide
support for the implementation of the revitalized Peace
Agreement, and South Sudan should continue to play
a constructive role in the resolution of the conflicts in
the Sudan.
The notable mutual gains achieved in the
reporting period include the intensification of bilateral
cooperation in the oil sector after the Sudan helped
South Sudan to resume oil production in its southern
oilfields in the greater Upper Nile region. This has
resulted in increased oil production. In the same vein,
4/19

30/04/2019

the two countries have agreed on the Sudan assisting
South Sudan in resuming oil production in the northern
oilfields of the same region. Production, which is
expected to come onstream at the end of April, is
projected to ensure an additional 70,000 barrels per day.
South Sudan’s petroleum Minister announced that the
upheavals in the Sudan had not affected his country’s
oil sector.
The Sudan and South Sudan have continued to
engage on bilateral security issues, though with little
substantive progress to report. This is reflected in the
progress on the final status of Abyei. Both countries
have, rather, focused on other bilateral issues they
consider more pressing. We have a de facto status quo
situation. In the absence of a joint Administration and
the lack of progress on Abyei’s final status, the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
remains central to the prevention and resolution of
intercommunal conflicts and the reduction of tensions
over Abyei.
In the next few weeks, I intend to encourage the
authorities in Khartoum and Juba to build on the gains
achieved and take a fresh look at the Abyei issue, with a
focus on the implementation of temporary arrangements
for the administration of Abyei and engagement on its
final status.
Let me now turn to the conflict in South Kordofan
and Blue Nile states and the process led by the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP).
While the SPLM-North issued, in December 2018,
a statement supporting the protest movement, its
leadership remains cautious about the military
takeover and what it perceives as a Khartoum-centric
process. Yet the political transition in the Sudan may
offer an opportunity to build new institutions that
are better equipped to address the root causes of the
Sudanese conflicts.
Immediately after the ouster of President Bashir,
the Transitional Military Council declared an indefinite
unilateral ceasefire across all of the Sudan, which was
reciprocated by the SPLM-North in South Kordofan
and Blue Nile states until 31 July. The Transitional
Military Council also called on armed groups to join the
political transition. The signatories to the Declaration of
Freedom and Change, which include the political forces
behind the protest movement, have stressed that the
resolution of conflicts in the Sudan should be a priority
of the transitional Government once it is established.
19-12397

30/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In the reporting period, despite the AUHIP’s
efforts, there has been no progress on the resolution
of the conflict in South Kordofan and Blue Nile
states. From 9 to 12 December, the AUHIP convened
a meeting among the signatories of the 2016 road map
agreement. While the AUHIP initially planned to
discuss with the signatories the possible participation
of the opposition parties in the constitution-drafting
process and the elections expected to take place in
2020, this did not materialize. Three signatories to
the road map — namely, the National Umma Party,
the Justice and Equality Movement and the Sudan
Liberation Movement-Minni Minnawi — insisted on
the participation of non-signatories in the meeting, on
the grounds that they represent the Sudan Call alliance
rather than their respective organizations.
The SPLM-North delegation refused to meet with
the Government of the Sudan to discuss the Movement’s
possible participation in the constitutional dialogue.
SPLM-North stated that it was not willing to engage
Government officials on this issue unless Khartoum
accepted its precondition to hold the constitutional
dialogue outside the Sudan, a request that was rejected
by the then Government of the Sudan. SPLM-North
reiterated that a negotiation process on the two Areas
should start with political talks followed by security
arrangements and, finally, by a permanent ceasefire.
The leader of SPLM-North is still claiming that
the people represented by his organization are entitled
to the terms of the comprehensive Peace Agreement
negotiated for the South, a non-starter for the previous
Government of the Sudan. That means that three
key contentious issues still need to be addressed by
future negotiations between SPLM-North and the new
Sudanese authorities, including on whether SPLMNorth can claim the right to self-determination in South
Kordofan and Blue Nile states, the extent to which the
application of Islamic law can be suspended in those
areas, and the possibility for SPLM-North to keep
its armed forces in a post-conflict setting. While the
place of Islamic law in the Sudanese political system
may be revisited in the ongoing political transition, the
readiness of the new authorities in Khartoum to depart
from the position of their predecessors regarding selfdetermination and the unity of the armed forces remains
to be seen.
In closing, I wish to state that the political transition
in the Sudan may offer an opportunity to redefine
the relations between the centre and its peripheries

S/PV. 8519

in a way that puts an end to discrimination based on
ethnicity, religion and territorial belonging. Building
on the unilateral cessation of hostilities declared by
both the Sudanese authorities and SPLM-North, and in
close coordination with AUHIP, we will encourage the
parties to engage on the resolution of the conflicts in
the Sudan on the basis of a new political dispensation.
The President: I thank Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for
his briefing.
I think that colleagues around the table will agree
that this is not one of the less complicated conflicts that
we are following.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements. In this context, I would like
to point to our hourglass, which, for the last day of our
presidency, has been refilled with fresh sand. We hope
that this is an incentive for members to abide by the
time indicated, which is now five and half minutes.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General and the Special Envoy
for their briefings. The United States welcomes
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga to his role and very much looks
forward to working with him.
The United States is pleased to see that the
Secretary-General’s recent report on the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) noted that
the security situation in Abyei is generally calm. We
welcome the expanding economic activity, including
cooperation on the development of oil resources in the
border region, and appreciate the commitment between
local populations to preserve peace.
The United States would like to extend particular
thanks to Ethiopia for its contributions to UNISFA.
Without Ethiopia’s efforts, the generally positive trend
of developments in Abyei would not have been possible.
While the political situations in Khartoum and Juba
remain fluid, the warming relations between the Sudan
and South Sudan and a stabilized security environment
indicate that there is great potential for those two
countries to capitalize on shared interests along their
border and work together to resolve border disputes.
While we commend the African Union (AU) for its
engagement in and support for addressing outstanding
border issues, we note that the Council has not received
a status update on the African Union’s efforts despite
repeated requests to the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. Sustained political engagement

19-123975/19

S/PV.8519

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

30/04/2019

by the AU on the Sudan and South Sudan’s border
issues is essential to ensuring that the two countries
remain committed and engaged on resolving these
issues. Taking advantage of recent trends to resolve
border issues at this time would promote stability in
the region and could be an easy win for the AU and the
nascent governments in Juba and Khartoum.

and standardized reporting across all United Nations
peacekeeping mission.

In November 2018, the Security Council unanimously
agreed in the UNISFA mandate that the improved
security situation in Abyei necessitated adjustments
to the peacekeeping mission (see S/PV.8400). The
United States notes with disappointment that the
troop reduction and increase in police that was agreed
upon by the Council and the parties have not yet been
implemented. We call on the Sudan to provide visas to
the incoming United Nations police without delay and
on Ethiopia to withdraw peacekeepers, in line with the
current mandate.

Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
their briefings.

In continuation of the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral to recommend the reconfiguration of UNISFA
for the upcoming mandate renewal, the United States
supports further advancing the efforts that this organ
made in the fall of 2018.
First, the United States calls for a reasonable
reduction of uniformed personnel in UNISFA. The
improved security environment and positive bilateral
developments between the Sudan and South Sudan must
be reflected in UNISFA force levels and composition.
Secondly, the United States calls for increasing
the number of police relative to troops in UNISFA. As
the Secretary-General has observed, a reorientation
towards a police-style mission is needed to ensure that
UNISFA continues to fulfil its primary role in protecting
civilians and reducing predominantly criminal threats.

In conclusion, the United States remains committed
to peace and security for Abyei and the region, and
looks forward to working with the Council and the
parties to ensure that UNISFA is adapted to the current
political and security environment.

I will focus today on three issues: the situation in
the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), the development
of the mission and the way forward.
We appreciate the stabilizing role of UNISFA in
Abyei. The Security Council must therefore focus its
attention on the Abyei region to protect it from any
surrounding events causing instability. We express our
concern about the reference contained in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/319) on the presence
of military elements from outside the region, which
demonstrates the need to accelerate the establishment
of the Abyei police service. We hope that the two
countries will continue to regularly hold meetings
within the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and
implement the benchmarks set out in resolutions 2445
(2018) and 2465 (2019).
We welcome the presence of the Special Envoy,
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, among us today. We stand
ready to cooperate with him in order to consolidate
peace and stability in the entire Horn of Africa,
which is a vital part for our Arab countries and their
strategic neighbourhood.

Thirdly, the United States calls for a civilian
leadership component within UNISFA. That civilian
leadership component could further facilitate
engagement among the parties to create space for a
political resolution. Those recommended changes will
appropriately reconfigure UNISFA to better suit the
security and political environment on the ground.

We also welcome the central role that UNISFA
plays in Abyei, and we take note of the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations contained in his report
before us. We stress our support for the mission and
its officials and call for facilitating its work. We call as
well for a careful and gradual approach to developing
the mission so that it can maintain security for Abyei
and its population and establish peace there.

Finally, regarding the Secretariat’s reporting
on UNISFA’s performance, the United States calls
for improvements in the quality and quantity of
information provided to the Council, in line with
resolution 2436 (2018), which mandates clear detailed

We welcome the implementation of resolution 2445
(2018) in reducing the military personnel of the mission
and the selection of Jordan as a police-contributing
country to provide a formed police unit. We hope that
the unit will begin its work in Abyei as soon as possible.

6/19

19-12397

30/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We also reaffirm the need for Council members
to agree on addressing the recommendations in the
report before including them in a draft resolution on the
mission mandate. We are grateful to the United States
delegation as a penholder for engaging with all parties
and seeking consensus on the mandate renewal.
We are well aware of the current critical phase, the
specific circumstances and the time frames facing the
Sudan and South Sudan. We therefore believe that the
Council should not rush either country. We welcome the
progress made by both countries in implementing the
border-demarcation benchmark. We look forward to the
implementation of the remaining bilateral agreements
in order to establish all the relevant institutions in Abyei
and support its people, while mitigating any conflict
and defusing any tensions.
We reiterate our position that any future steps
should be taken in consultation with the parties to
secure their consent before the steps are taken, which
is one of the three peacekeeping principles. We must
consider the internal situations in both countries
through the adoption of a draft resolution that defines
an applicable mandate amid the current circumstances.
In conclusion, Kuwait stands ready to cooperate
with the Sudan, South Sudan, members of the Council
and the Secretariat to reach a final settlement in Abyei.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his important briefing. My delegation would also
like to congratulate Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga on
his appointment as Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Horn of Africa. We thank him for his
informative briefing and encourage him to continue to
engage with all parties. My statement today will focus
on three key messages.
First, the presence of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) remains essential to
stability in Abyei and along the border region between
the Sudan and South Sudan. Indonesia is pleased that
the security situation in Abyei remains generally calm,
with the exception of sporadic incidents of violence,
as documented in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/319). My delegation attaches great importance
to UNISFA’s continued efforts to facilitate engagement,
mediation and confidence-building among communities
in Abyei. Indeed, improved intercommunal relations
have resulted in the establishment of the Amiet common
market, which has become a vibrant economic hub

S/PV. 8519

and provides opportunities for peaceful coexistence
among different communities in Abyei. Indonesia
also commends the important role of UNISFA’s police
component in strengthening law and order, including by
providing capacity-building to community protection
committees in response to the increase in criminality
and in the absence of an Abyei police force.
Earlier this month, our Ambassador in Khartoum
had an opportunity to visit Abyei and witness at firsthand the fruits of UNISFA’s work. In a similar vein, my
delegation also acknowledges UNISFA’s support for the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
(JBVMM), which is an important tool for maintaining
stability along the border region. We are pleased to
see marked improvement in the implementation of
the JBVMM, compared to previous years, including
towards meeting the benchmarks outlined in the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, we need to continue our strong
encouragement to the Sudan and South Sudan to
resolve their outstanding issues. My delegation regrets
that little progress has been registered to implement the
20 June 2011 Agreement on Temporary Arrangements
for the Administration and Security of the Abyei Area,
including the formation of joint interim institutions.
Concerning the JBVMM, Indonesia also notes a lack
of progress on critical issues, including the complete
withdrawal of forces from the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone and the establishment of customs and
immigration offices. We have also yet to see the
regular holding of meetings of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism. The Sudan and South Sudan need
to capitalize on the stability created by the presence
of UNISFA, as well as the significant improvement in
their bilateral relations, to resolve the Abyei and border
issues. The international community should support
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel in
its engagement with the two countries to promote the
timely implementation of their obligations under the
2012 cooperation agreement.
That brings me to my third point. We are cognizant
of changes in UNISFA’s operating environment since
its establishment in 2011. We must also not lose sight of
a wide range of difficult challenges that both the Sudan
and South Sudan are currently facing. For Indonesia,
the priorities are clear — to preserve and build on the
many important gains achieved throughout the work of
UNISFA and ensure that the interests of the civilian

19-123977/19

S/PV.8519

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

30/04/2019

population, including women and children, are taken
into account.

I would like to briefly address two points of
particular interest for my delegation.

Against that backdrop, we see the merit of the
Secretary-General’s proposal to reconfigure UNISFA
in order to reinvigorate the political process. For
such a reconfiguration to be effective, my delegation
underscores the importance of securing the
support of both the Sudan and South Sudan, while
also taking into account the views of troop- and
police-contributing countries.

First, the political process has, unfortunately,
not made enough progress. France regrets the lack of
progress in the implementation of the 2011 Agreement
on Temporary Arrangements for the Administration
and Security of the Abyei Area, as our two briefers
mentioned. In his latest report (S/2019/319), the
Secretary-General calls on the parties to relaunch the
political process so that the Abyei issue does not join
the long list of frozen conflicts. We share that concern
and call on the parties to implement their commitments
without delay.

Indonesia has peacekeepers on the ground in
UNISFA and will continue to contribute more if
needed. We will continue to support UNISFA’s
mandate renewal and stand ready to contribute
constructively to the discussion. Indonesia would also
like to commend all United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, together with their partners, which
provide humanitarian and recovery assistance to people
in need in Abyei.
I should like to conclude by expressing our
condolences to UNISFA and the Government and the
people of Ethiopia over the loss of three Ethiopian
peacekeepers who perished in a tragic helicopter crash
in February. May the exceptional brothers whom we
lost that day rest in peace, and we will continue to
honour their contribution to peace and security. My
delegation reaffirms its long-standing support for the
Sudan and South Sudan in finding a peaceful solution
to their outstanding issues, including through their
participation in UNISFA.
By the way, Mr. President, thank you very much for
the quicksand-filled hourglass.
The President: The representative of Indonesia
delivered his statement in under five and a half minutes,
for which I thank him.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): It is a
pleasure to welcome Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga to the
table here in the Security Council in his new capacity
as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn
of Africa. I wish him every success in his mission to
support efforts towards peace in a context of profound
change in the region, and I hope that such efforts will
lead to lasting peace and better and fairer conditions
for all. I thank him, as well as the Under--SecretaryGeneral for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
for their clear and informative briefings, as always.
8/19

The mere presence of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) will not be enough
to resolve the Abyei issue. Only the sincere and
determined commitment of both parties to resolving
their differences, with the support of the African Union
and the United Nations, will allow progress towards
a lasting solution. The establishment of the Abyei
police service and the meeting of the Joint Oversight
Committee are essential steps in that direction. in
that regard, I would like to ask our briefers about the
prospects of that happening. The political status quo
is not inevitable. We have seen in recent months that
the demanding attention of the Council has resulted
in encouraging progress on border demarcation. The
political developments in the Sudan represent an
opportunity that we must seize to encourage the parties
to relaunch the political process.
Secondly, we must proceed with the reconfiguration
of UNISFA. The recommendations that the SecretaryGeneral made in his letter on 20 August (S/2018/778)
and his latest report provide a good basis for
reconfiguring the mission. France supports a further
strengthening of the police component of UNISFA
to address the challenge of crime, particularly in the
Amiet common market. Those police forces are also
intended to prevent the escalation of intercommunal
tensions that we have been witnessing, which are often
rooted in the theft of livestock. In that regard, I regret
that the Jordanian police unit that was to be deployed
could not be so due to the lack of visas. France calls on
the Sudanese authorities to do their utmost to facilitate
the implementation of resolution 2445 (2018) as soon
as possible.
We believe that it is also important to strengthen
the civilian component of the mission by deploying a
19-12397

30/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

political section and appointing a civilian as deputy
head of mission. That would allow UNISFA to better
prevent local conflicts and strengthen cooperation with
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
for Sudan. We agree that UNISFA should support the
political process more actively, without replacing the
African Union’s High-level Panel, which has our full
support. We also support an adjustment of the troop
strength and believe that a moderate reduction in the
overall strength could take place without impacting the
mission’s effectiveness.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the work of
the Ethiopian troops, who make it possible, on a daily
basis, to stabilize the situation in Abyei and along the
border between the Sudan and South Sudan.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We extend our thanks to Mr. Lacroix and
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings.
We welcome the relative calm in the Abyei Area,
although we are concerned about the sporadic incidents
of intercommunal violence, the presence of armed
elements and the abundance of small arms and light
weapons, as well as the growing criminality generated
by the difficult economic situation. We hope that
those events will not undermine the prevailing calm,
for which we believe that the presence of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
remains crucial.
We also share the feelings of frustration over the lack
of progress in the implementation of the commitments
undertaken by the parties in the Agreement on
Temporary Arrangements for the Administration
and Security of the Abyei Area and the concern of
the Secretary-General over the intensification of the
political rhetoric on the appropriation of the Abyei Area.
We are hopeful that those events will not escalate and
that the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities and
their leaders will remain steadfast in their commitment
to peaceful coexistence and not be discouraged by the
elements attempting to disrupt the process. We call
on the Sudan and South Sudan to continue to build on
the positive progress achieved so far. In that regard,
we congratulate the Sudan and South Sudan on the
re-establishment of joint oil operations.
However, despite such progress, much remains to be
done. The disputed territory between the two countries
must not become another unresolved conflict. It is
necessary for the political process to continue forward

S/PV. 8519

and for an agreement to be reached that improves the
lives of the people in the area — a population with
growing humanitarian needs, including some 200,000
people in a state of vulnerability.
Time is of the essence, especially in the midst of
UNISFA’s ongoing reconfiguration process. Without
a sustainable peace plan and the eventual departure
of United Nations forces, the chances of a resurgence
of conflict are very high. If we take history as an
indicator, we know that a new conflict between the two
sides could have devastating results. We also hope that
the current dynamics in Khartoum will not negatively
interfere with Abyei. In that regard, we recognize the
efforts of the African Union to establish a consensual
and civilian-led transition process in the Sudan.
With regard to the reconfiguration of UNISFA,
we welcome the increase in police elements and the
proposal to strengthen political support, which, in
short, will help to alleviate the growing number of
crimes committed, effectively manage intercommunal
relations and in general, maintain peace in the Area.
Another aspect of particular importance that we
would like to emphasize is UNISFA’s commitment
to increasing the number of women in the mission,
as shown by the deployment of a women and
child protection adviser to the Abyei Area and the
involvement of women leaders from the Misseriya and
Ngok Dinka communities in gender and women’s rights
initiatives. In the same vein, we applaud the holding of
various seminars on resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, with special emphasis on the
role of women as agents of peace and the empowerment
of women to assume more active roles in community
conflict resolution mechanisms.
Another border element that is undeniably
critical is the need to fulfil UNISFA’s mandate for
the protection of civilians and peacekeeping in the
Area. We are optimistic about the latest progress
in the implementation of five of the established
parameters, including the authorization for air and
ground patrols in the border areas, the establishment
of two bases of operations, community outreach
activities, the holding of meetings of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism and the demilitarization
of the border areas. We particularly commend the
reactivation of the Joint Border Commission and the
Joint Demarcation Committee.

19-123979/19

S/PV.8519

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, the presence of UNISFA and its
support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism have played a decisive role in the stability
in the Abyei Area, especially in the rapprochement
between Juba and Khartoum and the Misseriya and
Ngok Dinka communities. However, in order for the
rapprochement to be sustainable, both the Sudan and
South Sudan must do more, as soon as possible, to
fulfil their commitments and we, in the Council, must
continue to seek ways to make UNISFA operations
more effective. In the end, those two elements together
will allow UNISFA to continue to operate successfully.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the holding of this meeting and are grateful
to Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
comprehensive briefing. We also welcome Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga in his new role as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa and wish
him every success in discharging his duties.
We would like to begin by highlighting the
stabilizing role of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in Abyei and along the
border between the Sudan and South Sudan. Its
presence in strategic trouble spots and its proactive role
as a mediator among the communities has enabled it
to respond effectively to violence in those areas. We
attach equal importance to the mission’s support for
capacity-building in key areas such as the maintenance
of law and order, the rule of law and gender equality. In
that regard, we highly value the inclusion of women in
community protection committees.
With regard to law and order, we reiterate the
urgent need to establish a police force in Abyei. We call
on the Government of South Sudan to continue its joint
planning efforts for the establishment of that force,
and on the Government of the Sudan to expedite the
issuance of visas for UNISFA police personnel so that
they can contribute to the full establishment of the rule
of law in Abyei as soon as possible.
We also note with concern that inflation and the
economic crisis in both the Sudan and South Sudan
have aggravated the humanitarian situation in Abyei.
We welcome the efforts of humanitarian personnel
to address this situation through food assistance,
health services, capacity-building and educational
activities, among other things. We hope that
international cooperation can continue to provide the
10/19

30/04/2019

necessary resources for development projects and the
establishment of adequate basic services.
We welcome the progress made by both
Governments on the border demarcation. However, we
are concerned that no progress has yet been made on
key issues such as the completion of the withdrawal of
forces from the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and the
full establishment of border crossing corridors, as well
as customs and migration offices.
We trust that the Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan will capitalize on recent developments
in the region to move forward with concrete measures
leading to the resolution of the issue of the status of Abyei
and the full determination of the common border. In
that context, we reiterate our support for the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations on improving the civilian
component of the mission, with a view to smoother
cooperation with the African Union Commission and its
High-level Implementation Panel. We believe that the
Abyei issue cannot be postponed indefinitely. Building
sustainable peace requires progress on the political
process through the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee
and the Joint Political and Security Mechanism.
I will conclude by expressing our hope that, despite
the difficult conditions, the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan will be able to make joint progress that
will lead to the resolution of the issue of the status of
Abyei and the determination of the common border. The
Council must continue to support the parties. UNISFA
must remain in the Abyei Area, adapt its mandates to
the situation on the ground and create the necessary
space for a viable political solution to the conflict.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by extending a warm welcome back to the
Security Council to Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga.
We look forward to working with him on this very
important topic.
I think we all agree that this is a very complex
issue. It also strikes me that this is an interesting time
to be discussing this issue given the major upheavals
in the Sudan, which the Special Envoy referred to. We
share his view that it is absolutely vital for the Sudanese
authorities and the Government of South Sudan to
continue to cooperate, despite what has been happening
on the ground, and to implement their agreements in
relation to the border.
19-12397

30/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I also very much agree with the tone set by both
of our briefers today on recent developments. There
is much to welcome over the past six months. Overall,
the security situation in Abyei has remained generally
calm, despite sporadic instances of violence. We should
also welcome the improved cooperation between the
Government of South Sudan and the authorities in the
Sudan, and the progress made against the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism benchmarks.
However, we continue to have two major concerns.
First, we share the concerns expressed today by
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix about intercommunal
tensions and the political rhetoric and criminality that
exacerbates them. This remains the largest challenge
to stability, and we think that the support of United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
for local mediation, community protection and judicial
initiatives remain absolutely vital, as does the full
deployment of UNISFA’s police assets. On that issue,
like Kuwait and the United States, we remain very
concerned about the delays in the issuing of visas for
key personnel, especially for the Jordanian technical
reconnaissance delegation. We urge the Sudanese
authorities to issue those visas without delay. I would
like to request of our Sudanese colleagues to update
the Council on the issuing of those visas during
their intervention.
Our second concern is related to the issue raised by
the Peruvian Ambassador — the humanitarian situation
in Abyei — which, as he said, has been caused by both
rapid inflation and the economic crises in both countries.
The United Kingdom is providing $40 million this year
in emergency humanitarian support to help the Sudan’s
most vulnerable and excluded communities with
their basic food and health needs. We urge all States
Members of the United Nations to assist in that regard.
Finally, turning to the question of UNISFA’s
upcoming mandate renewal, we commend the really
important work that the mission is doing on the ground,
particularly with regard to mediation among the various
parties. We therefore support the recommendation for a
six-month mandate renewal. We agree, however, with
the Council members who have said that the mission
does need to adapt to the situation on the ground.
Therefore, we also support the recommendation on
enhancing the mission’s civilian component in order to
help with its support to the African Union Commission
and its High-level Implementation Panel.

S/PV. 8519

Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to warmly thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, as well as the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, for their very insightful briefings.
We are aware of the current political situation in the
Sudan, and the issue of Abyei is inextricably connected.
Belgium continues to closely monitor developments
and encourages the parties to continue their dialogue
to find a solution that establishes a political transition
authority led by civilians, in line with the will of the
people of the Sudan.
We welcome the fact that the security situation in the
Abyei Area remains relatively calm. Nevertheless, it is
still tense and unpredictable due to persistent challenges
on the political, humanitarian and economic fronts. The
situation could deteriorate rapidly, with unacceptable
consequences for civilians. Therefore, we fully agree
with the Secretary-General that the continued presence
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) remains crucial. I wish to underline two
points — the need for a political solution and the role of
UNISFA in that regard.
The Council has long been committed to peace and
security in the Abyei Area and must continue to play a
role in the prevention of violence. Stability in the region
remains our main goal. The primary responsibility for
implementing the agreements of 2011 and 2012 lies with
the Governments of both countries. However, it is clear
that no progress has been made since last November
in terms of keeping to the commitments agreed by
the parties. Increasingly belligerent political remarks,
noted by UNISFA, highlight the need and urgency for
renewed dialogue.
The Security Council should encourage the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to quickly
establish joint mechanisms, make progress on border
demarcation and, in the longer term, develop a political
solution to settle the final status of the Abyei Area and
other border disputes. We call on the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel, led by President
Mbeki, and the African Union Commission to revitalize
their support for political dialogue between the parties.
As the name of the mission indicates, UNISFA was
established as an interim security force in 2011. The
environment in which it operates has evolved since
then. The Council will have to renew the mandate of

19-1239711/19

S/PV.8519

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the mission in two weeks’ time, and the mandate should
be adapted to the situation. A lasting political solution
is needed for Abyei. The Council must make sure that
the dispute between the Sudan and South Sudan over
Abyei and the border region does not become another
frozen conflict.
We support the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral, in particular the recommendation to
strengthen the civilian component of the mission — to
which my French colleague also referred — with a view
to facilitating the revitalization of the political process
and devising a possible exit strategy.
The Council should also consider how to adapt
the military and police components of the mission to
effectively address the challenge of rising crime rates
in the region in the absence of national security forces.
We call on the parties to facilitate the operations of the
mission, including the issuance of visas.
I would like to conclude by saying that dialogue
is the only option for resolving the Abyei issue. The
presence of UNISFA remains crucial for the stability
of the region, but it cannot replace the role of the State.
Only a political settlement can address the causes of the
conflict and ensure the long-term stability of both the
Sudan and South Sudan. The Council must therefore
ensure that the mission has the necessary resources to
support the achievement of that fundamental objective.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings on the
evolving situation in Abyei, the operationalization of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
and the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA). Their observations and
recommendations, whose relevance we welcome, have
moved my delegation to make the following comments
on the security, political and humanitarian situations,
as well as on the mandate of UNISFA.
With regard to the security situation, my delegation
notes with concern the persistence of criminal acts and
intercommunal violence despite the relative stability
that prevails in the Abyei Area. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the stabilizing role of UNISFA
and the commitment of community leaders to engage in
dialogue as a means of resolving their differences, which
is a good example of the inclusion of local populations
in peacebuilding efforts and the strengthening of
peaceful coexistence between the two communities
12/19

30/04/2019

living in the Abyei Area. My country strongly supports
that commendable initiative and encourages UNISFA
and all the relevant actors to continue along that path.
My delegation remains concerned by the increase
in disturbances of the peace, which made it necessary
for the Sudanese and South Sudanese parties to jointly
establish the Abyei police service and rapidly deploy
formed police units, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and agreements between
the parties. Côte d’Ivoire calls on all parties to speed up
the process of implementing those procedures.
With regard to the political situation, my country
notes with regret that the parties have not been able to
capitalize on the recent improvement in their relations
to accelerate the implementation of the provisions of the
agreement between the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei Area of 20 June 2011.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges the Sudanese and
South Sudanese parties to work towards the rapid
deployment of a common administration for the Abyei
Area with a view to consolidating the gains made with
the support of UNISFA. My country also urges local
communities to refrain from any actions that could
jeopardize the current stability, the conclusion of the
negotiations on the final status of Abyei and efforts to
build resilience.
On the humanitarian front, my delegation commends
the United Nations agencies and humanitarian
organizations, which in spite of the difficulties
encountered are making considerable efforts to provide
assistance on many levels to the people living in the
Abyei Area, thereby helping to respond to the urgent
health, education and subsistence needs of vulnerable
populations. My delegation is also of the view that those
efforts deserve the greatest attention and call for the
continued mobilization of the international community,
including the Security Council.
To conclude with the question of the implementation
of the mandate of UNISFA, Côte d’Ivoire commends
the invaluable support that it has provided to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism in
terms of stabilizing the Abyei Area, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
Council’s unanimous decision to extend the mandate of
UNISFA until 15 October reflects its recognition of the
progress made by the parties, in particular concerning
19-12397

30/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the implementation of the measures set out in paragraph
3 of resolution 2438 (2018). The Sudanese and South
Sudanese parties should see in that decision the
Council’s encouragement to work harder to find lasting
solutions to their border disputes by implementing
the border agreements and operationalizing the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
While Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the renewal of
UNISFA’s mandate, it is also of the view that, in order
to maximize UNISFA’s efficiency and to preserve
what it has achieved during its eight years in Abyei,
the mandate should be adjusted in order to reflect the
positive trends observed on the ground. In that regard,
Côte d’Ivoire takes note of the Secretary-General’s
call for the strengthening of UNISFA’s political
component, in support of the efforts of the African
Union Commission and the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the
renewal of the mandate of UNISFA in the light of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and all the
actors involved in the resolution of the Abyei issue, in
particular the Sudan, South Sudan, Ethiopia and the
African Union.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
are grateful to Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peace Operations, and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn
of Africa, for their briefings. We support the Special
Envoy in his very important new role.
At present, the situation in the Abyei Area
is generally stable. Over the past six months, the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan have
strengthened their interaction on the Abyei issue and
have actively cooperated with the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in the
discharge of its mandate. Intergovernmental working
mechanisms such as the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism and the Joint Border Commission continue
to function normally. This shows the two Governments’
willingness to cooperate in settling the Abyei issue,
which we welcome. At the same time, however, many
challenges remain in the area. A proper settlement of
the issue is important to ensuring the stability of both
countries and the region as a whole. The Security
Council should continue to monitor the situation and
support African countries solving African problems in
African ways.

S/PV. 8519

The work for the next phase should focus on two
specific aspects. First, we should continue to promote
good cooperation between the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan so as to achieve a political
solution to the Abyei issue as soon as possible.
Good cooperation between the two countries is the
prerequisite for securing a political solution to the
Abyei issue. The Council should continue to fully
respect the ownership of the Sudan and South Sudan on
this question, listen carefully to their views and support
the mediation efforts of regional and subregional
organizations such as the African Union (AU) and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
in promoting improved good-neighbourliness and
enhanced mutual trust between the two Governments.
Right now the international community should assist
the two Governments in working together to establish
administrative, judicial and public-security institutions
in the area, ease tensions among ethnic groups and
improve the community security environment.
Secondly, we should continue to UNISFA in
performing its mandated functions, as it is an important
force for maintaining stability in the Area. China
supports the continued renewal of UNISFA’s mandate
and has taken note of the recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/305). With
regard to the mission’s reconfiguration or adjustment,
the Security Council should listen carefully to the
views of both Governments, the AU and the troopcontributing countries. The Secretariat should
strengthen coordination and communication with the
relevant parties in order to enable the peacekeeping
force to better play its role in facilitating a proper
settlement of the issue. China is ready and willing
to work with African countries and the international
community to promote a settlement of the Abyei issue
and to make its contribution to advancing peace,
stability and development in Africa.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We too would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for his information on
the inter-Sudanese settlement and the activities of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). We welcome Mr. Onanga-Anyanga in his
new role as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Horn of Africa and thank him for his briefing.
We believe that the joint efforts of both parties are
vital to the successful promotion of an inter-Sudanese
settlement. The bilateral agreements concluded in

19-1239713/19

S/PV.8519

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

September 2012 in Addis Ababa, along with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, represent a good
basis for the cooperation between Khartoum and Juba.
We should not omit to point out that relations between
the Sudanese parties have warmed significantly since
September 2018. Khartoum’s effective participation
in the Intergovernmental Authority on Development’s
mediation efforts for the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan has helped the people of South Sudan
overcome the deadlock in the peace settlement. We join
the Secretary-General’s call to build on this positive
momentum in the interests of achieving a settlement in
Abyei as well. We hope that the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel will continue to be an
important mechanism in assisting the normalization of
relations between the two countries.
We are pleased that the situation in Abyei remains
stable. We believe UNISFA’s efforts to maintain
constructive relations with local communities are
important. The measures undertaken by the United
Nations to prevent intercommunal conflict and
establish intercommunal cooperation on issues of law
and order and economic activity in the area of the Amiet
common market deserve all possible support, as it will
be impossible to restore trust and achieve reconciliation
between the two communities without it. We deplore
the fact that few of the provisions of the agreement
of 20 June 2011 are being implemented. The power
vacuum in the region continues, and the demilitarized
status of Abyei itself and of the buffer zone at the border
between the Sudan and South Sudan is being violated.
We would also like to see more regular contact between
the parties.
We have carefully studied the data provided by
the Secretariat on the parties’ implementation of the
benchmarks established in resolution 2438 (2018) for
launching the full functioning of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. We note that
Khartoum and Juba have been working on meeting
them throughout the reporting period and have made
significant progress. However, we are quite certain
that the success of these efforts will depend not only
on the political will of the parties, which they have
demonstrated, but also on the concrete circumstances
and dynamics of the situation on the ground. In our
view, the Mechanism is an essential element in the
system for preventing incidents between the parties, and
withdrawing UNISFA’s support to it could have a very
14/19

30/04/2019

negative effect on the prospects for achieving a final
settlement of the situation around Abyei. We therefore
supported the Council’s adoption of resolution 2465
(2019), which extended UNISFA’s mandate to assist the
Mechanism through 15 October.
We are all familiar with the factors that are
preventing Khartoum and Juba from expediting the
process of reaching a settlement on Abyei’s final status.
In that context, maintaining UNISFA’s continued
presence in the region continues to be crucial, and
in that regard, the Russian Federation supports the
Secretary-General’s proposal to extend UNISFA’s
mandate for another six months. However, we believe
that consideration of the Secretariat’s proposals with
regard to the mission’s civilian component should take
into account the views of Khartoum and Juba, as the
fundamental principles of peacekeeping prescribe.
Mr. Elé Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish):
We salute Mr. Jean Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Horn of Africa, whose presence we
especially welcome as he assumes his new functions.
Equatorial Guinea reiterates its appreciation for
the stabilizing role that the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) plays in the Abyei
Area through its consistent efforts to communicate
and mediate between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
communities, which demonstrate its commitment to
the welfare of the people of the Abyei Area and the
border zones. The joint peace committee meetings
between these communities should be regularly held
for all the communities living in the Abyei Area with
a view to bringing the conflict to an end. However, we
are concerned about the increasing problems with law
and order in the Area. In that regard, we encourage the
Sudan and South Sudan, the two countries concerned,
to continue their joint planning for establishing the
Abyei police service by granting visas to increase
UNISFA police personnel.
We cannot ignore the most recent developments in
the Sudan in the context of the issues of Abyei, UNISFA
and the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism. The state of affairs is still uncertain and
we should monitor events on the ground closely. We
believe that this is not the time to make new decisions
with regard to the Sudan, and we must give the new
authorities some time to reveal their intentions on
19-12397

30/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a wide range of relevant issues, clearly including the
issue of Abyei and the Sudan’s relationship with South
Sudan. At this time, the Security Council’s demands on
the Government in Khartoum should focus on ensuring
stability throughout its territory and remaining fully
committed to its existing agreements, including those
relating to a settlement of the conflict in Abyei. In
that regard, we believe that UNISFA’s involvement
is essential to maintaining stability in these times of
great uncertainty, including its contribution to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. In
that context, the approval of the extension of UNISFA’s
mandate for six months is more than timely. For the
same reason, we do not think that the number of
UNISFA troops should be reduced, indeed we advocate
rather the opposite, in order to maintain and preserve
the achievements that have been made.
The 2011 Agreements remain the only way to
achieve lasting stability in the region and the border
between Sudan and South Sudan. All the parties must
clearly reconfirm their commitment to them and make
the necessary efforts to take steps to achieve peace and
stability as soon as possible.
In conclusion, we thank all those who have made
the progress in the Abyei Area possible — the African
Union, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism and the Ethiopian troops. They have shown
commendable determination in the search for peace and
security in the border area. We urge them to maintain
the momentum and spirit of compromise required for
the implementation of the signed agreements.
We also urge the Government in Khartoum to
engage as soon as possible in talks with South Sudan
and with regional, African and international partners,
in particular UNISFA, in order to address the challenges
facing the country with regard to Abyei in particular
and its relations with South Sudan in general.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for the
information they have shared with us today. Allow me
also to convey my best wishes to the Special Envoy and
offer him Poland’s full support.
I would like to focus my statement on two
issues — the current situation in the Abyei Area and the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA).

S/PV. 8519

We take note of the relatively stable security
situation in Abyei, but at the same time we recognize
that many challenges still remain on the political,
humanitarian and economic fronts. We note with regret
that no progress has been made in the implementation
of the 2011 Agreement on Temporary Arrangements
for the Administration and Security of the Abyei
Area. We are concerned that the lack of a genuine
political process between the Sudan and South Sudan
is solidifying the administrative vacuum that exists
in Abyei. The absence of effective formal authorities
in Abyei has resulted in limited law enforcement and
a lack of good governance and the rule of law. It also
hinders the delivery of basic services to the population.
We encourage Sudanese and South Sudanese
authorities to build on the rapprochement between the
two countries that we have witnessed over the past
months and work together to achieve a lasting solution
to the status of Abyei. At the same time, we call on all
parties to refrain from any activities that put at risk the
fragile peace achieved in Abyei.
Turning to the work of UNISFA and the renewal
of its mandate, Poland believes that the relatively calm
situation in Abyei is to a large extent a result of the
stabilizing role played by UNISFA. We are convinced
that every peacekeeping mission should adapt to the
changing realities on the ground. Therefore, UNISFA
also has to be able to adjust its tasks to the current
situation in Abyei.
Last year we voted in favour of UNISFA’s new
mandate, which reinforced the police component within
the mission in response to the weak rule of law in the
Abyei Area. Today, however, we note with regret that the
increase in police personnel has yet to be implemented,
and we call on the Sudan’s authorities to facilitate
the mission’s reconfiguration. At the same time, we
commend the progress achieved by the Sudan and
South Sudan in the implementation of the benchmarks
set out by the Security Council with regard to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
When it comes to UNISFA’s mandate, we support
its renewal for another six months. We agree with
the Secretary-General that UNISFA should be able
to engage in achieving a political solution in Abyei,
in collaboration with the African Union Commission
and the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel. We therefore support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to strengthen the political posture

19-1239715/19

S/PV.8519

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the mission and enhance its capacity to support a
political process in the Abyei Area.
I would like to conclude by stressing that there
can be no other way for the Sudan and South Sudan to
resolve the question of Abyei than through dialogue,
including intercommunal dialogue and reconciliation,
and a genuine and inclusive political process that
involves women and young people.
UNISFA’s presence remains crucial for the stability
of Abyei, but it cannot substitute the role of the State.
Poland believes that the Security Council should remain
unified on that issue and support all efforts to achieve a
lasting solution to the status of Abyei.
Ms. Sabelo (South Africa): We join other
delegations in expressing our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for holding this meeting, as well as to
our briefers for their comprehensive briefings. We also
would like to congratulate Mr. Onanga-Anyanga on his
new role as Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa.
I would like to limit my intervention to the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA),
the status of Abyei and the humanitarian situation.
With regard to UNISFA, South Africa welcomes the
role that UNISFA has played in improving intercommunal
relations through its proactive engagement with the
communities, particularly along the flashpoints, as well
as its efforts in supporting local-level dialogue between
the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities. We note
with concern, however, that intercommunal violence
still occurs and that, although the current military
threat to the Abyei Area remains limited, the presence
of armed groups has the potential to inflame tensions
between the communities.
South Africa wishes to remind the parties that
resolution 1990 (2011) stipulated that the Abyei Area
should be demilitarized from any forces other than
UNISFA and the Abyei police service. In the absence
of an Abyei police service, the United Nations should
continue to advise and mentor the community protection
committees on maintaining law and order.
In view of the forthcoming discussions on the
mandate renewal of UNISFA, South Africa stresses
that the extension of the mandate should take into
consideration the evolution of the current political
situation in the Sudan and the transitions taking
place in South Sudan. Consequently, we should also
guard against taking decisions that could possibly
16/19

30/04/2019

aggravate the current prevailing political environment.
Furthermore, we should ensure that the mission is fit
for purpose.
South Africa supports the recommendations
of the Secretary-General to maintain the presence
of UNISFA in the Abyei Area and within the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, which
remains crucial to sustaining the stability achieved thus
far. Equally, it is imperative that the mission continue to
support the two Governments and the African Union in
working to achieve a political resolution to the impasse.
Abyei has been a thorny issue for both countries for
many years. We welcome and recognize the progress that
has been achieved against the benchmarks. However,
we also recognize that Abyei remains the one area that
could unravel a lot of the good progress that has been
achieved by both countries. In that regard, we should
utilize the current political environment to recalibrate
and redouble efforts to address all outstanding issues in
order to create lasting peace.
We welcome the meetings of the Joint Border
Commission between the two countries, which are a
step in the right direction and another milestone on the
path towards resolving the final status of Abyei.
Furthermore, the stabilization of Abyei remains
critical, not only for South Sudan and the Sudan but
also for the region and neighbouring States. We should
therefore continue to encourage the implementation of
all relevant agreements, which will ultimately lead to
the final resolution of the status of Abyei and all its
outstanding issues.
Lastly, on the humanitarian front, we welcome
the work of UNISFA in facilitating the delivery
of humanitarian assistance by providing logistical
support. We also commend the United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations that continue to
provide much-needed assistance programmes to more
than 180,000 communities in the Abyei region and
neighbouring States.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.
Before turning to Abyei and the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), I
would like to do what our South African colleague
suggested — to look at the current political environment
in Abyei. With regard to the Sudan, we are following
events very closely. We see that the Sudanese people are
19-12397

30/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

standing up peacefully and with determination for their
legitimate demands. Germany echoes what the African
Union and the European Union High Representative
Mogherini have said in calling for a swift handover to
a civilian-led transitional Government. I can only echo
what Mr. Onanga-Anyanga has said with regard to the
fact that the gains achieved so far should not be lost.
Turning to South Sudan, the peace process is at a
crossroads. The date 12 May is approaching. Essential
questions regarding the security arrangements and
borders have not yet been resolved. Germany calls on
the South Sudanese leaders to do their utmost so that
in time the Transitional Government of National Unity
is established.
Turning to UNISFA, I would first like to pay tribute
to all its personnel and the troop- and police-contributors
that are active in the mission, in particular Ethiopia. I
express my condolences over the three peacekeepers
who lost their lives. UNIFSA continues to be crucial
to stabilizing Abyei as long as there is no political
settlement and no Government structures that address
the lack of socioeconomic development, criminality
and the increased availability of small arms.
With respect to its new mandate, we believe
that UNIFSA must be equipped so that it can fulfil
its mandate and address the challenges that I have
just described.
We
agree
with
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations. UNIFSA should address the crime
rate and support community-level peace processes,
mediation and dialogue. My South Africa colleague has
just pointed to specific communities. It is an obligation
for UNIFSA to contribute in that regard. It should also
advance its support to the African Union Commission,
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
and the two parties.
I want to echo what half of the members of the
Security Council said with regard to the strengthening
of the police component. I urge the Sudan to issue
visas without delays. As my United Kingdom colleague
requested, in his statement the Sudanese representative
could perhaps address that issue and make a commitment
that the visas will finally be issued.
We must strengthen the civilian component
of the mission and support the community-level
reconciliation, as I have mentioned earlier, but of course
the mission needs the staff for that. We would also like

S/PV. 8519

to highlight the need to strengthen the human rights
monitoring component, including regarding assessing
and combating sexual and gender-based violence, as
well as fighting impunity and implementing the spirit
and letter of resolution 2467 (2019).
In conclusion, the international community cannot
solve the issues for the Sudan and South Sudan. The
countries themselves must engage. We need timelines.
We call on the parties to resume regular meetings of
the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism. We also urge that
consultations on Abyei at the ministerial level be
resumed as soon as possible.
Finally, Germany underlines and believes it
essential to ensure the full and meaningful participation
of women at all stages of the political process and
peacebuilding in Abyei, as well as other conflicts. They
can count on Germany’s support for such efforts.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this
opportunity. I thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peace Operations, for his briefing. I also
welcome Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa. I would like
to express my country’s appreciation for his work, and
we stand ready to cooperate and coordinate with him.
At the outset, I reaffirm that my country’s
Government is committed to all agreements signed with
the sisterly Republic of South Sudan, foremost among
which is the Agreement between the Government of the
Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei Area, signed on 20 June 2011, and
the Cooperation Agreement between the Republic of
the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan, signed on
27 September 2012.
I take this opportunity to emphasize the importance
of the 2011 agreement, which is the cornerstone of all
arrangements related to the issue of Abyei, including
the deployment of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA). The two parties to the
agreement agreed that the 2011 agreement would
remain in force until the final status of Abyei had been
settled. Both parties also agreed to refrain from making

19-1239717/19

S/PV.8519

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

any amendment to the UNISFA mandate without the
approval of the three parties, namely, the Sudan,
South Sudan and Ethiopia, the only troop-contributing
country to UNISFA.
I also reaffirm that the issue of Abyei should be
considered in the overall framework of the relations
between the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan. In
that regard, my delegation refers to the progress made
recently in the relations between the two countries,
especially after the Sudan hosted the peace negotiations
on South Sudan. That has led, as the Council knows,
to the signing in September 2018 of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, which has contributed to
improving cooperation and coordination between
the two countries and to the implementation of the
provisions of the UNISFA mandate.
We hope that such cooperation will continue,
since on 11 April the Sudan embarked on a new era in
order to implement all the provisions of the June 2011
agreement, which is the principal agreement leading to
the final status of Abyei. It sets up the Abyei institutions,
namely, the joint administration for Abyei, the joint
legislative council and the joint police force, I am sure
that Council members will agree that those institutions
are indispensable in order to manage the region, provide
the services that the people need, promote peaceful
coexistence among the various elements of society and
ensure the proper conditions for settling the final status
of Abyei in a manner that meets the aspirations of all
stakeholders and is acceptable to all parties.
It goes without saying that the Abyei Protocol,
which is an integral part of the 2005 Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, is the bedrock foundation recognized
by the Security Council. The Protocol explicitly
stipulates that Abyei is an integral part of the territory
of the Sudan. That is a historical fact. It is therefore
impossible to review the arrangements that are based
on the Comprehensive Peace Agreement without
completely recognizing that fact.

30/04/2019

UNISFA. We reiterate the Sudan’s determination to
continue working with UNISFA in order to ensure that
it can discharge all its tasks in a smooth way.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mrs. Adeng (South Sudan): I thank you once
again, Mr. President, for allowing us to address the
Council under your presidency for the month of April.
On behalf of the Government of the Republic of South
Sudan, I would like to thank the Council for holding
this briefing on the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
We would like to recognize the presence of
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa.
The Government of South Sudan appreciate the
diligent efforts of UNISFA, and the Governments of
our two countries have been progressive in efforts to
achieve an everlasting peace between the two countries.
We are optimistic that the process started by the sisterly
countries to resolve the issue of Abyei will continue,
making it possible to create an environment conducive
to the resolution of the final status of Abyei, which, as
stated in the comprehensive Peace Agreement, should
be done through a referendum of the people of Abyei.
In the case of troop deployment, consultation with
and the consent of the parties before and during the
deployment of troops is paramount, in line with the
principles underlying peacekeeping operations.
We would like to assure the Council that the
Government of South Sudan remains committed to the
full implementation of the September 2018 revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, as it is to the agreement
signed between the Sudan and South Sudan.

In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
and express my gratitude to all our partners, friends
and brothers in the Republic of South Sudan, who have
worked in good faith to strengthen peace and stability.

We would like to acknowledge and express
our appreciation to Major General Gebre Adhana
Woldezgu, the outgoing Acting Head of Mission and
Force Commander, for his determined efforts to
maintain peace and stability in the Abyei Area.

We would also like to thank those who strive
to facilitate the work of UNISFA, in particular the
Government and the people of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia. We also thank all the staff of

To conclude, once again we would like to assure
the Council that the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan and the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan are committed to the implementation of the

18/19

19-12397

30/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

mandate. We are therefore requesting the continued
support of the Council.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.
I would like to turn again to the representative of the
Sudan and ask him if he could respond to the question
that was put to him by several delegations around the
table with regard to the issue of visas, in particular for
police personnel.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Council
members are aware that with respect to resolution 1990
(2011), which was preceded by the June 2011 agreement
on the arrangements for Abyei, we were able, through
the Council, to agree on an important institution
for the Abyei area, namely, the joint police service
for Abyei. We are of course aware that the Council
adopted resolution 2438 (2018), under which the police
component of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) was to be augmented. That
requires various measures and consultations in order
to avoid undermining the agreements that have been
signed between the Sudan and South Sudan.

S/PV. 8519

The Council and before it the African Union have
said that the formation of essential mechanisms and
institutions for Abyei is the only way forward towards
defining the final status of Abyei. The relevant authorities
of the Sudan are taking the necessary measures in order
to create conditions favourable to the consideration of
the issuance of visas to the proposed police personnel,
in conformity with the Council’s resolution. However,
we need more time for that. We hope that the Council
will understand the situation and give us more time,
so that we can take the measures necessary to prevent
any negative impact on the situation on the ground. It
must also be taken into account that the situation is now
changing in the Sudan and that these changes have had,
of course, an impact on all State institutions that are
seeking to create the proper conditions for UNISFA’s
work in Abyei.
To conclude, the consideration of the issuance of
visas for the police components in Abyei is ongoing
within the relevant institutions in the Sudan.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Sudan for his clarification.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

19-1239719/19
