A/54/PV.98

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fourth session

98th plenary meeting
Thursday, 15 June 2000, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Tribute to the memory of Hafez Al-Assad, President
of the Syrian Arab Republic
The President: This afternoon, before we take up
the items on our agenda, it is my sad duty to pay tribute
to the memory of the late President of the Syrian Arab
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Hafez Al-Assad, who
passed away on Saturday, 10 June 2000.
President Assad was one of the longest-serving
heads of State in the world and a key player in the
Middle East peace process. It is my sincere hope that,
even with his passing, the negotiating process will
move forward, on all the recognized tracks, towards a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the whole of
the Middle East.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to convey
our condolences to the Government and the people of
the Syrian Arab Republic and to the bereaved family of
His Excellency Mr. Hafez Al-Assad.
I invite representatives to stand and observe a
minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency Mr. Hafez Al-Assad.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Denis Dangue Réwaka, Permanent
Representative of Gabon, who will speak on behalf of
the African States.

Mr. Dangue Réwaka (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Since Saturday, 10 June 2000, the Middle East and
particularly Syria have been in mourning. They have
just lost one their illustrious leaders, President Hafez
Al-Assad. The unanimous tribute that has been paid to
him throughout the world amply demonstrates how
greatly he was appreciated, not only as a man the brutal
loss of whom we are mourning today, but above all for
his work, to which he unstintingly gave his strength,
intelligence, heart and life. The world will remember
him as a staunch nationalist and a man capable of
compromising. His commitment to defend the interests
of the Arab nation, as well as his struggle for peace,
security and harmony among the countries of the
region, made him an essential interlocutor in the
Middle East peace process. We have no doubt — and
this is our most ardent wish — that his successor will
pursue with the same resolve the dialogue that was
happily commenced with a view to facilitating the
consolidation of peace in the region.
The African Group, on the behalf of which I have
the honour to speak, would like to convey to the
bereaved family, the Government and people of Syria
its most heartfelt sympathy and condolences.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Makarim Wibisono, Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, who will speak on behalf
of the Asian States.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): I have the honour to
address this meeting in my capacity as the Chairman of
the Group of Asian States for June 2000.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-48140 (E)
`````````

A/54/PV.98

It was with the deepest regret that we learned of
the passing of President Hafez Al-Assad of the Syrian
Arab Republic, on Saturday, 10 June 2000. President
Hafez Al-Assad was a man who for three decades
fought to build a strong and proud nation and to help
his people fulfil their rightful destiny. We extend our
deepest condolences to the Government and people of
the Syrian Arab Republic on this tragic loss. We take
this opportunity to pay tribute to a great man, who
dedicated his life to his country and who at the end of
his life left a nation that had earned the respect and
admiration of the international community.
We are confident that despite his untimely demise
the people of the Syrian Arab Republic will continue to
move forward and fulfil President Al-Assad’s vision
under the leadership of the new President. As the next
generation assumes the leadership of Syria, we take
comfort that Mr. Hafez Al-Assad rests in peace in his
appointed place in paradise. Now we, the Member
States of the Asian Group, stand ready to assist the
Syrian Arab Republic as it makes this transition and
continues on the road to peace, security and
development.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ion Botnaru, Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Moldova, who will speak on behalf
of the Eastern European States.
Mr. Botnaru (Republic of Moldova): We are
deeply saddened by the passing, on Saturday, 10 June
2000, of His Excellency Hafez Al-Assad, President of
the Syrian Arab Republic. The Middle East lost one of
the greatest Arab leaders. History will reflect
Mr. Al-Assad’s career and accomplishments, the role
he played in unifying his country. A statesman
dedicated to his country’s greatness and to the destiny
of the Arab nation, President Hafez Al-Assad has left
his mark on history over the course of three decades.
The late President took important steps to finally
achieve peace in the Middle East. In recent years,
especially since the Madrid Conference, he involved
his country actively in the Middle East peace process
with the aim of achieving a comprehensive and last
peace in the region. We sincerely hope that the people
of the Syrian Arab Republic, together with the
international community, will rededicate their efforts to
achieve a stable peace, for which all of the region’s
peoples are waiting.

2

On behalf of the Group of Eastern European
States, I would like to extend our sincere sympathy and
condolences to the members of the bereaved family and
to the Government and the people of Syria. We also
extend our condolences to His Excellency Ambassador
Wehbe and the other members of the Syrian mission to
the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Patrick Albert Lewis, Permanent
Representative of Antigua and Barbuda, who will
speak on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean
States.
Mr. Lewis (Antigua and Barbuda): I wish to offer
deep and sincere condolences to the Government and
people of the Syrian Arab Republic on behalf of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States in
regard to the passing of President Hafez Al-Assad, the
widely respected President of Syria. It is quite clear to
the world at large that President Assad’s people held
him in deep admiration, and were most knowledgeable
of the developments that he brought about in his
beloved country. He was a man who never lost the
common touch and with whom the channels of
communication remained open for the citizens of his
homeland.
Hafez Al-Assad was born in 1930, and his
interest in public affairs became evident during the
Second World War, prior to the French evacuation of
Syria. He took part in demonstrations aimed at
restoring the independence and sovereignty of Syria,
became head of a student committee, Lattaquié
Muhafaza, and included in his political activities the
struggle for Palestinian independence. He later entered
the military academy, and in 1966 was nominated
Defence Minister, in addition to his post as commander
of the air force. By 1966 also he had played an
outstanding role in leading the movement that led to
the consolidation of the progressive positions and
policies of the Arab Ba’ath Socialist Party. His rise
after 1966 was meteoric, and in 1971 he was elected
President of the Syrian Arab Republic, and he
remained in this post until his untimely passing.
Domestically, he was a devoted husband and a
loving father of five children. Under President Hafez
Al-Assad, respectability was restored to the region of
the Middle East and a significant degree of stability
was secured for Lebanon. He was most instrumental in
achieving peace in the region under the terms of

A/54/PV.98

Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 425 (1978). Under President Al-Assad, the Syrian
economy not only stabilized but demonstrated
significant improvement. The President devoted much
attention to education and notable achievements were
made in this area.
Those of us who hail from Latin America and the
Caribbean are mindful of the contribution of the 12
million individuals of Syrian descent who are citizens
of our countries. We are thus knowledgeable of the fact
that Hafez Al-Assad urged these descendants not to
forget their Syrian origin, while also respecting the
laws of the countries in which they lived and giving
these countries their allegiance.
On a personal note, my country has at its
Ambassador to the Middle East one of these
descendants, and this fact gave President Al-Assad
pride and joy in the achievements of his people in
distant lands. So the countries of my region, which are
located in North, Central and South America, and in
both the Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean, recall
the passing of a notable politician and statesman, who
made a remarkable contribution during his earthly
existence towards the understanding of his region and
in endeavouring to secure a just and lasting peace for
that region.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. António Monteiro, Permanent
Representative of Portugal, who will speak on behalf of
the Western European and Other States.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): On behalf of the Group
of Western European and Other States, I would like to
convey to the people and Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic sincere condolences on the passing of
President Hafez Al-Assad. Our heartfelt sympathy goes
out to the family of President Al-Assad. His passing
was a loss to the Syrian people, and he was much
respected in the Arab world and beyond. Allow me also
to express the sincere hope of the Group of Western
European and Other States that the commitment to
peace that President Al-Assad made will be pursued
vigorously, with the aim of achieving the ever more
urgent comprehensive and lasting solution to the
problems of the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency
Mr.
Abdallah
Baali,
Permanent
Representative of Algeria, who will speak on behalf of
the Arab States.

Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): I would
have preferred not to find myself in the difficult
position of having to pay tribute to such an outstanding
personality as His Excellency the late President Hafez
Al-Assad. I was called by duty, after my colleagues in
the Group of Arab States asked me to speak on their
behalf, to pay tribute to a great Arab nationalist leader,
the late President Al-Assad.
I am truly speechless, searching for words to
express the sadness and consternation of the members
of the Arab Group following the calamity that befell
our Arab brothers and sisters in Syria. We were shaken
by the wrenching news of the death of one of our
outstanding Arab leaders — one of the greatest
symbols of recent Arab struggles for dignity, pride and
prosperity.
The late President Al-Assad was a national
leader. He dedicated his life to the service of his
country and his people. He led Syria firmly and
steadfastly on the road to building a modern State,
achieving stability and enhancing national unity,
solidarity and conciliation among the Syrian people.
His name was integrally connected to the Syrian
struggle to liberate the Golan. He made this his most
noble objective, and no one could deflect him from it.
The late President was a unique symbol of loyalty
in the unparalleled way he addressed and defended
Arab and Islamic issues. His humanity was the
foundation for his outlook. No one is unaware of his
commitment to the just causes of concern to the world
at large, specifically to the Arab and Islamic world and
particularly to issues of liberation and decolonization.
The achievements of President Hafez Al-Assad
are countless. He is the type of man who not only
friends, but enemies as well would recognize as being
wise and a true, insightful statesman. History will
certainly recall his love for peace and his sincere desire
to guarantee for his country, Syria, for the Arab people
in general and for the Middle East region, the
necessary conditions for living in peace and prosperity.
It was not strange that a leader such as he made
peace in the Middle East a strategic choice, a choice to
the dimensions of which he gave his full attention. The
success of his commitment has been evident ever since
the drive for peace in the region began.

3

A/54/PV.98

However, President Al-Assad died before he was
able to proceed further on this road. He has entrusted
this work to those he left behind.
We hope that his soul will rest in peace,
especially since he dedicated his life on Earth to the
service of his people and his country. May he dwell
contentedly in heaven, having left Syria enjoying the
dignity and stability we see today. May his soul rest in
the heavens, since he has left behind a generation —
the best of Syrian men and women — who are loyal
and faithful to the commitments he undertook, and thus
who will also pursue the path towards the liberation of
the Arab lands, the recovery of Syrian sovereignty in
the Golan and the establishment of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.
May God have mercy on his soul. May he live in
heaven. May his family enjoy such consolation as they
can.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. James Cunningham of the United
States of America, who will speak on behalf of the host
country.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): As
the representative of the host country, I wish to offer
our condolences on the passing of President Hafez AlAssad. I would like also to extend our sympathies to
his family and to all the Syrian people.
President Al-Assad stood out as a major figure in
the Middle East. He made a strategic choice for peace
at Madrid in 1991, and we welcome Syria’s continued
commitment to that choice. The United States strongly
believes that the Syrian decision was the right one, and
that Syria will continue on the path of peace that
President Al-Assad started down. President Al-Assad’s
strategic choice for peace reflected the compelling
logic for all parties to pursue a comprehensive peace
and America’s willingness to work with all parties to
achieve that goal. We will continue to do everything in
our power to bring a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace to the Middle East.
We join the world in offering our condolences
and hope that President Al-Assad’s desire for peace
will come to fruition as soon as possible.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency
Mr.
Mikhail
Wehbe,
Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

4

Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It is an hour of sorrow, especially since I have
closely known the father and the great leader President
Hafez Al-Assad.
Allow me, Sir, on behalf of the people and
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, to express to
you our profound thanks and appreciation for your
sincere words paying tribute to the leader and symbol
of the Syrian Arab people, President Hafez Al-Assad. I
would also like to thank you for setting aside this time
during the work of the General Assembly to share with
Syria its sadness at its great tragedy. I would also like
to thank all those who kindly made statements — the
Ambassadors who spoke on behalf of the regional
groups and the host country, the United States of
America — for their sincere words.
We would also like to express our profound
appreciation to Mr. Kofi Annan, the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, for having paid a visit to our
Mission and for offering his sincere condolences on the
loss of our late President Hafez Al-Assad in the
condolence book at the Mission.
With great bitterness and with a heart heavy with
sorrow and fraught with pain, Syria on 10 June 2000
bade farewell to a great and brilliant leader, His
Excellency President Hafez Al-Assad, who devoted his
life first and foremost to the causes of his people and
his nation and to the preservation of its pride and
dignity. His Excellency President Al-Assad spent his
life struggling for the noble humanitarian values and
principles for which he lived and which informed every
minute of his life.
Our leader, Al-Assad, was born in the midst of
the struggle of our Syrian people for liberation and
independence, as well as of the struggle of all the Arab
peoples, when the Arab nation was waging its most
ferocious battle in order to achieve its legitimate aims
of liberation and unity.
President Hafez Al-Assad was not an ordinary
leader in Syrian history. This leader was nurtured in the
school of love of one’s country and of sacrificing for
the progress and dignity of one’s country. This earned
him the trust of his people, who with conviction and
renewed faith chose him as their leader and the symbol
of their struggle.
During his rule, Syria enjoyed stability and
progress. Under him it built its modern cultural edifice.

A/54/PV.98

He has left for his country and for the Arab nation a
legacy of which we are all proud and an approach to
which Syria will remain committed and will build upon
in the days, months and years to come.
Our leader Al-Assad devoted himself to the
service of his country, his people and his nation, and to
the achievement of the lofty aims for which the Arab
masses have struggled. Every minute of his time was
devoted to his country, and so were his days and nights.
He was indeed totally devoted to his country and to the
Arab nation.
The words of one Arab poet are true of him:
“If he held in the palm of his hand nothing but his
soul, he would readily give it. Thus, let those who
would petition God fear Him.”
The leader Al-Assad was one with his masses and
the masses identified with their leader. Days after the
passing of Mr. Al-Assad, profound sadness still engulfs
the people of Syria and the Arab nation, as all have
noted, as well as others everywhere who love him. The
masses came out in every city and village with great
spontaneity and filled the streets of Damascus with
great sincerity, refusing to believe the painful news of
the passing of their leader Hafez Al-Assad.
The name of Al-Assad has come to be associated
with that of Syria. His history has come to be linked to
that of Syria and his status with its status. Syria grew
stronger under Al-Assad and Al-Assad grew stronger
with Syria. The late President Hafez Al-Assad
established a prominent status for Syria at the
international and regional levels. On the domestic
front, he pursued a comprehensive patriotic policy that
was consolidated over the years by deep-rooted
national unity and by social, cultural and economic
achievements exceeding the bounds of imagination.
Modern Syria was built under his rule and, because of
his tireless interest in the causes of the Arab nation, the
leader Al-Assad exhorted Arabs to close ranks in the
face of common challenges. In this regard, his first and
foremost concern was championing the causes of Arabs
and the Arab nation, regaining Arab glory, achieving
noble Arab objectives and settling Arab differences.
At the international level, he spared no effort in
building sound relations with all countries of the world
based on mutual respect and common interests and in
championing the causes of right and justice. President
Al-Assad believed deeply in the purposes and

principles of the United Nations Charter. At every
occasion, he emphasized the need to implement those
purposes and principles and their embodiment in the
policies of Syria. Through his strategic thinking,
President Al-Assad believed that there could be no
world peace or fruitful international cooperation
without international legitimacy, represented by the
United Nations and its resolutions, which must be
implemented with a single standard.
In this regard, under his leadership Syria was
always a platform for the voice of right and justice and
an advocate for the achievement of a just and
comprehensive peace based on international legitimacy
and the norms of international law. Strategic peace is
the option that Syria has chosen, an honourable peace
that confers rights where they are due and upholds the
dignity and pride of all.
It is a great honour for me to affirm that the
policies of President Al-Assad and all the values that
he established in the lives of our people have become
our legacy and guiding light. We are responsible for
our commitment to that legacy and guide and for
working to ensure their ongoing relevance. Those who
carry on the mission of President Al-Assad will seek to
affirm and embody this commitment with greater
progress and in defence of the causes of right and
justice in our region and throughout the world.
During the past few days since the passing of Mr.
Al-Assad, we have seen the sadness shared by
everyone we have encountered within and without the
United Nations. The late President Al-Assad was the
object of universal respect and appreciation that amply
reflect his noble qualities, his honourable positions and
firm belief in the causes of his people, his country and
the entire world. This has been acknowledged even by
those who differed with him, because their differences
did not affect their amity.
The leadership and people of Syria appreciate the
solidarity of all those who stand with us in this difficult
time. Their sincere condolences are balm to our deep
wounds and to our great tragedy. In conclusion, I
would ask members kindly to convey the thanks and
appreciation of the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and its people for all the sincere emotions
that have been expressed and our best wishes to their
people and Governments for success in achieving
progress and dignity. May God have mercy on the dear
departed and make paradise his abode.

5

A/54/PV.98

Agenda item 125 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/54/915)
The President: I should like, in keeping with the
established practice, to invite the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/54/915, which has
been circulated in the General Assembly Hall this
afternoon. It contains a letter from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the General
Assembly, in which he informs the Assembly that 35
Member States are in arrears in the payment of their
financial contributions to the United Nations within the
terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I should like to remind delegations that, under
Article 19 of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is
in arrears in the payment of its financial
contributions to the Organization shall have no
vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its
arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the
contributions due from it for the preceding two
full years.”
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/54/915?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 117, 118, 118 and 164, 119, 121, 124, 128 (a) and
(b), 129, 130 (a), 131, 132 and 148, 133, 136, 137, 141,
142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 149, 150 and 172, 151
and sub-items (a) and (c), 166, 173 and 175.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Jan Piotr Jaremczuk of Poland, to introduce the
reports of the Fifth Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Jaremczuk (Poland), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the honour today to present to the
General Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee
on its work during the second part of its resumed fiftyfourth session.
In connection with agenda item 117, entitled
“Financial reports and audited financial statements, and
reports of the Board of Auditors” and its sub-item (a),
“United Nations peacekeeping operations”, the report

6

of the Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/54/506/Add.2. In its report, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.58, which was adopted by
the Committee without a vote.
In connection with agenda items 118, entitled
“Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations”, and 164,
entitled “Human resources management”, in particular
with regard to the question of gratis personnel provided
by Governments, the report of the Fifth Committee is
contained in document A/54/827/Add.1, whereby the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.81, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Regarding agenda item 119, entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 1998-1999”, namely, the
question of treatment of perennial activities, the report
of the Committee is contained A/54/508/Add.3. In its
report, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly
the
adoption
of
draft
decision
A/C.5/54/L.84, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Concerning
agenda
item
121,
entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001”, the
report of the Committee is contained A/54/691/Add.2.
In this connection, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of one draft decision,
which deals with the question of additional
expenditures
(A/C.5/54/L.76),
and
two
draft
resolutions, one dealing with the analysis of the
organizational structure and the personnel and
technical resources of the Non-Governmental
Organizations Section of the United Nations Secretariat
(A/C.5/54/L.86) and the other with the review of the
resource requirements for the high-level international
intergovernmental event for financing for development
and the Third United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries and with the programme budget
implications
of
draft
resolution
A/54/L.82
(A/C.5/54/L.82). The draft decision and the two draft
resolutions were adopted by the Committee without a
vote.
In connection with agenda item 124, entitled
“Pattern of conferences”, considering in particular a
letter from the Chairman of the Committee on
Conferences addressed to the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee regarding the holding of the substantive

A/54/PV.98

session of the Committee on Conferences at Nairobi, a
draft resolution (A/C.5/54/L.83) was proposed by the
representatives of Kenya, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania. The report of the Committee is
contained in A/54/690/Add.2, whereby the Committee
informs the General Assembly that it decided to
postpone consideration of the draft resolution to a later
date pending the receipt of a statement of the
programme budget implications of the draft resolution
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
With regard to agenda item 128 (a), on the
financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, the report of the Committee is
contained in document A/54/896. In its report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.80, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Regarding agenda item 128 (b), on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the report of the
Committee is contained in document A/54/897. In this
connection, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.5/54/L.69 by 99 votes in favour to 2 against.
Concerning agenda item 129, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission and
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola”, the
report of the Committee is contained in document
A/54/504/Add.1, whereby the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of draft
resolution A/C.5/54/L.59, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
Mr. Ingólfsson (Iceland), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
In connection with agenda item 130 (a), on the
financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission, the report of the Fifth Committee
is contained in document A/54/510/Add.1 In this
connection, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of one draft resolution
(A/C.5/54/L.88) regarding the financing of the Mission
and one draft decision (A/C.5/54/L.94), dealing with
the Mission’s subsistence allowance. Both the draft
resolution and the draft decision were adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
Regarding agenda item 131, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara”, the report of the Committee is

contained in document A/54/899. In its report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.60, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Concerning agenda items 132, entitled “Financing
and liquidation of the United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia”, and 148, entitled “Financing
of the Military Observer Group of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Guatemala”, the report of the
Committee is contained in document A/54/910,
whereby the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly
the
adoption
of
draft
decision
A/C.5/54/L.75, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 133, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Protection Force, the United
Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia,
the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force and
the United Nations Peace Forces headquarters”, the
report of the Committee is contained in document
A/54/900. In this connection, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.61, which was adopted by
the Committee without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 136, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”,
the report of the Committee is contained in document
A/54/901. In its report, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of draft resolution
A/C.5/54/L.62, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Regarding agenda item 137, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia”,
the report of the Committee is contained in document
A/54/902. In this regard, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of draft
resolution A/C.5/54/L.63, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
In connection with agenda item 141, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission of Observers
in Tajikistan”, the report of the Committee is contained
in document A/54/903. In this connection, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.64, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 142, entitled “Financing
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of

7

A/54/PV.98

Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991”, the
report of the Committee is contained in document
A/54/678/Add.1, whereby the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of draft
resolution A/C.5/54/L.85, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 143, entitled
“Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994”, the report of the Committee is
contained in document A/54/679/Add.1. In its report,
the Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.73, which
was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 144, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina”, the report of the Committee is contained
in document A/54/904. In this connection, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.65, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
In connection with agenda item 145, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium and the Civilian Police Support
Group”, the report of the Committee is contained in
document A/54/905,
whereby the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.66, which was adopted by
the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 146, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force”, the report of the Committee is
contained in document A/54/906. In its report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.67, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 147, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti, the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti
and the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in

8

Haiti”, the report of the Committee is contained in
document A/54/907,
whereby the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.70, which was adopted by
the Committee without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 149, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic”, the report of the Committee is contained in
document A/54/908,
whereby the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.74, which was adopted by
the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda items 150, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Sierra Leone”, and 172, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone”, the report of
the
Committee
is
contained
in
document
A/54/686/Add.1, whereby the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of draft
resolution A/C.5/54/L.68, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
In connection with agenda item 151 (a), on the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the report of the Committee is contained in
document A/54/684/Add.2, whereby the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
three draft resolutions, one dealing with the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi (A/C.5/54/L.71),
another with the support account for peacekeeping
operations (A/C.5/54/L.87) and the third with
reimbursement
of
contingent-owned
equipment
(A/C.5/54/L.92). The three draft resolutions were
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Also under agenda item 151, the Committee
considered sub-item (c) on the relocation of South
Africa to the group of Member States set out in
paragraph 3 (c) of General Assembly resolution
43/232. In the same report, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of draft decision
A/C.5/54/L.72, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
In connection with agenda item 166, entitled
“Financing
of
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo”, the report of the
Committee is contained in document A/54/674/Add.1,
whereby the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly
the
adoption
of
draft
resolution

A/54/PV.98

A/C.5/54/L.77, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 173, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor”, the report of the
Committee is contained in document A/54/687/Add.2.
In its report, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of draft resolution
A/C.5/54/L.78, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Finally, concerning agenda item 175, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the report
of the Committee is contained in document
A/54/830/Add.1, whereby the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of draft
resolution A/C.5/54/L.79, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
With your permission, Sir, I should like to say a
few personal words from the bottom of my heart to my
friends and colleagues from the Fifth Committee who
are present here.
Since my diplomatic assignment will soon come
to an end after five hard years in the Fifth Committee
and I will be leaving New York, let me use this
opportunity to express my sincere thanks and gratitude
to all my dear colleagues for having elected me a
Bureau member and Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee
during the fifty-fourth session, which enabled me to
make a greater personal contribution to the work of the
Committee than I have ever made before.
I should like to express thanks to anybody in this
Organization who contributed to and assisted me in
fulfilling my function. First, I should like to thank our
Chairman, Ms. Penny Wensley, Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Australia to the United
Nations, for her excellent leadership. I thank the
secretariat of the Fifth Committee, headed by Mr.
Joseph Acakpo-Satchivi, with the strong support of his
Deputy, Mrs. Nora Benary, assisted by staff members
Patricia Morales, Mimi Diaz-Westberg and Paul
Dysenchuk, who conducted the informal consultations
at this session and know well how important a role
Mrs. Benary plays in the process of negotiations and in
the preparation of draft resolutions. I thank her very
much for that.

I am fully aware that it is impossible to mention
all the names of persons essentially involved in our
work and who assisted me in performing my function,
but let me call a few of them by name: Ambassador
Mselle, Chairman of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions — it is
needless to recall the role of the Advisory Committee
in our work; Mr. Joseph Connor, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Management; and his devoted and hardworking staff, especially Mr. Jean-Pierre Halbwachs,
the Controller, and Mr. Warren Sach, Director of the
Programme Planning and Budget Division of the Office
of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts. I
should like also like to thank Director Hocine Medili
and his highly professional staff of the Field
Administration and Logistics Division of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for their
strong support and contribution to our work and to my
functions, especially during the second resumed
session, which was, as we know, almost fully devoted
to the financing of peacekeeping operations — over 20
field missions.
I also would like to thank my wife Lucyna,
present here in this Hall now, for her moral support,
understanding and patience, especially when I often
returned home well after midnight from my Fifth
Committee work during the fifty-fourth session.
I wish the Assembly every success in the coming
session of the new millennium, especially during the
next, when the Committee will struggle over the new
scale of assessments, an extremely important and
sensitive item for the Member States and for the United
Nations. I wish representatives and their families good
health. May God bless them all.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Fifth Committee which are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.

9

A/54/PV.98

May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I would like to advise representatives that
we shall proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise. This means that where
recorded or separate votes were taken, we will do the
same. I should also hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report
of
the
(A/54/506/Add.2)

Fifth

Committee

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/13 C).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 117.

Agenda item 118 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report
of
the
(A/54/511/Add.3)

Fifth

Committee

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the two draft decisions
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 8
of its report.
We turn first to draft decision I, entitled
“Guidelines for Internal Control Standards”. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee
adopted draft decision II, entitled “Action taken on
certain documents”, without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The Acting President: We have concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 118.
Agenda items 118 and 164 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Human resources management
Report
of
the
(A/54/827/Add.1)

Fifth

Committee

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled “Gratis personnel provided by Governments”,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/264).
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of the United States of America, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.

10

A/54/PV.98

Mr. Hays (United States of America): My
delegation welcomes the resolution on gratis personnel
that the Assembly has just approved, as it provides a
more balanced approach to gratis issues.
We appreciate the assistance of all those
representatives who worked diligently to shape the
consensus on this resolution. However, we also believe
at the same time that the resolution could have been
even more balanced, particularly in the light of the
urgent need of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for adequate expertise to respond to
peacekeeping operations now under way. As we said
during the Fifth Committee discussions last month, the
General Assembly should go on record with a clear
encouragement of the Secretary-General to use those
provisions of resolution 51/243 when warranted. Those
provisions allow the Secretary-General to use gratis
personnel under exceptional circumstances. The
resolution we have just adopted does include, although
in a somewhat muted fashion, such an encouragement.
In paragraph 5 the resolution recalls the existing
mandates under relevant General Assembly resolutions
on gratis personnel.
Those mandates of course include resolution
51/243. In paragraph 4 of that resolution, the General
Assembly outlined the exceptional circumstances under
which the Secretary-General is authorized to accept
gratis personnel. As described in that resolution, the
Secretary-General can accept gratis personnel for very
specialized functions if they have expertise that is not
available to the United Nations and are used for a
limited and specific period of time. We can also accept
gratis personnel if they provide temporary and urgent
assistance in the case of a new or expanding mandate,
pending a General Assembly decision on the level of
resources to meet those mandates.
As Member States, we must realize that there will
continue to be unique circumstances when temporary
resource personnel in highly specialized areas must be
obtained quickly if the United Nations is to do the job
that we have mandated it to do. These circumstances
may be limited in number, but the mechanisms to
address these needs must not be further restricted.
Rather, they should be made even more flexible to help
in handling surge requirements when they arise.
We should not forget that the Secretary-General
appeared before the Fifth Committee last October and
appealed to Member States to help give him the

flexibility to respond promptly and effectively to new
challenges as they arise. If we are to assure that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations can fulfil its
mandate, we must respond to this call and provide the
Secretariat with the resources needed, in whatever form
is most readily available. As representatives to this
Organization, we should not be seeking ways to further
limit the Secretary-General’s ability to meet unusual
circumstances, but should instead ensure that he has
the flexible arrangements available to him that
ultimately serve to meet the needs of the Member
States.
The Acting President: There are no further
requests in explanation of position. We have concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda items 118 and
164.
Agenda item 119 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 1998-1999
Report
of
the
(A/54/508/Add.3)

Fifth

Committee

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft decision recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision,
entitled “Relationship between the treatment of
perennial activities in the programme budget and the
use of the contingency fund”, without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 119.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001
Report
of
the
(A/54/691/Add.2)

Fifth

Committee

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the two draft resolutions
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 16
of its report, and on the two draft decisions
recommended in paragraph 17 of the same report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Analysis of the organizational structure and the
personnel and technical resources of the Non-

11

A/54/PV.98

Governmental Organizations Section of the United
Nations Secretariat”. The Fifth Committee adopted this
draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/265).
The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution II, entitled “Review of the resource
requirements
for
the
high-level
international
intergovernmental event on financing for development
and the Third United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries”. The Fifth Committee adopted
this draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

The Acting President: We have concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 124.
Agenda item 128
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
forces in the Middle East
(a)

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/896)

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/258 B).

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled
“Financing
of
the
United
Nations
Disengagement Observer Force”, without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

The Acting President: We turn now to the two
draft decisions.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/266).

The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision I,
entitled “Estimates in respect of matters of which the
Security Council is seized”, without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 128.
(b)

Draft decision I was adopted.
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee
adopted draft decision II, entitled “Additional
expenditures referred to in paragraphs 10 and 11 of
annex I to General Assembly resolution 41/213”,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The Acting President: We have concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 121.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Pattern of conferences
Report
of
the
(A/54/690/Add.2)

Fifth

Committee

The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Fifth Committee contained in document
A/54/690/Add.2?
It was so decided.

12

United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/897)

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Israel in explanation of vote before
the voting.
Mr. Jacob (Israel): Israel will vote against the
draft resolution contained in document A/54/897. I
wish to address, in this context, some recent events that
may bring us further up to date on the issues at hand.
As the Assembly may know, the Government of
Israel adopted a decision on 5 March 2000 to withdraw
its forces from Lebanon. That decision was carried out
on 24 May, as the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF)
redeployed to the international border. It should be
emphasized that the IDF completed its withdrawal
swiftly and with maximum restraint, despite efforts by
terrorists in the area to provoke a confrontation. The
IDF, in fact, took pains to avoid any actions that might
have endangered innocent civilians, even after
terrorists cynically sought to use civilians as human
shields. The Israeli forces were soon deployed safely
on the Israeli side of the international border.

A/54/PV.98

Israel has repeatedly expressed its preference for
carrying out the withdrawal in the framework of a
peace agreement. However, these efforts were not
reciprocated in kind. Therefore, Israel finally
undertook to withdraw unilaterally. The withdrawal
was completed in full compliance with Security
Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978). It
should be recalled that resolution 425 (1978) calls not
only for the withdrawal of the Israeli forces, but also
for the restoration of international peace and security
and the return of the effective authority of the
Government of Lebanon to the area.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon”, recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 11 of its report (A/54/897).

Now that the withdrawal has been concluded, we
look forward to the fulfilment of the remaining aspects
of the resolution. The goal of bringing about
international peace and security, as well as that of
restoring the effective authority of Lebanon, is cited in
the resolution as an objective of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). Israel hopes that
UNIFIL will have the ability and the resources,
including the assistance of Member States, needed to
rise to the enormous responsibilities presented by
resolution 425 (1978). We expect that the Government
of Lebanon will fulfil its responsibility to ensure peace
and security within its borders. International law
prohibits any State from allowing its territory to be a
ground for terrorist activities. Israel reserves its right to
act in self-defence, should the need arise.

Mr. Diab (Lebanon): We have heard the
representative of Israel attack Lebanon using
unacceptable words. What we would like to ask is,
what is the reason in the Israeli definition?

As we have mentioned before, Israel is forced to
vote against this draft resolution because it singles out
and faults Israel unfairly and entirely for an incident
that was initiated by a terrorist group using human
shields. Moreover, it should be noted that this is the
only time a draft resolution calls for one particular
party to pay damages for the property of United
Nations peacekeepers as a result of a clash. My
delegation regrets that this draft resolution has been
tarnished by the needless addition of the three
paragraphs that single out Israel. Otherwise, Israel
could support this draft resolution.
Indeed, Israel recently took steps to intensify our
support for the peacekeeping operations. As the
Assembly will recall, Israel upgraded from group (c) to
group (b) in the peacekeeping operations budget. It is
unfortunate that we are forced to vote against this draft
resolution in its current form merely due to the
confrontational words added to it. It is time to adapt to
the new realities on the ground.

A single separate vote has been requested on the
first preambular paragraph and on paragraphs 2, 3 and
14 of the draft resolution. Is there any objection to that
request?
I give the floor to the representative of Lebanon
in explanation of vote before the voting.

The occupation of Lebanon for 22 years, in
violation of Security Council resolution 425 (1978),
and the terrorizing of the Lebanese population by
killing civilians and bombing civilian infrastructure —
The Acting President: We are in the midst of
proceeding to the voting. May I request that the
representative of Lebanon wait until after the voting to
explain his vote?
Mr. Diab (Lebanon): This is not an explanation
of vote. This is in right of reply.
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
the first preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 2, 3 and 14 of the draft resolution
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 11
of its report (A/54/897), on which a single separate
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria,
Angola,
Antigua
and
Barbuda,
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Gabon, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,

13

A/54/PV.98

Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Tonga, Tunisia, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
The first preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 2, 3, and 14 were retained by 64
votes to 2, with 43 abstentions.
The Acting President: I now put to the vote the
draft resolution contained in paragraph 11 of document
A/54/897 as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Egypt,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,

14

Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
None
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted by
110 votes to 2 (resolution 54/267).
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to make statements in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Hays (United States of America): The United
States wants to state its strong support for the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), which is
implementing a difficult and important mandate. We
also support the expansion of this peacekeeping
mission that the Secretary-General has recently
proposed. However, we believe that the use of General
Assembly funding resolutions to pursue claims against
Member States is procedurally incorrect. This is the
reason why we opposed resolution 53/227 last year —
and resolutions 52/237 and 51/233 in previous years —
since they contain sections that require Israel to pay for
the costs stemming from the Qana incident in 1996.
Those resolutions were not consensus resolutions.
Since shortly after the inception of the United
Nations, the procedure that has been followed is that
the Secretary-General presents and pursues the
settlement of Organization claims against a State or
States. This procedure was first begun in 1946 in the
Middle East and continues for peacekeeping-related
damages claims in the Balkans. Using a funding
resolution to legislate a claim is, in our view,
inappropriate. It also politicizes the work of the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly and should be
avoided both now and in the future.
Mr. Diab (Lebanon): I will speak in explanation
of vote.

A/54/PV.98

The resolution on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) confirmed
that it was the responsibility of the occupying State —
Israel — to fulfil its obligation and responsibilities
under international law. Lebanon’s position is based on
the necessity of the aggressor State — Israel — to
assume full responsibility for its acts of aggression
against Lebanon, especially since the aggression was
deliberate and directed against the United Nations.
Israel has ignored General Assembly resolutions
51/233, 52/237 and 53/227, which have determined its
responsibility for this aggression. The General
Assembly has once again demonstrated today that
when it comes to the issue of financing peacekeeping
operations, collective financial responsibility goes
hand-in-hand with collective responsibility for human
lives, the sanctity of the peacekeeping missions and the
responsibility to ensure its safety.
UNIFIL is another peacekeeping mission success
story. Peacekeeping and national resistance have
proven to be two fundamental prerequisites for
liberation from occupation, a right enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
We have full confidence in the Secretary-General
to ensure that the contents of the resolution will be
implemented. We will continue to monitor the
development of the situation, and we hope that the next
performance report on UNIFIL will reflect the
implementation of this resolution.
Mr. Nakkari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation has asked for the floor to reply
to the allegations made by the representative of the
Israeli occupation.
The resolution just adopted affirms Israel’s
responsibility —
The Acting President: I would respectfully
request that representatives limit their comments to
explanations of vote.
Mr. Nakkari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation has asked for the floor to
exercise its right of reply to respond to the allegations
made by the representative of the Israeli occupation.
The Acting President: As I stated, in accordance
with the rules of procedure, the exercise of the right of
reply can be conducted only after voting proceedings,
and at the end of the meeting.

Mr. Nakkari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The resolution just adopted once again
reaffirms Israel’s responsibility for its attack in April
1996 against United Nations headquarters in southern
Lebanon.
The Acting President: I will have to ask the
speaker to limit his comments to an explanation of vote
after the voting. I have repeatedly stated that, in
accordance with the rules of procedure, the right of
reply can only be exercised after we have conducted
the voting and before the end of the meeting.
Mr. Abdalla (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): In
explaining my vote I shall definitely be replying to
some of what the representative of Israel said earlier. In
that light, would the President prefer that I make my
statement after the voting procedure has come to an
end?
The Acting President: I respectfully ask that the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya wait until
the end of the meeting to make his statement, as we are
obliged to proceed in accordance with the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Mr. Abdalla (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): I would
point out that when Israel spoke in explanation of vote
it was permitted to allude to other matters that fall
outside the voting procedure. Thus, we would be
obliged to respond to the Israeli allegations in
explaining our own vote. I would ask the President to
propose a way in which we can do this, as what we
have to say certainly relates to this vote.
The Acting President: I have no intention of
denying any Member State the exercise of its right of
reply, but I respectfully ask the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to wait until the end of the
meeting to speak in exercise of that right.
We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 128.
Agenda item 129 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission and the United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola
Report
of
the
(A/54/504/Add.1)

Fifth

Committee

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by

15

A/54/PV.98

the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
draft resolution was adopted by the Fifth Committee
without a vote. May I consider that the General
Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/17 B).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 129.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Financing of the activities arising from Security
Council resolution 687 (1991)
(a)

United Nations
Mission

Iraq-Kuwait

Report
of
the
(A/54/510/Add.1)

Fifth

Observation
Committee

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report and on
the draft decision recommended in paragraph 9 of the
same report.
We turn first to the draft resolution, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission”. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I consider that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/18 B).
The Acting President: We turn now to the draft
decision, entitled “Payment of mission subsistence
allowance in the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission”. The draft decision was adopted
by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft
decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 130.

16

Agenda item 131
Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/899)
The Acting President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The draft
resolution was adopted by the Fifth Committee without
a vote. May I consider that the Assembly also wishes to
adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/268).
The Acting President: I call now on delegations
wishing to make statements in explanation of position
on the decision just taken.
Mr. Herrera (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me reaffirm the position that my delegation stated in
the Fifth Committee. My delegation has associated
itself with the adoption without a vote of the draft
resolution on agenda item 131, but has two concerns.
The first relates to the apparent loss of $375 million,
which the General Assembly had authorized 10 years
ago for the holding of a referendum, which should have
already taken place. The second is that we do not yet
know what options have been presented to the Sahraoui
people relating to its future.
We continue to think that the best way to attain
our common objective is to proceed to a referendum.
Mr. Zahid (Morocco) (spoke in French): We are
aware that the Assembly long ago decided that
delegations should as far as possible explain their vote
only once, either in plenary meeting or in Committee.
But as another delegation has already explained its vote
in both forums, my delegation too wishes to do so, with
apologies to the Assembly.
The Assembly has just adopted, without a vote as
usual, its resolution on the financing of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO). It was Morocco that had initiated the
referendum in this part of its territory, which it
regained legally following the Madrid agreement and
the opinion of the International Court of Justice.
Morocco has thus given unreserved material, financial
and moral support to MINURSO, as acknowledged in
all reports of the Secretary-General.

A/54/PV.98

We are convinced that MINURSO, which has
made enormous efforts, should continue to enjoy the
support of Member States. In our view, such support is
all the more appropriate at this very difficult stage for
the mission, when the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Baker, is using his good offices in an
attempt to break the deadlock that has affected the
implementation process for several months.
It is common knowledge that the identification
process has given rise to widespread dissatisfaction:
some 140,000 applicants have been rejected by the
identification centres and have appealed their
rejections. Those appeals have been duly received by
the relevant United Nations offices. The first problem
that is likely to arise is connected with the various
provisions of the protocols and guidelines governing
such appeals.
The second problem relates to the registration and
repatriation of refugees and of all Sahraouis who reside
outside the Territory. The third problem is that of what
has been termed revision: applicants who were
accepted by the identification centres and whose names
were communicated to us, but who were dropped from
the final lists. Morocco has requested that they be
restored to those lists.
There are a number of problems, and we consider
that the international community should and must
continue to support this peacekeeping mission; we are
convinced that, with due effort, it will succeed.
Mr. Belaoura (Algeria) (spoke in French): My
delegation fully endorses the statements by the
representative of Mexico a few moments ago and in the
Fifth Committee last week.
We believe that the resolution of the Western
Sahara conflict lies in the self-determination
referendum that is the cornerstone of the settlement
plan. Through that referendum, the Sahraoui people
will be able to express itself on its future in accordance
with international law and, particularly, with General
Assembly resolutions.
But as we noted last week, we have recently seen
certain members of the Security Council and others
attempt to change the approach. This change of
approach has affected the last three resolutions adopted
by the Security Council on this matter, including
Council resolutions 1292 (2000) and, most recently,
1301 (2000). It also affected the debate on the adoption

of the latter resolution, to the effect that the Western
Sahara settlement plan that has applied since 1992
could possibly be abandoned in favour of some other
alternative. Let me recall that the settlement plan
enjoys the support of the international community and
the endorsement of the Security Council and of the two
parties. It is a comprehensive plan whose purpose is to
carry out the self-determination referendum for which
the Sahraoui people has been waiting since January
1992.
Moreover, in addition to the Security Council
resolutions to which I have referred, the last two
reports of the Secretary-General have given rise to
certain interpretations which, because of problems
encountered in implementing the settlement plan, could
encourage the search for another option. For the
information of the General Assembly, I should observe
that among the problems with respect to the recent
reports and Security Council resolutions is that relating
to the context in which the resolutions were adopted
and to the voting itself — in which, for the first time,
there were abstentions and even negative votes. This
new trend can be explained by the existence of
problems impeding the implementation of the
settlement plan; generally speaking, these include the
appeals and the lack of a proper mechanism for
carrying out the referendum.
For its part, Algeria considers these to be normal
problems that could arise in any such important and
complex process, but that can be resolved through
dialogue and cooperation between Morocco and the
Frente POLISARIO — cooperation which has existed
over the past nine years with respect to a number of
other problems that I need not go into here. On the
specific issue of the approximately 130,000 appeals by
applicants rejected by the MINURSO Identification
Commission, there is good reason to apply the May
1999 agreement accepted and signed by the two parties
to the conflict, Morocco and the Frente POLISARIO,
and endorsed by the Security Council. The protocols on
the appeals process have been issued as United Nations
documents.
Algeria considers that, in spite of the present
problems, the process of resolving the conflict in
Western Sahara has made considerable progress
towards the full implementation of the settlement plan.
It would be unfair to ignore that progress, which
includes the ceasefire that has obtained in Western
Sahara since 6 September 1991; the progress made in

17

A/54/PV.98

the identification process, which has made it possible
to identify at least 200,000 individuals in Western
Sahara; and the pre-registration of Sahraoui refugees,
of whom the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees has registered more than
100,000 to date.
It would thus be unfair and unwise at this stage to
contemplate the abandonment of this process or of the
settlement plan, which represent the fruit of 10 years of
effort and human, material and financial investment by
the international community.
The question of Western Sahara is a
decolonization issue falling under resolution 1514
(XV) adopted in 1960, on which the settlement plan is
based, and under the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly each year, calling upon the two
parties, Morocco and the Frente POLISARIO, to
cooperate with the international community, with
MINURSO and with the Secretary-General in the
implementation of the plan and in the holding of the
self-determination referendum for which the Sahraoui
people has been waiting for 25 years, both in its
territory and in refugee camps.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 131.
Agenda items 132 and 148
Financing and liquidation of the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia
Financing of the Military Observer Group of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/910)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft decision recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
draft decision, entitled “Losses of United Nations
property in peacekeeping operations”, was adopted by
the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I consider
that the Assembly wishes also to adopt the draft
decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda items 132 and
148.

18

Agenda item 133
Financing of the United Nations Protection Force,
the United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation in Croatia, the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force and the United Nations Peace
Forces headquarters
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/900)
The Acting President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The draft
resolution was adopted by the Fifth Committee without
a vote. May I consider that the Assembly too wishes to
adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/269).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 133.
Agenda item 136
Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/901)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/270).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 136.
Agenda item 137
Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/902)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?

A/54/PV.98

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/271).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 137.
Agenda item 141
Financing of the United
Observers in Tajikistan

Nations

Mission

of

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/903)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
draft resolution was adopted by the Fifth Committee
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes also to adopt the draft resolution?

Agenda item 143 (continued)
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31
December 1994
Report
of
the
(A/54/679/Add.1)

Fifth

Committee

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/272).

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
draft resolution was adopted by the Fifth Committee
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
likewise wishes to adopt the draft resolution?

The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 141.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/240 B).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 143.

Agenda item 142 (continued)
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
Report
of
the
(A/54/678/Add.1)

Fifth

Committee

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/239 B).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 142.

Agenda item 144
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/904)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/273).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 144.

19

A/54/PV.98

Agenda item 145
Financing of the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium and the Civilian Police Support
Group
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/905)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
draft resolution, entitled “Financing of the Civilian
Police Support Group”, was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly also wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/274).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 145.
Agenda item 146
Financing of the
Deployment Force

United

Nations

Preventive

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/906)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/275).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 146.
Agenda item 147
Financing of the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti, the United Nations Transition Mission in
Haiti and the United Nations Civilian Police
Mission in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/907)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.

20

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Civilian
Police Mission in Haiti”, without a vote. May I
consider that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/276).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 147.
Agenda item 149
Financing of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/908)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/277).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 149.
Agenda items 150 and 172 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Sierra Leone
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone
Report
of
the
(A/54/686/Add.1)

Fifth

Committee

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Sierra Leone and the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/241 B).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda items 150 and
172.

A/54/PV.98

Agenda item 151 (continued)
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
(a)

Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations

(c)

Relocation of South Africa to the group of
Member States set out in paragraph 3 (c) of
General Assembly resolution 43/232
Report
of
the
(A/54/684/Add.2)

Fifth

Committee

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on three draft resolutions recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 14 of its report
and on two draft decisions recommended by the
Committee in paragraph 15 of the same report.
We turn first to the three draft resolutions.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Logistics
Base at Brindisi, Italy”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution
54/278).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The Acting President: The Fifth Committee
adopted draft resolution II, entitled “Support account
for peacekeeping operations”, without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
54/243 B).
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee
adopted draft resolution III, entitled “Reformed
procedures for determining reimbursement to Member
States for contingent-owned equipment”, without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
54/19 B).
The Acting President: We turn next to the two
draft decisions.
Draft decision I is entitled “Reimbursement to the
Governments of troop-contributing States” and was
recommended by the Fifth Committee for adoption.

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
decision I?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee
adopted draft decision II, entitled “Relocation of South
Africa to the group of Member States set out in
paragraph 3 (c) of General Assembly resolution
43/232”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United States in explanation of
position on the draft resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Hays (United States of America): My
delegation has asked for the floor at this time to recall
the many serious statements made by ambassadors
during the resumed session in May regarding the need
to strengthen the United Nations peacekeeping
capacity, both operationally and financially. At this
critical juncture, when we are expecting the United
Nations to undertake bigger and more complex
peacekeeping activities than ever before, it is
incumbent on the Fifth Committee to approve those
needed resources that will enable the United Nations,
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) in particular, to carry out its critical mandates.
We made important progress towards that end
during the resumed session of the Fifth Committee.
Notably, the Committee membership welcomed
positive developments in the utilization of the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi and asked that the
Secretary-General report to the General Assembly on
the review of the concept of the operation of the Base
as soon as possible. As soon as the reports of both the
Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions show that the
Base has proved to be an extremely useful and costeffective means of rapid deployment and procurement
for missions in the field, and given its even greater
potential for support of current and upcoming
peacekeeping needs, the United States delegation hopes
that the Secretary-General will, in the context of his
review,
present,
for
the
Fifth
Committee’s
consideration during the fifty-fifth session of the
General Assembly this fall, a comprehensive proposal
for resources to expand the Base.

21

A/54/PV.98

Regarding the issue of the support account, the
debate was lively and reflected the full range of views
of Member States. The resolution underscores the
importance placed by all Member States on the ability
of the United Nations to respond and rapidly deploy
new peacekeeping operations. It also highlights the
need for adequate funding to enable DPKO to
effectively support missions in the field. My delegation
regrets that the Committee was unable to approve the
two posts requested for the Rapid Deployment
Management
Unit
during
the
Committee’s
deliberations. However, the United States delegation
remains convinced that an effective and enhanced
roster system is an important first step towards
enabling the United Nations to get needed expertise on
the ground on a timely basis. We hope that the
Committee will reconsider the resource needs
necessary to strengthen rapid deployment capacity as
soon as possible.
My delegation remains deeply concerned that we,
the Member States, have yet to deal with the serious
needs of DPKO, both structurally and in human
resource terms. With five new, major, complex
peacekeeping missions launched over the past year, and
a sixth on the horizon, DPKO staff are performing
heroically, but there is no doubt that they are stretched
to the breaking point. We wish to draw the SecretaryGeneral’s attention to his obligation, reiterated in the
support account resolution, to request adequate funding
to maintain the capacity of DPKO. In this regard, we
urge him to conduct a thorough examination of current
personnel needs, both permanent and temporary, and to
determine precisely what additional staff are needed.
In the light of such a review and other relevant
reviews, including that conducted by the SecretaryGeneral’s panel on peacekeeping operations, the
request by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, we urge the Fifth Committee to consider,
during the fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly,
the need for enhancing DPKO’s staff. The membership
cannot afford to put the demands of peacekeeping on
hold. While its work is technical in nature, the Fifth
Committee deliberations must be attuned to the
realities facing United Nations peacekeeping today. It
is clear that unless we take concrete steps to fix
peacekeeping now, this core function of the United
Nations will remain at risk.
The resumed session represented another critical
milestone in our shared endeavour to strengthen the

22

ability of the United Nations to conduct effective
peacekeeping operations. After 27 years, a growing
number of Member States have come to recognize the
need to create a permanent, stable system for
apportioning the expenses of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations. There is no doubt that the
future of United Nations peacekeeping depends on a
sound, fair system to determine how peacekeeping
expenses are borne by the Members. While there are
significant differences that must be bridged, my
delegation is greatly encouraged by the degree of
common ground that has emerged around the need to
address this essential question. We have heard a wide
range of very thoughtful views from delegations from
all regions, many of whom echo the same fundamental
principles with regard to guidelines for reform of the
peacekeeping finance system.
The United States delegation would like to
express its appreciation to six delegations in
particular — Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary, Israel, Latvia
and the Philippines — which announced their
willingness to make concrete financial commitments to
the future of United Nations peacekeeping, and to the
South African delegation, which declared its strong
belief in the need for a secure system for peacekeeping
finance and demonstrated its commitment through a
voluntary deferral of its well-justified request for an
adjustment of its own assessment.
The leadership shown by all of these Member
States bodes very well for the ability of the body to
reach a consensus for action on this critical issue. We
look forward to continuing the work with all of our
colleagues over the coming months and at the fiftyfifth session of the General Assembly, to devise and
implement a series of measures that, together, will
safeguard the future of United Nations peacekeeping
well into the new century.
The Acting President: We have concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 151.
Agenda item 166 (continued)
Financing of the United
Administration in Kosovo
Report
of
the
(A/54/674/Add.1)

Nations
Fifth

Interim

Committee

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
proceed to take a decision on the draft resolution

A/54/PV.98

recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6
of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/245 B).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 166.
Agenda item 173 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations
Administration in East Timor
Report
of
the
(A/54/687/Add.2)

Fifth

Transitional
Committee

Agenda item 8 (continued)
Allocation of items and organization of work
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 17 September 1999, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 97
to the Second Committee and that sub-item (a) of
agenda item 97 remained open for consideration during
the fifty-fourth session.
In order to proceed expeditiously on the item,
may I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider subitem (a) of agenda item 97 directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/246 C).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 173.

The Acting President: May I further take it that
the Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 97?
I see no objection. We shall now proceed
accordingly.
Agenda item 97 (continued)
Macroeconomic policy questions
(a)

High-level international intergovernmental
consideration of financing for development
Draft resolution (A/54/L.82)

Agenda item 175 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report
of
the
(A/54/830/Add.1)

The General Assembly has thus concluded
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.

Fifth

Committee

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/260 B).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 175.

The Acting President: I should like to recall for
the benefit of members that the Assembly has adopted,
under agenda item 121, a resolution entitled “Review
of the resource requirements for the high-level
international intergovernmental event on financing for
development and the Third United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries”, contained in
document A/54/691/Add.1. Part II of that resolution
refers to draft resolution A/54/L.82.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/54/L.82. The Assembly will take a decision on the
draft resolution, entitled “Preparations for the
substantive preparatory process and the high-level
international event”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/54/L.82?

23

A/54/PV.98

Draft resolution A/54/L.82
(resolution 54/279).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 97.
Agenda item 167 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
Draft resolution A/54/L.86
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Austria to introduce draft resolution
A/54/L.86.
Ms. Schneebauer (Austria): I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/54/L.86, entitled
“Agreement concerning the relationship between the
United Nations and the Preparatory Commission for
the
Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty
Organization”.
May I thank all the sponsors of this draft
resolution for their support. I should like to announce
that, since the publication of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/54/L.86: Armenia, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, China, Ecuador,
Finland, France, Greece, Hungary, Japan, Liberia, New
Zealand, Norway, the Philippines, the Republic of
Korea, the Russian Federation, Sweden, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Uganda.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) of 24 September 1996 prohibits any nuclearweapon test explosion and any other nuclear explosion.
In the preamble to the Treaty, the States parties to the
Treaty recognize that the cessation of all nuclearweapon test explosions and all other nuclear
explosions, by constraining the development and
qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons and
ending the development of advanced new types of
nuclear weapons, constitutes an effective measure of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation in all its
aspects. Thus, the Treaty will contribute to the
realization of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
The
Preparatory
Commission
for
the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization

24

was established in New York on 19 November 1996 at
the first meeting of States signatories to the Treaty. The
seat of the Commission is in Vienna. The Commission
was established for the purpose of carrying out the
necessary preparations for the effective implementation
of the Treaty, including ensuring the operationalization
of the Treaty’s verification regime at entry into force.
The Commission established a Provisional Technical
Secretariat, which took up its work on 17 March 1997
at the seat of the Commission in Vienna.
By its resolution 54/65 of 6 December 1999, the
General Assembly invited the Secretary-General to
take the appropriate steps to conclude, with the
Executive Secretary of the Preparatory Commission for
the
Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty
Organization, an agreement to regulate the relationship
between the United Nations and the Preparatory
Commission, to be submitted to the General Assembly
for its approval.
Following the completion of the negotiations, the
Agreement to Regulate the Relationship between the
United Nations and the Preparatory Commission for
the
Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty
Organization was submitted to the Preparatory
Commission for approval. By a letter dated 5 May
2000, the Executive Secretary of the Preparatory
Commission advised the Secretary-General of the
United Nations that on that date the Preparatory
Commission, at its eleventh session, by decision
CTBT/PC-11/CR.7, had approved the Agreement.
On 26 May 2000, the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Executive Secretary of the
Preparatory Commission signed the Agreement, which
is now before the General Assembly for its approval.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in the debate on this item. We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/54/L.86.
Belarus has announced its wish to become a
sponsor of the draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/54/L.86, entitled “Agreement concerning
the relationship between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/54/L.86?

A/54/PV.98

Draft resolution A/54/L.86
(resolution 54/280).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
167.
A number of delegations have asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. I remind members that
statements in exercise of the right of reply shall be
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second, and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Nakkari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for the confusion, but when we
asked for the floor the first time, we did so to exercise
the right of reply. When the presidency said that we
could not do so, I sought to explain our position on the
resolution. There has been a misunderstanding: we
never explained our position on the draft resolution in
the Fifth Committee, but only made a statement, as is
perfectly clear from paragraph 6 of the report of the
Fifth Committee in document A/54/897. Therefore, we
feel it is only right that we should explain our position
in the General Assembly.
The resolution reaffirms the responsibility of
Israel with regard to the attack on the United Nations
headquarters in Qana. I would like to reaffirm that,
after 22 years of struggle by the Lebanese people,
Israel withdrew from Lebanon. This withdrawal, which
has yet to be completed, took place after 22 years of
destruction, killing and bombing of innocent civilians
in Lebanon. Israel has falsely accused the honourable
Lebanese people who were defending their land of
being terrorists. Israel itself has practised terrorism
since it was established on the occupied Arab
territories. Israel has disregarded the wishes of the
international community, but the international
community knows the truth about Israel and its hostile
intentions, which are no secret. Israel should accept
liability for its aggression against south Lebanon over
the years. To describe honest citizens as terrorists is to
make a false accusation. Israel must admit to its acts of
terrorism, which it has been committing throughout its
entire history.
Let me repeat once again that the withdrawal,
which has yet to be completed, was not undertaken to
show that Israel is a peace-loving nation, but resulted
from the courage of the Lebanese resistance, which
forced Israel to withdraw from southern Lebanon. Once

again, we reaffirm that this withdrawal does not mean
in any way that Israel did not commit that heinous
crime against the United Nations headquarters in Qana.
It does not in any way mean that Israel should be
declared innocent or that it should not be held liable for
its crime and pay for it.
Mr. Abdalla (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
giving us the chance to speak. We wanted to explain
our vote on draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.69. That right
was extended to Israel before us. At the outset, we
would like to place on the record that Israel occupied
parts of Lebanon in the mid-seventies. Israel’s
declaration of a security zone in southern Lebanon
dates back to 1985.
Apparently, we live in a time when facts are
being inverted and distorted before the entire world.
Today we have heard the Israeli representative, who
believes that Israel was gracious enough for having
complied with United Nations resolutions more than 20
years after their adoption. He even went as far as
setting conditions to be complied with by the Lebanese
State.
Israel began to implement its withdrawal strategy
by punishing honourable Lebanese civilians who
defeated Israel and by violating the provisions of the
international
Memorandum
of
Understanding
concluded in 1996. I can think of many Christian
Science Monitor editorials, but I will cite the issue of
16 February 2000. Bahman Biktiari and Richard
Norton provided analyses that compared Israel to a
boxer who runs outside the ring and starts throwing
grenades at the group of spectators and even at the
refreshment stand.
The Israeli representative claimed that the
Lebanese civilians who were killed by his country’s
shells were human shields. This is false. It is a totally
unfounded claim not governed by facts or reality. We
would have wanted to believe the Israeli representative
that the hundreds who were killed had taken refuge in
one of the Lebanese Government buildings or in any
other building. But instead they were killed inside a
United Nations headquarters building that is
supposedly protected by international law. However,
Israel, which failed to respect any of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, thought it could undertake
a massive and collective killing campaign of those who
decided to resort to the United Nations camp, this time

25

A/54/PV.98

under the pretext that those who took refuge at the
United Nations headquarters, which is basically in
charge of protecting civilians and displaced persons,
were human shields.
The question that arises is, since when have
United Nations camps and headquarters become places
of refuge for human shields? Is that a way of
questioning the integrity and neutrality of United
Nations staff members, or is it simply an attempt to use
any pretext whatsoever when other pretexts no longer
exist? What happened in Qana is the responsibility of
Israel, the United Nations and the Security Council. I
think what occurred is State-sponsored terrorism, on
which the State of Israel was built, and I do not think
we have sufficient time to cite the many pages and
examples to prove our point. Those who doubt us could
go and read a book entitled By Way of Deception, a
book written by a former Israeli spy.
What is really strange here is that the
representative of Israel uses the words terrorists and
terrorism, while his country was based on the principle
of terrorism, on the carnage of Deir Yassin, on blowing
up the King David Hotel. These are good examples of
Israeli terrorism. The assassination of many people in
Beirut during the Israeli invasion of Beirut and the
carnage of Sabra and Shatila are other examples. I
wonder, are all these people who were killed human
shields as well? It is really astonishing for the Israeli
representative to talk about terrorism, while failing to
mention that his Government officially acknowledged
burying some Egyptian and Sudanese prisoners alive. It
is also strange that the United Nations and the Security
Council do not heed such events and do not try to
determine the exact circumstances surrounding them
and to point out Israel’s responsibility.
However, the issue apparently is that we at the
United Nations have double standards. Claiming that
attacks by civilian Lebanese people are violations of
resolutions is totally unfounded. Many honest
observers, including the United Nations observers,
fully agree that such nationalist acts are sanctioned by
principles that allow people to defend their country and
to evict the occupier.
If Israel wants to enjoy stability, it would have to
withdraw completely from Lebanon
to
the
internationally recognized borders. Has this happened
yet? Has this happened so that we can accept Israel’s
claim that it has already withdrawn from Lebanon? No.

26

We do not believe that Israel has actually withdrawn
from Lebanon. We can believe this only when the
United Nations and the Security Council assure us that
Israel has actually withdrawn to the internationally
recognized borders.
In our view, Israel should be committed to pay
reparations for the Qana event, and for that reason we
voted in favour of this draft resolution. We wish to
underscore Lebanon’s right in that regard.
Mr. Zahid (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish
to begin by saying that I greatly regret having to take
the floor following the statement made by the
representative of Algeria because I wished to provide a
number of clarifications and respond to some of the
things said.
The so-called Western Sahara is an integral part
of Moroccan territory. The colonization of this region
came to an end with the departure of the country that
controlled this territory, and that was Spain. As I said
earlier, Morocco recovered that territory following the
Madrid Agreement and the opinion of the International
Court of Justice, which unequivocally established the
links of sovereignty — the Arab allegiance, which was
the only link of sovereignty at the time — that existed
between the Saharan territory and Morocco.
Secondly, Morocco is not a colonial Power, nor
an occupier. Our Algerian brothers are in the best
position to judge this because the Moroccan people and
the Algerian people have struggled side by side for
decades for the same cause. The Sahara question is a
question of territorial integrity, not a colonization
issue. For Morocco, which is convinced of the
soundness of its rights, the referendum that Morocco
itself initiated can only confirm that territorial
integrity.
Thirdly, the Settlement Plan is the product of the
good offices of the former Secretary-General, Mr.
Péréz de Cuéllar, who authorized it under the
provisions of the Charter, rather than under any
decolonization resolution.
Fourthly, the implementation of the Settlement
Plan has certainly experienced progress, inter alia, the
ceasefire, but it has also experienced enormous
difficulties. As the representative of the United States
explained so well in the Security Council, we are not
going to resolve these difficulties by overlooking them.

A/54/PV.98

Of course, the identification has been completed,
and the pre-registration of the refugees in the Tindouf
camp in Algeria is almost complete. However, we must
not forget that it is public knowledge that the Saharans
of Tindouf have not been able to freely express their
choice in terms of the venue of repatriation. Therefore,
it is under that pressure that the Saharans were
constrained, for the most part, to declare that they
wished to return to the east of the sand-wall, which is a
no-man’s land, a completely desolate, desert,
uninhabited area. Morocco solemnly and officially
stated that it can in no way, under any circumstances,
accept the displacement of the Tindouf refugees to that
location, where conditions for a normal life do not
exist.
With respect to identification, everyone,
including the United Nations, knows that throughout
the process Morocco has rejected the illegal and
irregular veto exercised by the other party, on the
instructions of their intelligence, of course, against our
applicants. We have submitted to the Secretary-General
evidence to that effect. By way of example I can cite
that there were people who even rejected their own
family members. This evidence was communicated to
the Secretary-General and United Nations officials.
Finally, there were those on the other side, with
Polisario, who regained the motherland and who
brought evidence of this matter which was published
by the national press, which led to the accumulation of
some 140,000 appeals.
Regarding our position on the implementation of
the protocol and guidelines, Morocco has submitted to
the United Nations its interpretation of the
implementation of the protocol, which has been
published in a document in February 2000, and the
Secretary-General has held consultations with a view to
arriving at a common interpretation. Unfortunately, the
persistence of the other party and its demands to
oppose the participation of thousands of Saharans in
the referendum have not made it possible to reach an
acceptable solution. As we know, Morocco cannot in
any way accept a referendum in which all the Saharans,
without exception, cannot participate.

We want to be optimistic like our Algerian
brothers, and we hope that our brothers will help us
resolve the various problems mentioned by the
Secretary-General in his recent report to the Security
Council. In its most recent relevant resolution, the
Council requested that the parties present concrete
solutions that could be acceptable to both parties
regarding the various problems regarding the Plan’s
various implementation problems.
I also hope that our Algerian brothers will help us
find adequate solutions, which will make it possible for
us to conduct a fair and equitable referendum which
would not exclude any Saharan from participating in
the vote. That is our fervent hope, and we hope our
Algerian brothers will help us achieve that lofty
objective that was solemnly adopted by the Saharan
tribal leaders — and when I refer to the Saharan
leaders, I am referring to the leaders of the two
parties — at their first meeting in Geneva in 1990, and
that was well before the Settlement Plan itself.
Mr. Bouheddou (Algeria) (spoke in French): My
delegation will be brief. We wish to take the floor
following the statement made by the representative of
Morocco.
My delegation spoke earlier to recall Algeria’s
attachment to the Settlement Plan for the Western
Sahara and to reiterate its position to encourage the
international community, the Secretary-General and his
Personal Representative, Mr. Baker, to continue their
efforts to implement the Settlement Plan of the Western
Saharan conflict and with a view to enabling the
Saharan people to express themselves freely regarding
their destiny.
Algeria still abides with the peace Settlement
Plan approved by both parties to the conflict, the Frente
POLISARIO and Morocco, and endorsed by the
Security Council. Algeria is still determined to assist
the two parties in finding solutions to the difficulties
that have hampered the implementation process of the
peace plan in Western Sahara.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

27
