S/2015/716

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 September 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security*
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 16 of Security Council
resolution 2122 (2013), in which the Council invited me to commission a global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), highlighting examples of
good practice, implementation gaps and challenges, as well as emerging trends and
priorities for action, and to submit within my 2015 report to the Council the results
of the study. In addition, the report includes an update on annual progress towards
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as measured using the indicators
designed for that purpose.
2.
I have closely followed the preparations for the global study and the related
high-level review in order to assess progress in implementing resolution 1325
(2000). I welcome the consultative and comprehensive approach taken by the lead
author of the study, former Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and former Special Rapporteur on violence against
women, Radhika Coomaraswamy, the distinguished 16-member high-level advisory
group, 1 the secretariat of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the Standing Committee on Women, Peace
and Security and the informal “Friends of the global study” Member State group in
their work assessing the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda from the global to the local level. The active engagement of Member States,
United Nations entities, regional organizations and civil society, including research

__________________

* The present report was submitted late so as to include as much updated information as possible.
1
Members of the high-level advisory group are Alaa Murabit (Canada/Libya), Anwarul
Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Bandana Rana (Nepal), Elisabeth Rehn (Finland), Igballe Rogova
(Kosovo), Julia Kharashvili (Georgia), Leymah Gbowee (Liberia), Liliana Andrea Silva Bello
(Colombia), Luz Méndez (Guatemala), Madeleine Rees (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland), Major General Patrick Cammaert (the Netherlands), Pramila Patten
(Mauritius), Ruth Ojiambo Ochieng (Uganda), Sharon Bhagwan Rolls (Fiji), Yasmin Sooka
(South Africa), and Youssef Mahmoud (Tunisia). Maha Abu Dayyeh (State of Palestine) served
as a member of the high-level advisory group until her passing on 9 January 2015.

15-15656 (E)

081015

*1515656*

S/2015/716

institutes, 2 in this task has been impressive and lends promise to the implementation
of the global study’s recommendations.
3.
The present report contains select findings and recommendations from the
global study, which were informed by a series of regional consultations and country
visits, direct inputs from all actors, cutting-edge research and data analysis,
including updated data for indicators to track the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) (see S/2010/498). I am particularly pleased by the efforts made to ensure
synergies with related reviews, including the High -level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, the Advisory Group of Experts on the 2015 Review of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Architecture, the preparations for the 2016 World
Humanitarian Summit, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
20-year review and appraisal of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action. I, together with my senior managers, will carefully study the
findings and recommendations. I strongly encourage all stakeholders to seriously
consider the concerns voiced in the study and to respond to the demands for
stronger action and specific results.

II. Overview of progress and results of the global study
on women and peace and security
4.
As the Organization marks the seventieth anniversary of its adoption of the
Charter of the United Nations, the global study’s findings carry particular relevance.
The similarities between key findings of the study, the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (A/70/95-S/2015/446), of which
Ms. Coomaraswamy was a member, and the Advisory Group of Experts on the 2015
Review of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture (see A/69/968S/2015/490), as well as those emanating from consultations for the 2016 World
Humanitarian Summit, are striking. The reviews have painted a stark picture of the
current peace and security context, which is characterized by blatant violations of
human rights and humanitarian law, complex drivers of conflict, involvement of a
growing number of non-State armed actors, new technologies and transnational
connections that are changing the nature of warfare. The challenges have underlined
the need for a stronger focus on prevention, more holistic and consistent approaches
and mechanisms that place human rights at the core of security, protection, political,
humanitarian, peacebuilding and socioeconomic development work. The reviews
have also highlighted the challenges that women and girls encounter in having their
voices heard and their needs addressed at the global, regional and national levels.
5.
The review processes coincided with one of the most brutal waves of
organized violence in modern history. Over the past few years, armed conflict has
__________________
2

2/54

Over 120 written submissions were received from close to 50 Member States, as well as from
regional and subregional organizations, United Nations entities and civil society, including
research institutions. Preparations for the global study included global consultations with Member
States and civil society, country visits and regional consultations with Member States, regional
organizations, civil society and academia in Brussels, Addis Abba, Kathmandu, Tirana, BanjaLuka and Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Vilnius, The Hague, the Netherlands, Guatemala
City, Kampala, Cairo and Suva. The civil society survey was conducted in partnership with the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the
Global Network of Women Peacebuilders, and received 317 responses from 71 countries during
the period from 13 February to 1 May 2015.

15-15656

S/2015/716

erupted or escalated in multiple locations, bringing to a halt or dramatically
reversing progress made. The number of people in need of international
humanitarian assistance has tripled over the past decade, with 80 per cent of them
affected by armed conflict. Worldwide displacement in 2014 was at the highest level
ever recorded, with 59.5 million people forcibly displaced, compared with
51.2 million in 2013 and 37.5 million a decade ago. 3 Conflict and persecution forced
an average of 42,500 individuals per day to leave their homes and seek protection
within or beyond the borders of their country. The growing spread of violent
extremism during that period was marked by abuses and violations of the rights of
women and girls.
6.
Against that backdrop, participants in regional and country consultations 4 on
the global study called for an end to increased militariza tion and for more
investment in political solutions to conflict. All three peace and security reviews
strongly underlined the need for the increased and enhanced participation of women
in all areas of peace and security decision-making, both on the basis of legal and
human rights obligations and because women’s effective and meaningful
participation significantly contributes to the greater operational effectiveness of our
peace, security and humanitarian efforts and to the sustainability of peace.
7.
The three peace and security reviews have pointed to the need for greater
emphasis on prevention, for sustaining peace and addressing the root causes of
conflict in order to avoid the relapse, escalation and protraction of crises, issues also
addressed in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. As a result, the related
sustainable development goal 16, on promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for
sustainable development, providing access to justice for all and building effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels, is premised on the common
understanding that development, human rights, and peace and security, the three
pillars of the work of the United Nations, are indivisible and interrelated, as
evidenced by the lagging progress of conflict-affected countries towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals.
8.
Select messages from the global study are highlighted in the sections below. In
the final section, the roles and responsibilities of key actors in accelerating the
implementation of women and peace and security commitments are explored.
Perhaps the strongest message to emerge from the study is the remarkable impact of
women’s participation on all areas of peace and security. New evidence, added
through research commissioned for the study, demonstrates clearly that the inclusion
of women leads to more sustainable peace and enhanced prevention efforts. Further
findings show that unpredictable and insufficient funding, the lack of systematic
gender-responsive analysis and technical gender expertise, attitudinal obstacles and
the insufficient mapping of needs in planning and budgeting have had a detrimental
impact on the long-term effectiveness of peace and security and humanitarian and
development interventions. However, robust and predictable funding, committed,
accountable and visible leadership, inclusive, rights -based and gender-responsive
__________________
3

See Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),“Wo rld at war:
UNHCR global trends — forced displacement in 2014” (2015).
4
For the full list of the consultations and participants, see the global study on the implementation
of United Nations Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). Available from
http://wps.unwomen.org/en.

15-15656

3/54

S/2015/716

processes and a strong gender equality architecture have all featured prominently
when tangible results have been achieved.
9.
The need for the earlier engagement of the Security Council to address
emerging threats was mentioned in consultations and country visits as part of the
global study, as was the need for the Council to remain politically vigilant in order
to avoid having situations relapse into conflict and the need for better information sharing on threats, risks and violations of human rights in conflict contexts across
intergovernmental bodies. Concerns were expressed that efforts to address
violations of women’s human rights and commitments to women’s participation by
all actors involved have remained largely ad hoc and “add-on”, rather than as part of
a deeper situation analysis, response and tools for achieving the Council ’s objective
of sustainable peace.
10. I hope that the present report, the global study and the high-level review to be
held in October 2015 will spark reflection, dialogue, new partnerships and more
determined action. It is essential to learn from and build on good practices and to
recognize the Member States, leaders, organizations and entities that have stood at
the forefront of positive change since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
However, despite impressive normative advancements, implementation and results
on the ground remain somewhat limited. I encourage Member States, United
Nations entities, regional organizations and other key stakeholders to carefully
review the study and its recommendations. Commitments must not only be upheld
in international law, existing resolutions, declarations and action plans but efforts
must also be made to ensure that strategies for implementation are inclusive,
financed and grounded in the realities on the ground.

A.

Beyond the rhetoric: women’s leadership for peace
11. The research undertaken for the global study served to examine the impact of
women’s participation in peacemaking, constitution-making and national dialogues.
The findings point to the fact that women’s effective and meaningful participation in
those processes is positively correlated with the conclusion and sustainability of
talks, and the implementation of agreements. Accordingly, women ’s participation
shifts the dynamics by bringing new issues to the table, strengthening linkages to
root causes of conflict and promoting more sustainable peace. However,
consultations for the study showed that the participation of women in formal peace
processes remains contested. Their inclusion is still mostly initiated and attained
through concerted pressure by women’s organizations, rather than by the parties to
the conflict, the mediators or the organizers of the negotiations. Although
differences exist between processes led or co-led by the United Nations and those
that are not, gains are generally too few and far between. Many negotiations have
focused solely on the military and political parties of conflict and on high -level
processes where women remain underrepresented and too few of them are in
positions of authority. This has often resulted in further empowering “men with
guns” and in future cycles of violence and impunity.
12. A recent study of 40 peace processes showed that the ability of women to
influence negotiations increased the chances of agreements being reached, was
positively correlated with greater implementation and had a positive impact on the
durability of peace. The meaningful inclusion of women enhanced the influence of

4/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

other actors, such as civil society organizations, on negotiation outcomes. Notably,
there was not a single case where organized women’s groups had a negative impact
on a peace process. One of the most repeated effects of the involvement of women
in peace processes was their role in pushing for the commencement, resumption or
finalization of negotiations when the momentum had stalled or the talks had
faltered. The findings help to reaffirm the importance of women’s effective
participation as a key tool for effective peacemaking.
Increasing the gender-responsiveness of peace agreements
13. The importance of including gender-related provisions in peace agreements is
emphasized in resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent Security Council resolutions.
Better data and analysis, including through regular monitoring using the indicators
in resolution 1325 (2000), are beginning to provide a better picture of the extent to
which agreements and their gender equality provisions are being implemented. New
research shows the increasing presence of references to women and gender
perspectives in peace agreements, in particular after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). An analysis of 664 agreements produced between 1990 and 2000 showed
that 73 (11 per cent) included at least one reference to women. An analysis of 504
agreements reached in the period after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) until
1 January 2015 showed that 138 (27 per cent) included references to women.
Evidence also indicates that peace and negotiation processes involving the United
Nations have been more likely to include references to women and gender issues.
14. The findings are in line with indicator data regarding resolution 1325 (2000). 5
While slight differences in definitions and methodology result in some numerical
discrepancies, the overall trends move in the same direction. Of 16 peace
agreements 6 signed in 2014, 8 (50 per cent) included gender or women and pea ce
and security provisions, compared with 54 per cent in 2013, 30 per cent in 2012 and
22 per cent in both 2011 and 2010. Outcome documents from processes led or
co-led by the United Nations are more likely to include gender equality provisions.
Of the six agreements emerging from United Nations-supported peace processes in
2014, four (67 per cent) contained women and peace and security references.
Conflict-related sexual violence references have increased in signed agreements
since 2010. 7
15. Very few of the examined agreements reflect comprehensive gender equality
or women and peace and security considerations. Good examples include
agreements signed in Guatemala in the mid-1990s, which still stand out for the
quality and depth of their gender equality provision, and agreements signed in
Colombia in 2014. Other processes with references to women across most of the
__________________
5

The Department of Political Affairs has been tracking data since 2011 against the indicator on the
percentage of peace agreements with specific provisions to improve the security and status of
women and girls.
6
For the purposes of data collection, the Department of Political Affairs includes, under the term
“peace agreements”, cessations of hostilities, ceasefires, frameworks and overall peace
agreements signed between at least two parties to a conflict intended to end, prevent or
significantly transform a violent conflict so that it may be addressed more constructively.
7
In 2012, the Department of Political Affairs launched its Guidance for Mediators Addressing
Conflict-Related Sexual Violence in Ceasefire and Peace Agreements, contributing further
technical support in this area. The report was produced with support from United Nations Action
Against Sexual Violence in Conflict.

15-15656

5/54

S/2015/716

signed agreements include Burundi, Nepal, Northern Ireland, the Philippines and the
Sudan (Darfur). More analysis is required to better understand why gender-specific
provisions were included, how well these reflected women’s concerns and the extent
to which provisions have been implemented. It is of concern that some of the
agreements with the clearest provisions for women have been poorly impleme nted.
The need to sustain gender-specific gains enshrined in negotiated agreements
requires the continued participation of women in mediation and implementation.
Better funding and monitoring of that implementation, including of gender -specific
provisions and the effective and meaningful participation of women in established
monitoring mechanisms, may also help to ensure that agreements are implemented
and sustained.
Ensuring women’s inclusion in peace processes
16. The role played by different stakeholders in peace processes, especially
mediators, influences women’s inclusion in peacemaking. While attitudinal
obstacles on the part of the mediators can constrain the inclusion of women ’s
perspectives in peace agreements, the awareness and acknowledgement of mediators
of United Nations standards have proved instrumental in facilitating women ’s
participation in peace processes and political transitions. Emphasis on the
importance of women’s effective participation was, for example, a priority of the
former Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the Great Lakes Region, Mary
Robinson, and the current Special Envoy, Said Djinnit. The use of forums for
mediators to share experiences and explore approaches regarding inclusive
peacemaking, such as the high-level seminar on gender and the inclusive mediation
processes of the Department of Political Affairs has been important in creating
greater awareness among envoys, mediators and mediation experts representing the
United Nations, regional organizations and Member States on the strategic value of
inclusion and the availability of tools, practical strategies and approaches to
inclusive mediation. It is essential that all mediators and external actors that support
peace talks, such as groups of friends, promote the use of global values and
standards. Initiatives to address logistical barriers to women ’s participation should
be systematically considered in process design.
17. Third-party mediation teams have, at times, helped to promote more inclusive
processes. For example, the role of Norway as facilitator in the Colombia peace
process helped to ensure the inclusion of women and a gender perspective in the
Havana peace talks. Women leaders and faith-based actors, who play significant
roles in some communities, can further promote women’s inclusion and the
consideration of their different experiences of conflict, needs and priorities in peace
negotiations. Additionally, as set out in Security Council resolution 1820 (2008),
peace agreements that include amnesty provisions for crimes of conflict-related sexual
violence should be deemed invalid by the international community. I encourage
individual countries supporting peace processes to provide incentives, including
financial incentives, for the greater inclusivity of women.
18. In 2014, the United Nations led, or co-led, 12 formal peace mediation
processes. 8 All United Nations mediation support teams (100 per cent) included at
least one woman, the same percentage as in recent years and up from 86 per cent in
__________________
8

6/54

For one of these processes (Syrian Arab Republic), no formal negotiations were held during the
reporting period.

15-15656

S/2015/716

2011. Data on women’s representation on negotiating party delegations show an
upward trend, with senior women participating in 9 (75 per cent) of those processes
in 2014, compared with 8 processes (72 per cent) in 2013, 6 processes (67 per cent)
in 2012 and 14 processes (36 per cent) in 2011. Nevertheless, a focus on the
improvement in numbers alone does not capture the quality of women ’s influence.
Further analysis is necessary to assess the quality and impact of the contributions of
both female and male delegates to the promotion of gender equality and to
addressing gender-specific issues in the context of peace talks.
19. Although gender-specific expertise is systematically offered through the
United Nations Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers and a roster of senior
technical experts, the demand for it emerging from peace negotiations remains
lower than for other areas of mediation standby expertise, possibly evidencing a
lack of awareness of the importance of gender perspectives as part of process
design. In 2014, gender expertise was requested and provided by the United Nations
to six of the nine relevant processes (67 per cent), 9 compared with 88 per cent in
2013 and 36 per cent in 2011. More must be done to sensitize all parties to
understand that the participation of women is essential to furthering sustainable
peace, thereby prompting greater demand for these skills. I am committed to
continuing to ensure that gender expertise is an integral part of all United Nations supported mediation processes.
20. The importance of regular consultations between mediation teams and
women’s civil society organizations has been emphasized in resolutions on women
and peace and security. In 2014, all peace processes with United Nations
engagement included regular consultations with civil society, 88 per cent of them
with women’s organizations, a notable rise from the 2011 rate of 50 per cent.
However, it is important to strengthen the effectiveness of these engagements and
ensure that they go beyond symbolism. More must be do ne to support women’s
mobilization and to amplify women’s voices in peace processes. I call upon all
relevant United Nations entities to further strengthen their important role in this
regard.
21. Building on good practices entails increasing efforts to create stronger
linkages between track I and track II processes and enabling the meaningful transfer
of information and recommendations to the mediator and negotiating parties.
Research has found that the most effective strategy is to combine the “insider
tactics” of submitting position papers and meeting with mediators, negotiators or
technical advisers with “outsider tactics” such as issuing public reports, lobbying
international actors and conducting media outreach. A succe ssful strategy used by
women’s coalitions has been the development of a common document expressing a
unified position of a cross-section of women’s groups, which can then be used by
mediation and negotiation teams.
22. Subnational and local mediation initiatives are important in laying the
foundations for peaceful societies where women have leadership roles. Efforts to
support the engagement of insider mediators can be particularly valuable, and in a
growing number of contexts the United Nations has worked with partners to identify
women’s organizations and civil society leaders to engage in national dialogue and
__________________
9

15-15656

Since three negotiations are held at the minister/Head of State level to settle border and name
disputes, the provision of gender expertise and the civil society organization consultations are
not directly applicable and are therefore not measured.

7/54

S/2015/716

mediation processes. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has
helped to strengthen women’s participation and leadership capacity through training
and awareness-raising activities in Indonesia, Mauritania, Nepal, the Niger and
Timor-Leste and has facilitated the participation of women in peace and dialogue
forums in Colombia, Cyprus, Lebanon, Nepal and South Sudan. In Cyprus, a focus
on gender equality in the Cyprus Dialogue Forum has been a prominent feature of
the design of the initiative, and branches of political parties represented by women,
trade unions and women’s organizations have been fully represented. In South
Sudan, UNDP supported women grass-roots networks to present their peacebuilding
perspectives to the peace talks in Addis Ababa. In Colombia, the United Nations
country team has supported a rigorous call for the participation process to encourage
the representation of women’s organizations in the dialogue to end the conflict. As a
result, 49 per cent of the victims participating in the forum are women. Greater
support by all for the role of civil society in conflict -affected contexts must be
prioritized. Resolution 1325 (2000) was spearheaded by an international movement
advocating for peace and gender equality and recognizing that silencing the civic
voice for peace in decision-making had a detrimental impact on sustainable and
inclusive peace. However, the transformative potential, as promoted in the
resolution, has yet to be realized.

B.

Building inclusive and peaceful societies in the aftermath of conflict
23. The global study brings renewed attention to aspects of post -conflict
peacebuilding and examines how attention to a gender perspective in these areas
contributes to lasting and meaningful peace and security. Women and girls are often
invisible when decisions about post-conflict recovery and governance are made.
Nevertheless, research and practice over the past fifteen years have established that
women’s effective and meaningful participation builds a more durable peace, given
that it broadens the benefits of the peace dividends to stakeholders beyond the
fighting parties and builds resilience in local communities. W hile the Seven-Point
Action Plan on Gender-Responsive Peacebuilding has gained some traction at the
global and country levels, several of the measures have not been fully implemented,
therefore limiting women’s opportunities to engage in post-conflict peacebuilding
processes.
24. The findings and recommendations of the global study and the 2015 report of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(A/69/968-S/2015/490) provide a solid basis for further strengthening genderresponsive peacebuilding interventions. In addition to ensuring women ’s
contribution, peacebuilding initiatives must support women ’s rights and economic,
political and social empowerment in order to maximize women ’s role in
stabilization and recovery. Furthermore, as noted by the Advisory Group of Experts,
peacebuilding must address not only the root causes of conflict and include long term development strategies that benefit women and girls but also the human rights
violations that women and girls continue to experience during conflict and after a
peace agreement has been reached.
Economic recovery and access to resources
25. Large-scale foreign investment in the aftermath of conflict tends to focus on
infrastructure, markets, extractive industries and commercial agriculture, areas

8/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

where women are traditionally underrepresented. The employment and income generation activities of women are often affected by conflict, with a detrimental
impact on women and their families and the effectiveness of post-conflict economic
recovery (see PBC/7/OC/3). Data from the Development Assistance Committee of
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) show that
while Committee donors invest large amounts in the economic and productive
sectors in fragile States and economies — 10 billion dollars per year during the
period 2012-2013 — only 439 million dollars (2 per cent) of that amount targeted
gender equality as a principal objective. 10 Similarly, a 2013 study of UNDP
economic recovery programmes in six post-conflict countries found that less than
4 per cent of economic recovery spending was allocated to furthering women ’s
economic empowerment and gender equality or meeting women’s needs. 11
Investment in gender-responsive economic recovery leads to important results for
societies as a whole. For example, women are more likely to spend their incomes on
family needs, including health care and education, thus making a large contribution
to recovery.
26. Local initiatives are especially conducive to women ’s empowerment. Services
such as community loans, revolving credit and revenue-generating cooperatives
have succeeded in providing a stable source of income to women in Burundi and
Rwanda. However, economic recovery for women is too often confined to
microcredit or microenterprises, while large-scale projects continue to be dominated
by men. As livelihood opportunities are few in conflict and post-conflict settings,
many women find work in the informal economy, collecting and selling firewood or
charcoal, running small-goods kiosks, selling goods door-to-door or in the market,
engaging in domestic work and engaging in survival sex. Economic recovery should
aim to be transformative, encompassing not only the state of the inherited economy
but also what the future economy should be and how women can le ad, contribute to
and benefit from a transformative recovery programme. Initiatives must provide
tailored approaches for particularly vulnerable groups of women.
27. Recognizing the importance of women’s access to livelihoods in the aftermath
of conflict, in 2013 UNDP began to track disbursements allocated to women in the
context of temporary employment and productive livelihood projects. I welcome the
initiative of UNDP to integrate an indicator to track the proportion of women
beneficiaries of temporary employment projects in its strategic plan for the period
2014-2017. This commitment makes the annual monitoring and reporting of these
actions a corporate priority. I encourage more work to evaluate this commitment for
its impact and recommend that other United Nations entities take similar action.
While data availability for relevant UNDP programmes is limited to seven countries
where data collection has begun (Democratic Republic of the Congo, Jordan,
Mauritania, South Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen), evidence
shows that, in total, only 35 per cent of benefits from temporary employment
__________________
10

See Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Development Assistance
Committee Network on Gender Equality (GENDERNET), “Financing United Nations Security
Council resolution 1325: aid in support of gender equality and women’s rights in fragile
contexts” (March 2015). The list of Development Assistance Committee members is available
from http://www.oecd.org/about/membersandpartners/.
11
See Sarah Douglas, “What gets measured gets done: translating accountability frameworks into
better responses for women and girls in peacebuilding contexts”, Journal of Peacebuilding and
Development, vol. 10, No. 1 (2015).

15-15656

9/54

S/2015/716

activities from disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes were
received by women in 2014. With the exception of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where women received 50 per cent of the benefits, women received less than
half of the allocations in all the other countries. While still under the 40 per cent
target of the Seven-Point Action Plan, this represents an increase from 22 per cent in
2013. I encourage all United Nations entities to accelerate action on this commitment .
Governance and women’s participation in elected and non-elected bodies
28. A critical mass of women in decision-making has a significant impact on
institutions and policies, and inclusive decision-making brings a broader range of
concerns to the table. It can also contribute to increased allocations to the social
spending needed to address inequalities and women’s socioeconomic disadvantages.
Studies have found inverse correlations between the proportion of women in
parliament and corruption levels and that inclusive decision-making bodies bring a
broader range of concerns to the table. For example, women legislators tend to give
greater attention to legislative proposals covering basic rights and social services,
including education, health and gender-sensitive legal reforms.
29. According to the Millennium Development Goals Report 2015, since the
adoption of the Beijing Platform for Action, the global proportion of seats held by
women in national parliaments has doubled from 11 per cent in 1995 to 22 per cent
in 2015. Notably, a number of developing countries with the highest representation
of women today have emerged from conflict, with Rwand a still ranking highest at
63.8 per cent. 12 In this case, as in others, a constitutional commission was
instrumental in drafting a more inclusive constitution that entrenched provisions to
guarantee women’s full and equal political participation. However, in the aggregate
of conflict and post-conflict countries reviewed, 13 the representation of women
stood at 18 per cent as at 31 July 2015, indicating a low increase in women ’s
representation rate since 2011.
30. The adoption of temporary special measures has proved useful in many
countries. By July 2015, in conflict and post-conflict countries where legislated
electoral quotas had been adopted, women represented almost 23 per cent of
parliamentarians, compared with 15 per cent in countries without such special
measures. Similar levels were evident in 2014, when women occupied 23 per cent of
parliamentary seats in countries using electoral quotas and 10 per cent for those
without. 14 These figures demonstrate the positive effect of electoral quotas in
reaching legislated targets in a number of countries. As regularly recommended by
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, context specific temporary special measures, including targeted training, public awareness,
__________________
12

Data available from http://ipu.org/wmn-e/classif-arc.htm.
Countries or territories in which a political, peacebuilding o r peacekeeping mission operated
during 2014, or concerning which the Security Council was seized and which had been
considered by the Council at a formal meeting during the period from 1 January to 31 December
2014, or countries or territories that received programmatic funds from the Peacebuilding Fund
in 2014.
14
Aggregates from Inter-Parliamentary Union country-level data for countries or territories in
which a political, peacebuilding or peacekeeping mission operated during the reporting period, or
concerning which the Security Council was seized and which had been considered by the Council
at a formal meeting during the reporting period, or countries or territories that received
programmatic funds from the Peacebuilding Fund in the reporting period.
13

10/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

quotas for party lists and working with electoral manage ment bodies to ensure that
women can participate in a safe environment, are necessary to further promote
women’s participation in politics. Effective initiatives supported by UNDP include
those implemented in Nigeria, where numerous young women politicians were
mentored through a forum on women in politics and in Pakistan, where support for
the formation and operation of a women’s caucus has led to that body leading
legislative action on several important development priorities. In El Salvador,
UNDP helped to develop a 30 per cent quota that significantly increased women ’s
presence in parliament in 2014.
31. Women’s representation rates have been hard to maintain in many fragile
settings. In Afghanistan and Iraq, for example, many women politicians and their
families face threats and violence, including as a deliberate tactic to deter them from
participating in public life. Women politicians and leaders continue to face harmful
gender stereotypes, cultural and legal barriers and discrimination that cannot be
abrogated by quotas for women or the mere presence of women in parliaments.
While evidence does show that greater numbers of women in decision -making lead
to fairer outcomes for societies as a whole, women’s right to participate in public
life must be pursued as an end in itself. Capacity-building support for elected
women is important to better influence decision-making processes. Gaps in some
countries in the availability of data on political participation, especially at the local
level, and on sex-disaggregated voter registration and turnout rates prevent an
accurate and full picture of the barriers to participation that women face.
32. While much effort has gone into promoting and monitoring women ’s
participation in post-conflict elections, less attention has been given to women in
non-elected posts and even less so to women in the civil service. As at 1 January
2015, women held, on average, 14.8 per cent of ministerial positions across conflict
and post-conflict countries, a slight improvement from 13.1 per cent in 2014,
12.7 per cent in 2013, 14.6 per cent in 2012 and 14 per cent in 2011. Of the
countries reviewed, only in Burundi and Guinea -Bissau do women represent more
than 30 per cent of ministers. Similarly, data gaps on women ’s representation in the
civil service hinder comprehensive analysis and the efficient advocacy of women ’s
full and equal participation and access to decision -making roles in all sectors of the
public administration, including in fragile, conflict and post -conflict settings.
Enabling women at the local level to plan and deliver services in fragile and
post-conflict contexts contributes significantly to improving women ’s social,
political and economic situation. UN-Women stipulates that high numbers of
women in service delivery lead to better-quality services for both men and women
and improve women’s access to services. The United Nations “restore or reform”
review has led to the development of a joint United Nations -World Bank diagnostic
tool that stresses the role of women’s participation and leadership in state-building
and the core functions of Government, including at the local level. The review also
found a link between the participation of women in the civil service and the gender responsiveness of public administration and service delivery.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform
33. Over the past fifteen years, increased awareness of the gender -related
dynamics within the security sector has resulted in more attention, both at policy
and operational levels, on the specific needs and capacities of women and girls as
ex-combatants, members of the host communities and users of security services.

15-15656

11/54

S/2015/716

Despite the progress made, however, security continues to be a realm dominated and
defined by men. In a review of financial allocations to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes in six post-conflict countries, security sector reform
performed the worst, with less than 1 per cent of funds going to projects whose
principal objective was gender equality. 15 A lack of resources, coupled with
insufficient accountability to commitments, has resulted in a continued lack of
attention to gender issues, despite some good practices arising from the field.
34. Since 2000, the Security Council has urged the consideration of the specific
needs, concerns and priorities of women in United Nations -supported processes,
which has contributed to increasing numbers of women ex-combatants and women
associated with armed forces entering disarmament, demobiliz ation and
reintegration programmes. Data compiled using the indicators in resolution 1325
(2000) has shown an increase in women participating in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes, although the indicator s do not assess the quality or
the impact of demobilization and reintegration support on women ’s lives. In 2014,
44 per cent of the beneficiaries of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
interventions in United Nations field missions were women. Not ably, half of the
beneficiaries of small projects in Haiti were women, while larger projects and legal
assistance benefited mostly men. In the case of UNDP -supported initiatives for the
reintegration of ex-combatants and youth at risk in eight countries, 26 per cent of
the beneficiaries were women. In Burundi, Colombia, Mali and Somalia, women
beneficiary rates surpassed 40 per cent, rising to more than half in Burundi, where
beneficiaries included returned internally displaced persons, and support focused on
promoting employment by building markets, rehabilitating roads and providing cash
for work.
35. Security sector actors are often among the main perpetrators of violence
during and after conflict. Increasing the representation of women and women ’s
organizations in civilian oversight and through security sector reform processes can
help to increase public trust by shaping security institutions that are responsive to
and representative of the population at large. Vetting security sector recruits for
conflict-related crimes against women, including sexual and gender -based violence,
is an important step towards re-establishing the community’s trust. Recent progress
in engaging the military in some countries to address conflict -related sexual
violence should be noted, including the action plan put in place by the national army
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo with the support of my Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. The action plan focuses on command
responsibility and accountability for crimes of sexual violence and led to the
prosecution of 137 members of the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including senior officers, during the 2013 -2014 reporting period. Similar
initiatives are under way with the militaries of Côte d ’Ivoire, Somalia and South
Sudan.
36. Over the past 15 years, special protection units have been established in police
forces in countries such as Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea, Liberia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and Timor -Leste. The units receive victims
of gender-based violence and domestic crimes and refer them to services in a
__________________
15

12/54

See Sarah Douglas, “Linking women’s economic security to peacebuilding ”, International
Humanitarian Law Magazine, No. 2 (2014).

15-15656

S/2015/716

confidential and victim-centred manner. The units have been most useful in
increasing awareness of women’s rights at the community level and rebuilding
women’s trust in security sector institutions. In the Western Balkans, there are
domestic violence and gender-based violence focal points appointed within police
forces, and a joint programme of UN-Women, UNDP, the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) on gender based violence has worked in Kosovo 16 to establish coordination mechanisms at
municipal and central levels and employ more women in the ranks.
37. Significant progress has been made in mainstreaming a gender perspective into
mine action. In 2010, the United Nations published gender guidelines for mine
action programmes, and the Strategy of the United Nations for Mine Action 2013 2018 includes the implementation and monitoring of the guidelines as a cross cutting initiative. Data gathered to monitor the strategy show that, in 2014, 57 per
cent of United Nations Mine Action Service field programmes “almost always”
ensured that the needs of women, girls, boys and men were considered in
programme design. In terms of ensuring equal employment opportunities, 78 per
cent of programmes made arrangements to accommodate both women’s and men’s
needs in the workplace and 60 per cent actively encouraged women ’s employment.
38. The review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture underscored the
particularly pernicious effect of fragmentation on enhancing women ’s participation
in peacebuilding. Nevertheless, as some of the examples above highlight, significant
progress has been made in terms of normative frameworks with an ever -growing
body of good practice to accompany it. I request relevant United Nations entiti es to
redouble their efforts during the next five years to achieve the vision inscribed in
my Seven-Point Action Plan on Gender-Responsive Peacebuilding, thereby
accelerating the virtuous cycle between stability, peace and women ’s empowerment.

C.

Protecting and promoting the rights and leadership of women
and girls in humanitarian settings
39. The preparations for the global study coincided with a groundswell of violence
that is overwhelming humanitarian systems and destroying the lives of men and
boys, women and girls. The study highlights the strategic importance of women ’s
leadership and participation in decision-making on humanitarian issues and finds
that the humanitarian community must do more to embrace gender equality as a
central, organizing principle of its work. Gender analysis should be automatically
included in needs assessments and gender issues addressed through the
humanitarian cluster coordination systems. It is clear from the consultations held
with regard to the study that the promotion and protection of human rights is
fundamental to peace and the security of women and girls. In crises and
emergencies, women and girls are less likely to enjoy certain human rights, such as
to food, health, education, housing, physical integrity and nat ionality.

__________________
16

15-15656

References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999).

13/54

S/2015/716

The right to life and physical integrity
40. All forms of violence against women and girls, from rape to domestic violence
and child marriage, are often exacerbated by armed conflict. Such violence is more
visible now, both to policymakers and the public, and it has not abated. In my report
on conflict-related sexual violence (see S/2015/203), I highlighted harrowing
accounts of rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced
sterilization and other forms of sexual violence of comparab le gravity in
19 different country contexts. The annex 17 contains a list of 45 parties to conflict,
including armed groups, militia and government security forces that are credibly
suspected of committing or being responsible for patterns of rape and other forms of
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. In addition, the report contains
measures taken by a range of actors, including by my Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, to prevent and respond to such violence. My reports on
conflict-related sexual violence indicate a significant deepening of information on
and analysis of these crimes, which is an essential basis for interventions at all
levels. It should be noted, however, that evaluations suggest the reach and impact, in
particular of comprehensive and multisectoral services for survivors, have been
grossly inadequate. 18 Many interventions have remained small in scope, duration
and coverage. The findings of the global study should be a strong call to action to
end all forms of conflict-related violence against civilians, including sexual and
gender-based violence.
Access to basic services, including health and education
41. Despite efforts by the international community to provide basic services
during and after conflict, the capacity to meet such needs is insufficient. In a
growing number of displacement sites, the living conditions are appalling. A
February 2014 assessment found that there was no medical assistance in 90 per cent
of the displacement sites in the Central African Republic. In consultations for the
study, psychosocial support and mental health care were frequently identified as gap
areas, and attacks against health-care facilities and workers have been on the rise. A
study conducted in 2014 by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
on health care and violence and the need for effective protection documented more
than 1,800 incidents involving serious acts or threats of violence affecting the
delivery of health care in 2012 and 2013.
42. The latest estimates for maternal mortality, which date from 2013, indicated
that the ratio for the aggregate of conflict and post-conflict countries 19 was more
than twice the global figure. Most of the deaths were preventable. In conflict affected settings, accessing medical care during delivery is not always possible, and
in some countries the proportion of births attended by skilled health professionals is
extremely low. For example, only 19.4 per cent of births were attended to in South
__________________
17

The report should be read in conjunction with my six previous reports on conflict -related sexual
violence, which provide a cumulative basis for the inclusion of parties in the list.
18
Sean Healy and Sandrine Tiller, “Where is everyone? Responding to emergencies i n the most
difficult places” (Médecins sans frontières, July 2014).
19
Countries or territories in which a political, peacebuilding or peacekeeping mission operated
during 2013, or concerning which the Security Council was seized and which had been
considered by the Council at a formal meeting during the period from 1 January to 31 December
2014, or countries or territories that received programmatic funds from the Peacebuilding Fund
in 2014.

14/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

Sudan and 33 per cent in Somalia, 20 where maternal mortality reached, respectively,
730 and 850 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2013, compared with a global rate of
210. In some cases, simple and low-cost solutions are sufficient to make major gains
in maternal health outcomes. For example, in one district in Sierra Leone, Médecins
sans frontières introduced an ambulance service to transport women from local
clinics to the hospital, reducing maternal mortality by 74 per cent. 21
43. The global study underscores the importance of ensuring quality sexual and
reproductive health services for women and adolescent girls, including in conflict
contexts. In my previous annual reports on women and peace and security,
I emphasized the need to make available medical, legal, psychosocial and live lihood
services to survivors of rape, including access to emergency contraceptives and
services for the safe termination of pregnancies resulting from rape, without
discrimination, and in accordance with international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law. The mandatory reporting of cases from medical personnel to
police authorities remains a major obstacle to victims who seek medical assistance.
Measures are necessary to ensure that the confidentiality of victims is preserved in
police and medical records and thus promote access to assistance, as mandated by
the Security Council in resolution 2122 (2013).
44. Since 2000, the investments and programming related to the Millennium
Development Goals have played an essential role in reducing gender disparit y at all
education levels globally. In conflict and post-conflict countries, however, education
parity targets remain unachieved. 22 Data from 2015 show that, in these countries, the
adjusted net primary enrolment rates reached 82.5 per cent for boys and 77. 5 for
girls, showing stagnation in relation to the 82.2 and 76.5 per cent rates of 2011,
respectively. Net enrolment rates in secondary school are much lower, at 48.7 per
cent of males and 44.7 per cent of females in 2015, and have dropped, compared
with the 49.6 and 45.2 per cent rates of 2011, respectively. It is estimated that, in
countries affected by conflict, the proportion of out-of-school children increased
from 30 per cent in 1999 to 36 per cent in 2012, and those figures do not include
dropouts caused by outbreaks of conflict in recent years. In my previous reports,
I highlighted a range of barriers that had an impact on girls’ access to education,
including child, early and forced marriage, lack of security at schools and threats of
violence stemming from attending school, targeted attacks against schools, students
and related personnel or the use of schools by the military. The use of new
technologies as powerful tools to widen access to education could also help to
overcome such barriers, especially in rural and remote areas.
__________________
20

Estimates for the latest available year include 2010 for South Su dan, 2010 for the Sudan and
2012 for Somalia.
21
See Séverine Caluwaerts, “Obstetric emergencies: if you cried here, you ’d cry every day”, in
Because Tomorrow Needs Her (Médecins sans frontières, 2015).
22
Countries or territories in which a political, peacebuilding or peacekeeping mission operated
during 2014, or concerning which the Security Council was seized and which had been
considered by the Council at a formal meeting during the period from 1 January to 31 December
2014, or countries or territories that received programmatic funds from the Peacebuilding Fund
in 2014. Estimates provided in 2015 by the Institute for Statistics of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) showed that the gender parity
index stood at 0.94 in the aggregate of these countries, which is lower than the internationally
accepted measure of gender parity (achievement of the Millennium Development Goal target) of
between 0.97 and 1.03.

15-15656

15/54

S/2015/716

Protection in situations of displacement
45. In October 2014, the Security Council held its annual open debate on women,
peace and security with a focus on the theme “Displaced women and girls: leaders
and survivors” (S/PV.7289). During the debate, over 70 speakers discussed the
increasingly grave situation of female internally displaced persons and expounded
upon the effects of violent extremism that contributed to those rising numbers. The
Council recognized that displaced women and girls were at a heightened risk of
being subjected to human rights violations and abuses, including sexual and gender based violence and discrimination, and urged pairing the protection of women with
better access to justice, basic health services, enhanced participation and
humanitarian assistance (see S/PRST/2014/21).
46. In its resolution 2122 (2013), the Security Council expressed concern at
women’s exacerbated vulnerability in situations of forced d isplacement, as a result
of unequal citizenship rights, the gender-biased application of asylum laws and
obstacles to registering and accessing identity documents. In my previous report,
I emphasized the need to eliminate statelessness (see S/2014/693). Nationality laws
that do not grant women equality in conferring nationality to their children cause
statelessness, a problem that has an impact on at least 10 million people
worldwide. 23 To date, 27 countries have laws that discriminate against women in
their ability to hold custody of and confer nationality to their children. 24 The impact
of the problem is severe and can result in denial of access to basic public services
and employment opportunities. To drive stronger action in this area, in 2014 the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees launched a global
action plan to end statelessness within the period from 2014 to 2024. One of the key
actions is the removal of national laws that directly or indirectly discriminate
against women and girls.
Promoting gender equality in humanitarian action
47. Despite growing evidence that gender mainstreaming improves humanitarian
effectiveness, the gap between guidelines and reality remains stark. Between 2011
and 2013, less than 2 per cent of all humanitarian programmes in the financial
tracking system of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs had the
explicit goal of advancing gender equality. By the end of 2014, the figure had fallen
to 1 per cent. 25 Only recently has the international community begun to support
women’s leadership in camp committees and its inclusion in participatory
assessments. While growing work supports women’s deliberate engagement in
empowerment programmes so that they can better assist themselves and others, and
claim their rights, it is troubling that some humanitarian actors have failed to
implement gender equality consistently in their programming. A 2015 multi -country
study examining the impact of such programming 26 on humanitarian outcomes
found that gender equality programming contributes to improving access to and the
__________________
23

UNHCR, “World at war”, see footnote No. 3 above.
UNHCR, “Background note on gender equality, nationality laws and statelessness 2014” (2014).
25
See Global Humanitarian Assistance, “Funding gender in emergencies: what are the trends?”,
Briefing Paper (September 2014).
26
Gender equality programming incorporates a contextual gender analysis to help to ensure equal
access and benefits to women, men, boys and girls, avoid placing any group at risk and facilitate
equal opportunities to participate in decision-making. See UN-Women, The Effects of Gender
Equality on Humanitarian Outcomes (New York, April 2015).
24

16/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

use of humanitarian services by women, men, girls and boys, as well as making
overall programming more effective for everyone. In the sectors exa mined, namely,
health, education, water, sanitation, hygiene and food security, an improvement in
access and effectiveness was shown for all groups.
48. The World Humanitarian Summit in 2016 will serve as a catalyst for reform
and for the increased effectiveness of the humanitarian sector. During consultations,
participants called for an end to gender-blind humanitarian programming and
support for women’s groups to contribute to humanitarian action. The women and
peace and security agenda was cited as a model and inspiration. 27 The global study
underscores the importance of systematically integrating gender equality, the human
rights of women and girls and empowerment into all discussions leading up to the
Summit and to its outcome. Regional consultations hav e highlighted key issues that
are limiting the implementation of commitments on women and peace and security
in the humanitarian field. I hope that the international community can seize this
historic opportunity to make humanitarian action more gender -responsive in order
to ensure that all needs are met and that vulnerability is reduced.

D.

Access to justice for women
49. Delivering justice and re-establishing the rule of law are fundamental to
sustaining peace. However, the challenges of restoring justice in the ashes of
conflict are immense. In the formal system, courthouses are frequently dilapidated
and legal records and necessary materials are often missing. Typically, the
independence of the judiciary is weak, and the requirement for justice is heightened
by the need to address the atrocities committed during conflict. For women, whose
access to justice may have already been hampered by discriminatory laws and
attitudinal and institutional obstacles, adherence to the rule of law is fundamental to
their full participation in post-conflict recovery. In addition, prisons in post-conflict
countries do not usually provide for the safe, secure and humane detentio n of female
offenders and suspects, all of whom might be subject to abuse and human rights
violations and whose specific needs are not addressed.
50. There has been a shift in policy towards recognition of the need for justice
mechanisms to address not only violations but also the underlying inequalities that
render women and girls vulnerable. Such an approach involves taking into account
the full range of human rights violations that women experience, designing
processes that facilitate their active participation and ensuring that support for the
prosecution of perpetrators is matched with an equal focus and investment in the
redress needed for victims to rebuild their lives. It is thus an approach that
prioritizes empowerment and accountability, and is anc hored on changing the future
by addressing the past. 28
51. The Global Focal Point for the Police, Justice and Corrections regarding the
rule of law in post-conflict and other crisis situations has benefitted from the
co-location of UN-Women and improved coordination with the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. The co -location has increased
programming on women’s access to justice and addressing sexual and gender-based

__________________
27
28

15-15656

More information available from www.worldhumanitariansummit.org.
See Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women general recommendation
No. 33.

17/54

S/2015/716

violence; improved gender mainstreaming into justice and security sector reforms;
incorporated key policies on women and peace and security into rule of law
planning, analyses and programming; and ensured that sufficient resources were
allocated to justice programmes that benefit women directly, such as in the Ce ntral
African Republic and Somalia.
52. Nevertheless, it is clear that our efforts remain lacking in reach and scope with
positive shifts in policy yet to translate into practice. As affirmed by consultations
for the global study, justice for violations experienced by women and girls during
conflict has been slow to attain in many settings, and human rights violations and
abuses often continue unabated in its aftermath. In addition, recent evidence from
surveys conducted by the Harvard Humanitarian Initiative among 30,000
individuals in eight conflict-affected areas over 11 years revealed that women
tended to be less informed and reported lower levels of access to both formal and
traditional justice mechanisms than men. 29
53. A review of the past 15 years in the area of women’s access to justice in fragile
and post-conflict settings points to three positive trends: real and concerted efforts
to secure accountability and address impunity for sexual violence in conflict;
increased recognition of women’s access to justice to be transformative in nature;
and growing recognition of the need to engage informal justice systems in contexts
that are legally plural as entry points for intervention and programming for gender responsive access to justice.
Increasing prosecutions and closing the impunity gap
54. The importance of delivering individual justice and addressing impunity is
underscored in all Security Council resolutions on women and peace and security.
Perhaps the greatest gains in this area have been in the evolution of international
law, in particular since the entry into force of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, which provided the most progressive and comprehensive
international legal framework on gender-based crimes to date, explicitly recognizing
rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy and enforced
sterilization and other forms of sexual violence as crimes against humanity, war
crimes and constituent acts of genocide. One of the main remaining challenges in
addressing sexual and gender-based violence in conflict and post-conflict settings is
ensuring that mechanisms are in place to protect the security and dignity of victims
and witnesses.
55. A number of State parties to the Rome Statute have amended their penal codes
to criminalize a broad range of gender-based crimes in line with their obligations
under the Statute, pointing to a possible significant cascade effect of international
norms to the domestic sphere. 30 Realizing the full progress of the international
justice system and its potential for victims will require the incorporation of the
Statute into the national context so that States have a comprehensive framework for
investigating international sexual and gender-based crimes, dedicated procedures for
victim and witness support that are matched with adequate resources for their
__________________
29

Research conducted with the support of UN-Women. Countries included Cambodia, the Central
African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the C ongo, Iraq, Liberia, Rwanda
and northern Uganda.
30
See Fionnuala Ní Aoláin, “Gendered harms and their interface with international criminal law”,
International Feminist Journal of Politics, vol. 16, No. 4 (2014).

18/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

implementation, civic programmes to educate women on relevant laws, resources
for monitoring the implementation of gender-responsive laws and provisions for
reparations. Each of these components has a significant impact on women’s access
to justice and is part of the Statute, but is often ignored in the narrower discussions
on complementarity in relation to the International Criminal Court.
56. An important development in the past decade has been the establishment of
specialized chambers or courts to handle conflict-related crimes (for example,
Croatia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Serbia and Uganda) and
prosecution and investigatory units to deal specifically with gender -based and
sexual violence (see A/HRC/27/21). Prosecutions of this nature require national
jurisdictions to have the capacity to investigate and prosecute sexual and gender based violence as international crimes, an effort to which increasing numbers of
international actors are now contributing, including the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which brings together the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, OHCHR, UNDP, the office of my Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Justice Rapid Response and UN -Women
sexual and gender-based violence justice experts roster. Recent experiences
exemplify the potential dividends of providing rigorous technical support to national
authorities to enable them to prosecute sexual violence crimes. This includes the
case of Guinea, where the political engagement of my Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict has enabled the United Nations, through the Team of
Experts, to provide technical support to a Guinean panel of judges that has
consequently indicted 16 high-ranking individuals for alleged crimes perpetrated in
2009, including sexual violence. Among the indicted are former Head of State
Moussa Dadis Camara and the head of the presidential guard, Claude Pivi.
Nevertheless, the actual number of national level prosecutions of these crimes
continues to be a fraction of the total crimes committed, and increased political will,
expertise, funding, capacity support and civic education efforts are needed to ensure
that these crimes are no longer met with silence and impunity.
Moving beyond prosecutions: an agenda for transitional justice
57. Transitional justice mechanisms must respond to the full range of women ’s
human rights violations, provide redress for victims and seek to transform rather
than reinforce gender inequalities. In line with Security Council resolution 2122
(2013) and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, the right to truth is essential to justice and stability in the aftermath
of conflict (see A/HRC/27/21). A range of mechanisms facilitates truth-seeking,
including truth and reconciliation commissions, internati onal commissions of
inquiry and fact-finding missions. While the full impact of truth commissions is yet
to be realized, we have seen significant advancements in their gender sensitivity
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Particularly critical i s the design of
mandates that provide scope for addressing the full range of violations that women
experience during conflict, well-resourced gender units and a commitment to
effectively mainstreaming a gender perspective throughout a commission ’s work,
consultations with women’s organizations and the training of staff.
58. In 2014, United Nations-supported truth commissions were established in
Mali, the Philippines and Tunisia. Of the two that are operational, both are led by
women and at least one third of their commissioners are women (33 per cent for

15-15656

19/54

S/2015/716

Tunisia and 50 per cent for the Philippines). 31 The transitional justice law, which
established the Truth and Dignity Commission in Tunisia, provides that the impact
of violations on women will be taken into account when revealing the truth and in
the design of reparations. It calls upon the Commission to develop measures that
ensure the protection of women’s rights, including respect for privacy during
hearings. The inclusion of groups and family members within the definition of
“victim” by the Commission, as well as its mandate to consider socioeconomic
rights violations such as corruption, gives it a strong framework for addressing the
structural context of discrimination that renders women vulnerable to violence.
Established in 2014, the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission in Mali is
specifically tasked with investigating cases of grave violations of human rights
committed against women and children. The final report of the National
Commission on Truth in Brazil, which was issued in December 2014, devoted a
specific chapter to sexual and gender-based violence.
59. In contexts where official processes insufficiently addressed women’s
demands, civil society organizations have held their own tribunals to highlight
women’s experiences. In May 2015, hundreds of women from all corners of the
former Yugoslavia came together in a tribunal organized in Sarajevo by women’s
groups from across the region, bridging political and ethnic divides. Its design was
the result of a participatory process through which survivors were consulted and
given ownership of the tribunal. Women gave testimony, highlighting the co ntinuity
of violence before, during and after conflict, the consequences of gender -based
violence on families and communities, the climate of ongoing impunity and the
importance of strong women’s networks for overcoming barriers to justice and
equality. The experience of this women’s tribunal follows similar initiatives in
Cambodia, Guatemala, Nepal and elsewhere.
60. Commissions of inquiry have become a more frequently used tool by the
United Nations and others to document crimes and create a historical re cord. In
addition, these bodies can pave the way for appropriate post -conflict justice and
accountability measures, including prosecutions. I am pleased that the practice of
UN-Women to second a gender adviser or sexual and gender-based violence
investigator to OHCHR-led commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions has
been systematically maintained, in accordance with the request contained in my
2011 report (S/2011/598). These results are increasingly being reported to the
Security Council through formal and informal meetings.
61. Comprehensive reparations for victims are a key element of rebuilding post conflict societies. Perhaps the greatest progress in the area of reparations in recent
years has been the increased political willingness to provide reparations for victims
of conflict-related sexual violence and the recognition that, to be effective,
reparations should be about not only returning women to the situation in which they
were found before the violation but also about striving to have a transformative
potential to reverse the gender inequalities that may be the root causes of the
violation. The war crimes court in Bosnia and Herzegovina issued a landmark ruling
in June 2015 that granted the first-ever compensation to a wartime rape victim.
Other country-specific examples are provided in my previous report on conflict __________________
31

20/54

Data on the extent to which truth and reconciliation commissions include provisions to address
the rights and participation of women and girls has been tracked since 2011 using the indicators
in resolution 1325 (2000).

15-15656

S/2015/716

related sexual violence (S/2015/203) and in my guidance note on reparations for
conflict-related sexual violence launched in 2014. For reparations programmes to be
sustainable with transformative impact, linkages to targeted development policies
and development actors are needed to complement them. This is especially the case
in contexts of large-scale rights violations and poverty, and can be an important
means to address structural inequalities, including gender inequality.
Women’s access to justice in plural legal contexts
62. Another trend has been the growing interest in informal justi ce systems as
entry points for intervention and the recognition that, during and in the aftermath of
conflict, effective programming must recognize and engage with the reality of plural
legal contexts when formal systems are often non-existent or have little reach
beyond the capital. While investment has increased in ensuring that informal justice
systems deliver equal protection of the rights of women and girls, it remains an
underutilized site of engagement.
63. Plural legal systems, where customary or religious law is exempted from
constitutional equality and non-discrimination provisions, can be harder to reform,
including in conflict and post-conflict settings. As the post-conflict phase is almost
always accompanied by constitutional and legislative re forms, it is an important
moment of opportunity to entrench gender equality and equal rights across all legal
systems. Affirming the primacy of constitutional laws over religious and customary
laws, as well as mandating that they be consistent with constit utional norms on
equality, is a key step towards ensuring the protection and promotion of women ’s
rights (see A/HRC/29/40). This must be done by securing national buy-in and
support.
64. Women’s participation in all sites and forms of justice can have transformative
impacts in itself. Data have shown that employing women on the front line of
service delivery creates justice systems that are more gender -responsive. For
example, increasing the number of female police officers correlates positively with
an increase in the reporting of sexual violence. Evidence also suggests that women
judges can create more conducive environments for women in courts and make a
difference to outcomes in sexual violence cases. 32 Promoting women’s participation
can be facilitated by programmes encouraging women to pursue legal careers and
through mandatory minimum quotas for women’s involvement in the administration
of justice.
65. In consultations for the global study, few issues resonated more universally
than women’s demands that justice be treated as inseparable from broader concerns
about security and equal access to basic needs. For women, experiences of
vulnerability to violence, as well as the consequences of the violations themselves,
are related directly to their unequal status. Justice is as much about dealing with the
past as it is about securing a better future, which includes guarantees of
non-recurrence. Justice is fundamentally about its linkages with conf lict, human
rights and broader development. For example, access to justice for survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence should be comprehensive in nature. In the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, UNDP, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUSCO) and other
__________________
32

15-15656

See UN-Women, Progress of the World’s Women: In Pursuit of Justice (New York, 2011).

21/54

S/2015/716

partners support a large network of legal aid clinics to address impunity for crimes,
particularly sexual and gender-based violence. These clinics include medical,
psychosocial and legal aid, and more recently have begun to address the
reintegration problems faced by victims through literacy classes, socioeconomic
reinsertion support, education of community leaders on attitudes towards survivors
and psychosocial support to victims. 33 One-stop centres that offer survivors medical
care, psychological counselling, access to police investigators and legal assistance
in one location are proving to serve as successful models for the integration of legal
services with the broader needs of survivors through a coordinated approach
between health professionals, who are often the first point of contact, and the police.
Access to legal aid is also crucial for female detainees and prisoners to ensure a fair
trial and sentence, especially considering that women prisoners frequently are
victims of abuse themselves, may suffer from mental illness and continue to be the
primary caretakers of their children.

E.

Preventing conflict: the origins of the women and peace and
security agenda
66. In its report entitled “Uniting our strengths for peace — politics, partnership
and people”, the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations found that
prevention efforts remained “the poor relative of better resourced peace operations
deployed during and after conflict” and called for more to be done to bring
prevention and mediation back to the fore of international peace and security. Such
efforts would be greatly enhanced by greater participation of women in short -term
and structural prevention efforts, including the work being carried forward by my
special political missions and Special Envoys. In 2000, when women peace activists
took their call for a women and peace and security agenda to the Security Council,
they were not only demanding the full and equal participation of half the world’s
population in addressing threats to global peace and security but also seeking a
fundamental shift in how international peace and security is maintained and
restored. Their objective was, at its core, the prevention of armed co nflict and a
rollback of the escalating levels of militarization that was making homes,
communities and nations less secure. These concerns and fears continue to resonate
today. In consultations, women across regions expressed concern that the United
Nations had lost sight of its own vision to beat “swords into ploughshare”. In 2014,
the global financial cost of violence was estimated at 13.4 per cent of global gross
domestic product, or 14.3 trillion dollars. 34 The human cost and impact of conflicts,
however, lasts for decades, contributing to renewed cycles of violence, devastation
and despair. A militarized view of conflict prevention sells resolution 1325 (2000)
short of its transformative vision of a more equal, just and peaceful world.
67. Recent research suggests that levels of gender equality, women’s access to
economic, political, and social rights and the security of women are key indicators
of the level of peace within a State. Accordingly, greater investment in gender

__________________
33

See UNDP, Strengthening the Rule of Law in Crisis-Affected and Fragile Situations: Global
Programme Annual Report 2014 (New York, 2015).
34
See Institute for Economics and Peace, Global Peace Index 2015: Measuring Peace, Its Causes
and Its Economic Value (2015). The index gauges global peace using three broad themes: the
level of safety and security in society, the extent of national and international conflict and the
degree of militarization.

22/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

equality and the empowerment of women, including in terms of educational and
training opportunities, are intrinsically linked to stability, development, peace and
human rights. The global epidemic of violence against women is often aggravated
by conflict and may rise even further after conflict. This continuum of violence
undermines peace for half the population of a society and stands as an obstacle to
the participation of women in post-conflict recovery and governance. Genderresponsive conflict prevention must begin from an understa nding of insecurities,
inequalities and human rights violations that permeate women’s and girls’ lives
prior to, during and after conflict.
Strengthening short-term and medium-term measures to prevent conflict
68. Few early warning systems effectively integrate gender considerations as a
category of analysis, include adequate gender equality expertise or engage with
local women. Women may be the first to be aware of and experience rising
insecurity in society. Studies in Kosovo and Sierra Leone, for exa mple, found that
women in those contexts had valuable information about the accumulation of
weapons and violent attacks being planned, but had no means of reporting or
sharing this information. 35 Rising tensions can result in restrictive freedom of
movement for women, an increased risk of assault in public areas and an inability or
a lack of willingness to access fields and gardens owing to threats. Rising levels of
domestic violence and the specific vulnerability of women to gender-based violence
within and outside the home often reflect rising tensions and militarization in
society as a whole.
69. In addition, gender-specific indicators can be critical sources of information.
Early warning indicators of conflict in Jonglei state, South Sudan, for example,
include unusual movement of all-male groups, rising bride prices and an increase in
pregnancy terminations. 36 These specific issues can be valuable indicators and
sources of information if captured as elements of early warning mechanisms for
preventative action. Women must participate in the design, implementation and
monitoring of these systems, and the systems should include indicators that are
gender-sensitive and specific to gender-based violations.
70. At the same time that new technologies are being leveraged to wage war, they
are also being used to increase security and prevent conflict. Technologies such as
drone and satellite monitoring systems, mobile phones and Internet platforms can be
important tools for conflict prevention. In order for women and girls to benefit fully
from conflict-prevention technology, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system and Member States must ensure that women and girls have equal access and
that those monitoring early warning signs through the use of new technology are
trained and instructed to detect gender-specific security threats. MONUSCO has
instituted a programme to provide women with mobile phones as part of a gender sensitive early warning system, giving populations direct access to the United
Nations and related response mechanisms.
__________________
35

See Hannah Wright, “Gender and conflict early warning: results of a literature review on
integrating gender perspectives into conflict early warning systems”, Saferworld Briefing
(London, 28 May 2014).
36
See Pablo Castillo Díaz and Sunita Caminha, “Gender -responsive early warning: overview and
how-to guide” (UN-Women, October 2012).

15-15656

23/54

S/2015/716

71. In my previous annual reports, I highlighted the importance of and the need to
better support and strengthen community-level mediation, dispute resolution and
conflict mitigation mechanisms. Innovative practices emphasized in the global study
include the women’s situation rooms employed in Kenya, Nigeria and elsewhere,
the “peace huts” established in Liberia and the “peace communities” formed in
some areas in Colombia where women community leaders have declared their area
and population as neutral and free from armed conflict, demanding that combatants
do not draw these communities into violence.
72. To achieve progress in such preventative efforts, gender e xpertise needs to be
included across all relevant United Nations entities. Ideally, thematic specialists
with solid expertise on gender, and on women and peace and security should be
present in all relevant mission components. The United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste set an early precedent for this approach. In my response to the High Level Independent Panel, I made a commitment to the effect that senior gender
advisers be located in the offices of my special representatives, report directly to
them and advise senior mission leadership at the strategic level. In terms of
capacity, only 6 of the 11 special political missions active in 2014 had a dedicated
gender adviser post. However, those 6 missions had a total of 25 gender affairs
officers and all special political missions had appointed gender focal points. In
comparison, while 9 of the 16 active peacekeeping missions had a senior gender
adviser post, 7 of those posts were vacant at the end of 2014. In Headquarters,
where gender expertise is necessary for the comprehensive mainstreaming and
backstopping of the work of the missions, the Department of Political Affairs had just
one core-budget funded gender adviser and two additional temporary extrabudgetary
positions, while the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had three long-term
core-budget funded posts.
Addressing root causes
73. The international small arms trade is estimated at 8.5 billion dollars per year.
Significant quantities of small arms are diverted from legal to illicit circle s, which
increase the rates of violence and insecurity, in particular for women. For example,
in Latin America, respondents to a survey of civil society organizations for the
global study designated organized crime as the most pressing emerging issue for
women and peace and security in the region. Data availability on the existence of
national mechanisms for the control of illicit small arms and light weapons remains
limited. 37 In 2014, 75 States voluntarily shared national reports through the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, set up under the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects (see A/CONF.192/15). Out of
these, 47 (63 per cent) reported having national coordination agencies on small arms
and light weapons, while 2 were in the process of setting them up. Ninety -five per
cent reported having a national focal point. Fifty-eight States (77 per cent) reported
having legislation in place to regulate small arms and light weapons. Of the 14
conflict and post-conflict countries 38 that contributed reports to the Programme o f
Action in 2014, 9 (64 per cent) stated that they had a coordination agency, 13
__________________
37

Data for this indicator is compiled annually to monitor the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
38
See footnote No. 13 above.

24/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

(93 per cent) reported having a focal point and 11 (79 per cent) reported having
legislation in place to regulate small arms and light weapons. In comparison, only
44 per cent of conflict and post-conflict countries reporting data in 2013 had such
legislation in place, with 35 per cent of those indicating that their legislation was
non-comprehensive.
74. The Arms Trade Treaty, which entered into force on 24 December 2014, mark s
an important step towards regulating the transfer of arms and mitigating its impact
on rates of gender-based violence. States parties must now implement the Treaty to
address the proliferation of arms as a root cause of conflict and as a source of
insecurity in the lives of women and girls around the world. Specific national -level
responses have also evolved to address the flow of small arms and light weapons.
For example, in response to the high levels of national gun violence in the
Philippines, women’s civil society organizations lobbied for the adoption of the
Treaty and the inclusion of small arms control in the country’s national action plan
for the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), which contains
an indicator on the adoption of regulations on small arms transfer and usage. 39
Capacity gaps and other challenges faced by State parties in implementing the
Treaty require stronger attention.
75. The negotiations for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development created an
unprecedented and inclusive debate on a universal and transformative global agenda
for all countries to achieve sustainable development. In this context, the linkages
between peaceful societies and effective government institutions and development
have been reaffirmed. The African Union, for example, called for the inextricable
links between development and peace, security and stability to be recognized as the
sustainable development goals are agreed to and for a focus on conflict prevention
and addressing its root causes. This growing political will should be translated into
more significant action for building peaceful and inclusive societies in the post 2015 era. I am encouraged by the fact that the 2030 Agenda addresses factors that
give rise to violence, insecurity and injustice, such as inequality, corruption, poor
governance and illicit financial and arms flows. Furthermore, the 2030 Agenda
emphasizes the need to redouble our efforts to resolve or prevent conflict and to
support post-conflict countries, including through ensuring that women have a full
and equal role in peacebuilding and State-building.

F.

Keeping the peace in an increasingly militarized world
76. In the past 15 years, the United Nations peacekeeping budget has more than
tripled. While the number of civilian staff in peacekeeping missions has grown by
50 per cent, the numbers of uniformed personnel have tripled and missions now last
three times longer (see A/70/95-S/2015/446). Recent mandates and doctrine have
pushed for greater readiness to use force, including proactively, to uphold duties to
protect civilians while operating in volatile environments where there is no peace to
keep. These missions operate in an increasingly militarized world shaped by global
counter-terrorism campaigns and sophisticated weapons technology that redefine the
scope of the battlefield and blur lines between soldiers and weapons. The global

__________________
39

15-15656

See Megan Bastick and Kristen Valasek, “Converging agendas: women, peace, security and small
arms”, in Small Arms Survey 2014: Women and Guns (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
2014).

25/54

S/2015/716

study examines efforts by a range of actors, including security sector institutions, to
engage on the women and peace and security agenda. These include mainstreaming
gender perspectives into peacekeeping, increasing the integration of gender e quality
expertise within key sectors, improving the gender balance in the military and
police, training all categories of staff, protecting civilians and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse. Consultations for the study emphasized the need for a
stronger focus on non-violent forms of protection, prevention of conflict and
political solutions to crises.
Efforts made to mainstream a gender perspective into peacekeeping
77. United Nation peacekeeping benefits today from an entire normative and
institutional architecture that did not exist 15 years ago. In 2000, only a fifth of
United Nations peacekeeping missions had a specialized gender unit. Currently, all
multidimensional peacekeeping missions have gender units and are increasingly
deploying women protection advisers, who are charged specifically with
implementing key operational aspects of the resolutions of the Security Council on
sexual violence in conflict. They are also currently assigning military gender
advisers and focal points at all levels, including at the Office of Military Affairs at
Headquarters. The Police Division in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
also has its own gender advisers. Almost every mandate of United Nations
peacekeeping now includes specific provisions on women and peace and security, as
well as precise elements on conflict-related sexual violence, although it varies from
very general language to specific targeted provisions. Data compiled using the
indicators in resolution 1325 (2000) 40 indicate that the majority of directives for
military and police components of missions include instructions to protect the rights
of and address women’s and girls’ specific security needs.
78. As of mid-2015, 73 per cent of the nine military strategic concepts of
operations and six force operation orders valid across nine peacekeeping operations
included some provisions to this end, up from 56 per cent in 2012. As for the United
Nations police, in 2015 81 per cent of directives in 16 missions included measures
to protect the rights of women and girls, up from 54 per cent in 2012. However,
strong provisions in mandates and directives is not enough. Dedicated leadership,
scenario-based gender equality and human rights training of all categories of staff,
increased integration of gender equality expertise across mission sectors, adequate
resources for effective implementation of gender-responsive protection measures,
monitoring and accountability for results are essential for their effective application
across all missions.
79. Most of the best practices over the past 15 years have been limited in scope
and scale, constrained by several factors, including the systematic underresourcing
of gender equality work within peacekeeping budgets. In addition, only a limited
number of missions have established gender-sensitive benchmarks to track progress
or guide their decisions about reconfiguration or withdrawal. This implies that
peacekeeping missions could complete their withdrawal without evaluating if the
__________________
40

26/54

Data have been compiled by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations since 2012 for the
indicator on the extent to which measures to protect women’s and girls’ human rights are
included in directives issued by heads of military components and heads of police components of
peacekeeping missions.

15-15656

S/2015/716

mission has addressed women’s specific needs or the gender-specific provisions in
that mission’s mandate.
Improving the gender balance in the military and police
80. Examples included in the global study show that since 2000 a growing number
of countries have increased the percentage of women in their armed forces. 41 The
number of countries, however, remains low overall, including among the largest
troop-contributing countries, and this is reflected in the deployments to
peacekeeping operations. On average, only 4 per cent of the mil itary in United
Nations missions were women as of July 2015, and they are mostly employed as
support staff. The number has not changed since 2011 and has barely inched up
from 1 per cent in 1993, despite repeated calls for more women in peacekeeping
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The situation affects the work of the
mission in areas such as the implementation of protection innovations and the
possibility of engaging with women in the community. The study puts forward
suggestions for incentives to boost women’s participation in the military contingents
of United Nations peacekeeping missions, which should be carefully considered.
81. Increasing the percentage of women in the police component of missions has a
positive effect on issues that affect women and has also been found to lower the
rates of complaints of misconduct, improper use of force or inappropriate use of
weapons, and authoritarian behaviours in interactions with citizens and lower
ranking officers. 42 In 2009, the United Nations launched a campaign with the
ambitious goal of ensuring that women would make up one fifth of all United
Nations police components by 2014. Although the percentage of women has grown
since then, the campaign has not yet met its target. 43 The Police Division of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has asked Member States to deploy the
same proportion of women that they already have in their national police forces, and
to review their recruitment policies and criteria for deployment to identify and
eliminate any inequalities or admission barriers for women.
Addressing sexual exploitation and abuse
82. Available data 44 show that in 2014, 79 new allegations of sexual exploitation
or sexual abuse were made across United Nations entities that reported informa tion
(including departments and offices of the Secretariat, agencies, funds and
__________________
41

See examples in the yearly national reports of NATO members to the NATO Committee on
Gender Perspectives, or in country submissions to the Secretary -General’s annual report on
women, peace and security. Several countries have specific action plans adopted by their defence
institutions (e.g., Argentina, Bulgaria, Ireland).
42
Charlotte Anderholt, Female Participation in Formed Police Units: A Report on the Integration
of Women in Formed Police Units of Peacekeeping Operations (Carlisle, PA, United States Army
Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute, September 2012).
43
The police component in the mission consists of individual policemen and women, and formed
police units. Although women now comprise 18 per cent of the police that are individually
recruited, the percentage drops to 10 per cent when adding formed police units. See “Gender
statistics by Mission” (United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations, May 2015).
44
Data is regularly collected and published by the United Nations Conduct and Discipline Unit,
under both the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support.
This informs the indicator of resolution 1325 (2000) on the percentage o f reported cases of
sexual exploitation and abuse allegedly perpetrated by uniformed, civilian peacekeepers and/or
humanitarian workers that are acted upon out of the total number of referred cases.

15-15656

27/54

S/2015/716

programmes), compared with 96 in 2013, 88 in 2012 and 102 in 2011 (see
A/69/799). In field missions, 51 allegations were reported in nine peacekeeping
missions and one special political mission, with a majority (75 per cent) of
allegations received from three peacekeeping missions: MONUSCO, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). Of the allegations in field missions, 14
involved staff members or United Nations Volunteers; 24 involved members of
military contingents or United Nations military observers; and 13 involved United
Nations police officers, members of uniformed police units and governmentprovided correctional personnel. Eighteen allegations (35 per cent) involved the
most egregious forms of sexual exploitation and abuse, including sexual activities
with minors or rape of persons 18 years of age or younger. Paternity claims were
associated with 12 allegations.
83. The majority of the allegations involving civilian personnel or police and
military personnel with the status of experts on missions were referred to the United
Nations for investigation, while allegations involving military contingent personnel
were referred to troop-contributing countries. In the absence of a reply from
Member States or a decline to investigate the matter, investigations were
automatically undertaken by the United Nations. As at 31 January 2015,
investigations into 18 allegations received in 2014 were completed, including
investigations conducted by troop-contributing countries into five allegations (four
substantiated and one unsubstantiated) and investigations conducted by th e United
Nations into 13 allegations (five substantiated and eight unsubstantiated). A
substantiated allegation involving one civilian personnel in a field mission was
referred for disciplinary actions by the United Nations and possible criminal
accountability measures. Regarding actions involving military and police personnel
taken in 2014, troop- and police-contributing countries were informed that 16
military personnel and five police personnel would be repatriated on disciplinary
grounds and barred from participating in field missions in the future for their
connection to 18 substantiated allegations received in 2014 or earlier. For
allegations received in 2014, responses from Member States indicated that
disciplinary actions of an administrative nature were taken against two military
personnel concerning two separate substantiated allegations of sexual exploitation,
and two additional military personnel were imprisoned for another two substantiated
allegations, one of sexual abuse and one of sexual exploitation.
84. I am profoundly concerned over any allegation of sexual exploitation and
abuse that surfaces in peacekeeping contexts. When the United Nations deploys
peacekeepers, it aims at protecting the world’s most vulnerable people in the most
affected places. I will not tolerate any action that causes populations to question this
trusted role. The troubling allegations concerning the conduct of United Nations
peacekeepers deployed to the Central African Republic in 2015 has shown that it
remains an area where the Organization and its Member States must do much more.
Those who work for the United Nations in peacekeeping and other humanitarian
operations must uphold the Organization’s highest ideals. Yet the outrageous and
criminal actions of a few people tarnish the heroic work of tens of thousands of
United Nations peacekeepers and other personnel. In my most recent report on
special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse
(A/69/779), I have made a series of proposals to enhance the response of the United
Nations, including its agencies, funds and programmes, to sexual exploitation and

28/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

abuse. I have also appointed a high-level external independent panel to look into the
reports of sexual exploitation and abuse in the Central African Republic and the
Organization’s systemic response. Every allegation must be reported immediately,
investigated thoroughly and acted upon decisively. Failure to do so will have clear
consequences. Member States have the ultimate responsibility to hold uniformed
personnel to account and they must take decisive preventive and punitive action. I
welcome, in this regard, the emergency session of the Security Council that was
held on 13 August 2015. I encourage regional organizations deploying peacekeeping
personnel to do the same. My clear message to perpetrators is that everything
possible will be done to pursue them and bring them to justice. I want victims to rest
assured that the Organization will uphold its institutional responsibility to safeguard
their security and dignity. The latter is an area where the international community
must emphasize assistance and support, including for implementing and resourcing
past commitments.
Promoting unarmed means of protection
85. The global study and the report of the High-level Independent Panel of Peace
Operations underscore the importance of promoting unarmed protection actions,
including by military actors and their police and civilian partners. United Nations
missions are meant to protect civilians not only through the provision of direct
physical protection but also through dialogue, engagement and the establishment of
a protective environment. A repeated theme in consultations for the global study was
that the promotion of women’s leadership is a protection strategy in itself. Early
warning mechanisms continue to be underutilized and disconnected from proactive
and immediate response. To protect the humanitarian space, many advocate for
protection by presence, proven to be effective even if it is unarmed military
personnel or unarmed civilian protection.

G.

Countering violent extremism: women and peace and security
in a new context
86. The rise of violent extremism in addition to ongoing conflicts exacerbates the
already complex threats faced by communities, States and regions, with a direct
impact on the rights of women and girls. From forced marriage and the commission
of systematic sexual and gender-based crimes, abuses of the right to physical
integrity, to restrictions on education, access to health care and participation in
public life, the escalation in violence and insecurity is perhaps one of the greatest
threats to global peace and security at present, and one that affects women and girls
in both unique and disproportionate ways. It also makes more evident than ever the
clear linkages between gender equality, peace and security that the originators of
resolution 1325 (2000) first drew to international attention. In the presidential
statement adopted in connection to the open debate on women and peace and
security in 2014 (S/PRST/2014/21), the Security Council expressed with deep
concern that “violent extremism, which can be conducive to terrori sm, often results
in increased displacement, and is frequently targeted at women and girls, leading to
serious human rights violations and abuses committed against them including
murder, abduction, hostage taking, kidnapping, enslavement, their sale and fo rced
marriage, human trafficking, rape, sexual slavery and other forms of sexual
violence”. Since then, this targeted violence is receiving increasing global attention.

15-15656

29/54

S/2015/716

Yet, even as violent extremist groups place the subordination of women at the
forefront of their agenda, the promotion of gender equality has remained an
afterthought in national and international responses to the spread of their violence.
As the Organization mobilizes against violent extremism, synergies must continue
to be built between the agendas on counter-terrorism and on women and peace and
security. Promoting women’s participation, leadership, human rights and
empowerment increases the chance of success in addressing this scourge.
Deliberate targeting of women’s and girls’ human rights
87. A common thread shared by violent extremist groups is that their advance has
been coupled with attacks on the rights of women and girls — such as rights to
education, to participation in public life and to decision -making over their own
bodies. According to reports, abductions of and sexual violence against women and
girls have been used as a deliberate tactic, for example, by Boko Haram. Reports
estimate that as many as 2,000 women and girls may have been abducted since the
start of 2014. Research also indicates that abducted women and girls held in
captivity by Boko Haram experience a range of violations including physical and
psychological abuse, forced labour, forced participation in military operations,
forced marriage to their captors, and sexual abuse and violence, including rape and
forced pregnancy. 45 Sexual and gender-based violence is being used as a deliberate
tactic of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. In my previous report on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2015/203), I highlighted the use of sexual
violence as integrally linked with the objectives, ideology and funding of violent
extremist groups.
88. As violent extremist groups continue to grow in power and influence,
international actors have focused on military and security solutions to stop their
progress. This approach is not sufficient to address the evolving problem, and can
result in human rights violations that can further fuel grievances. At its heart,
violent extremism is also a manifestation of governance and development
shortcomings as well as a lack of respect for human rights and the rule of law.
Building societies that are conflict-resilient and able to permanently address the
conditions conducive to violent extremism requires investing in policies a nd
programmes that support good governance and sustainable and rights -based
development. As evidenced in the global study, this must involve policies and
programmes that integrate human rights of women and their empowerment and
active participation of women.
89. Women are, however, not only victims, they can be active participants and
leaders in perpetrating extremist violence. Their roles vary according to each group
and have included carrying out suicide bombings, participating in women ’s wings or
all-female brigades within armed organizations, gathering intelligence, and serving as
recruiters and mobilizers. Women play an important role in social media, which can
be used as a recruitment tool, publicize and celebrate activities of extremists, and
build interest in their causes. 46 The efforts of Member States and international actors
__________________
45

“‘Our job is to shoot, slaughter and kill’: Boko Haram’s reign of terror in north-east Nigeria”
(Amnesty International, 14 April 2015).
46
Shiv Malik, “Lured by ISIS: how the young girls who revel in brutality are offered cause”,
The Guardian, 21 February 2015. Available from http://www.theguardian.com/wor ld/2015/feb/
20/push-pull-lure-western-women-isis.

30/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

must be informed by a nuanced gendered lens on the conditions conducive to
terrorism, understanding the grievances that move women and men towards violent
extremism, and supporting the dynamics that strengthen their resilience against them.
90. Women are impacted both by violent extremist and terrorist groups as well as
the strategies used to counter them, which can result in their being squeezed between
terror and anti-terror. Efforts to counter terrorism and violent extremism that are not
grounded in human rights have had an adverse impact on gender equality and
women’s organizations, including women human rights defenders. The
disempowerment of women, and the harmful social norms that accompany the rise of
violent extremism, is not incidental but systemic, weakening the foundation of
resilient and stable communities. One-sided security-driven solutions heighten
women’s insecurity, with militarized counter-terrorism operations disrupting
economic and social activity and destroying civilian infrastructure that is not used for
military purposes. Displacement leaves women and girls vulnerable to sexual and
gender-based violence and other human rights violations. The failure to preve nt these
negative impacts results in women’s re-victimization, and ultimately in more poverty,
more desperation, and greater radicalization that can lead to violent extremism.
91. I recommend that Member States and United Nations entities invest in gender
sensitive research and data collection on identifying the drivers that lead individuals
to join violent extremist groups and the impacts of comprehensive counter -terrorism
strategies on women’s human rights, in order to develop targeted and evidence based policy and programming responses. This would entail designing a context and
gender-sensitive approach to programming based on local needs and community
perceptions including those of women.
92. The world is clearly witnessing a strategic moment in the evol ution of the
counter-terrorism agenda where women’s participation and empowerment has
become recognized as a necessary part of a comprehensive response to securing
peace and security in line with resolution 1325 (2000). The Security Council has
increasingly referred to women in resolutions and statements related to terrorism. In
resolution 2178 (2014), the Council recognizes for the first time the need to
empower women as part of preventative measures to the spread of violent
extremism and radicalization. However, there is a certain disconnect between the
rhetoric and the degree of investment in relevant programming on the ground.
93. The women and peace and security agenda provides a platform for analysing
how conditions may be conducive to terrorism, particularly prolonged unresolved
conflicts as identified under Pillar I of the United Nations Global Counter -Terrorism
Strategy, and how the drivers of radicalization affect or are impacted by gender
dynamics. In resolution 2122 (2013), the Security Council e xplicitly mentions
terrorism as one of the thematic areas where the Council intends to increase its
attention to women and peace and security issues, a theme reaffirmed in resolution
2129 (2013).
94. I urge Member States and relevant United Nations entiti es to continue building
synergies between the agendas on counter-terrorism and on women and peace and
security. This must involve strengthening the integration of a gender perspective,
including women’s participation, leadership and empowerment, into counterterrorism and preventing violent extremism frameworks. It also requires ensuring
mechanisms and processes mandated to prevent and respond to violent extremism
have the necessary gender expertise to fulfil their mandates. This includes United

15-15656

31/54

S/2015/716

Nations entities providing relevant capacity-building and other assistance, sanctions
monitoring teams, bodies established to track terrorist financing and conduct
fact-finding and criminal investigations.
95. Violent extremists have made effective use of social media to advance their
objectives, whether through propaganda, radicalization or recruitment. In the same
way, media channels can be used to counter the narratives of violent extremism and
develop messages on gender equality, good governance, and conflict prev ention.
Employing the media to educate men and boys to change discriminatory practices,
including through non-violent conflict resolution, rethinking masculinities and
stereotypes about gender roles also creates pathways for women and girls to engage
in efforts to counter violent extremism. Counter-narratives to violent extremist
messaging also need to be developed and targeted at male and female audiences.
Training religious leaders to work as mentors in their communities and increasing
women’s access to education to amplify their voices against violent extremist
narratives are other important strategies.

H.

Addressing obstacles to implementation: the role of key actors
96. The present section includes an examination of the initiatives taken by
different stakeholders to accelerate action, measure progress and deliver better
results on the ground. Good practices, gaps and challenges are highlighted,
identified through the preparations for the global study and the high-level review of
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). It concludes with a
critical look at the financing of the women and peace and security agenda and a
strong call for greater investment in its full implementation.
Planning for action and monitoring results at the national level
97. Since 2002, the Security Council has encouraged the development of clear
strategies focusing on the integration of gender perspectives in conflict and
post-conflict response (see S/PRST/2002/32). As highlighted in my annual reports
on women and peace and security, a range of national and local implementation
strategies have evolved since, of which dedicated national action plans on women
and peace and security have received significant attention. They provide an
opportunity for national stakeholders to identify priorities, determine
responsibilities, allocate resources, and initiate actions within a defined time frame.
As of March 2015, 53 countries had adopted a national action plan (24 in Europe,
17 in Africa, 8 in Asia, 3 in the Americas and 1 in Oceania). Several national action
plans are due to be updated and almost 20 additional countries are in the pro cess of
preparing their first action plans. Similarly, a wide range of women and peace and
security “localization” initiatives have been developed.
98. The increasing adoption of national action plans is often welcomed as an
illustration of growing commitment of Member States to implementing resolution
1325 (2000). However, national action plans are simply processes and facilitators of
action, not ends in themselves. Building on past lessons and good practices, the
global study puts forward a set of common elements necessary for a national action
plan to be able to facilitate coherent, targeted and impactful action. These include
strong leadership and effective coordination, inclusive design processes, costing and
allocated budgets for implementation, monitoring and evaluation and flexibility to

32/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

adapt to emerging situations. National action plans are also stronger when they link
to other planning processes like United Nations Development Assistance
Frameworks and strategies to implement the 2030 Sustainable D evelopment
Agenda.
99. It is promising that several of the countries that are implementing their second
or third generation national action plans have made efforts to address earlier deficits
across those areas. Yet, deeper analysis shows that many gaps re main. For instance,
a review of 47 national action plans undertaken in 2014 showed that only 11 had a
specified budget attached to their implementation. In addition to government
leadership, effective national implementation strategies call for broad parti cipation
by all relevant actors as well as affected communities. There is a need to identify
better avenues for sharing results, lessons learned and good practices at the national,
regional and global levels.
100. Some Governments have appointed high-level champions for genderresponsive foreign policy and development cooperation. Australia established in
2011 the role of Ambassador for Women and Girls as an advocate for the promotion
and protection of women’s human rights around the globe and to ensure that gender
equality is a central focus of Australia’s diplomatic, peacebuilding and development
efforts. In 2015, Sweden appointed an Ambassador-at-large for Global Women’s
Issues and Gender Equality to coordinate Sweden’s feminist foreign policy, which
aims at guaranteeing women’s rights, including participation in peacebuilding and
peacemaking and preventing violence. Such an explicit and strong political stand to
promote gender equality and the human rights of women and girls marks a good
practice that could be replicated by more governments.
101. Besides national action plans specific to women and peace and security,
national policies and plans on issues such as national security, human rights,
development, including development cooperation, gender equal ity, violence against
women, peacebuilding and reconstruction and disaster management provide
significant entry-points for advancing progress on women and peace and security.
As such, it is essential to ensure that the issue of women and peace and security
does not become an under-resourced strand of government policy, isolated from
larger policy and programme initiatives, and that synergies between various
initiatives are promoted.
Strengthening linkages between human rights mechanisms and Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security
102. In my previous reports, I have called upon Member States to follow up on
recommendations put forward by international, regional and national human rights
mechanisms (S/2013/525, para. 64, and S/2012/732, para. 64). I have also
highlighted the remarkable achievements made at the normative level for the
protection of the human rights of women and girls in conflict -affected settings
(S/2014/693, para. 2). In particular, the adoption of General Recommendation
No. 30, on women in conflict prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations, by
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women in 2013 was a
landmark achievement. In 2015, UN-Women issued a guidebook on the general
recommendation and related Security Council resolutions on women and peace and
security. In addition to the Committee, there are eight othe r treaty bodies charged
with monitoring implementation of the major human right s treaties. Their work

15-15656

33/54

S/2015/716

plays an integral role in ensuring respect for the rights of women and girls in
conflict and post-conflict settings, informing Member State policies and a ssisting in
documentation for other parts of the United Nations system.
103. The Human Rights Council process of universal periodic review also performs
a critical function since it is the only universal mechanism to regularly assess every
four years the human rights situation of each Member State and compliance with
international humanitarian law. I encourage Member States participating in
universal periodic reviews to consider women and peace and security obligations
and commitments in their questions and recommendations to peer Member States
and in their submissions to the Human Rights Council. I also applaud the efforts of
civil society to strengthen accountability processes through submissions to the
Human Rights Council and treaty bodies, and by using review outcomes to advocate
for change in their home countries.
104. The special procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council have
also drawn important attention to the rights of women and girls in conflict -affected
countries. For example, the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its
causes and consequences, issued a seminal report on reparations which has
furthered the acceptance of the need for justice to transform structural inequalities
affecting women and girls; the Working Group on the issue of discrimination
against women in law and practice issued its first thematic report on discrimination
against women in public and political life, including in times of transition; and the
Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances adopted a general
comment on gender and enforced disappearances. The global study highlights the
importance of increasing synergies between the Security Council and the special
procedures, including by inviting special procedures to brief the Council on is sues
relating to women and peace and security. For instance, the Special Rapporteur on
the rights of internally displaced persons briefed the Security Council in October
2014 during the open debate on women and peace and security (see S/PV.7289). The
Human Rights Council also has the power to establish commissions of inquiry and
expert fact-finding bodies to investigate, analyse and report on situations of armed
conflict. As an important tool for accountability, the ability of such bodies to report
on sexual and gender-based violence must continue to be strengthened, and
information flows further encouraged with the Security Council and other relevant
actors.
105. Regional and subregional human rights mechanisms support the promotion
and advancement of women’s rights and hold States accountable to commitments
for gender equality in conflict-affected contexts. For example, the African regional
human rights system has some of the strongest normative frameworks for wo men’s
rights, including the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples ’ Rights
on the Rights of Women in Africa, the first regional human rights instrument to
include provisions on the right to abortion (see A/HRC/29/27, para. 17). National
human rights instruments and mechanisms form another critical link in the chain of
accountability (S/2014/693, para. 18). In addition to the responsibility of ensuring
general compliance of Member States with their human rights obligations, they are
uniquely placed to take the lead on implementing the recommendations put forward
by international and regional human rights mechanisms, setting timelines,
benchmarks and indicators for success, including for women’s human rights.

34/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

Stepping up implementation at the regional and subregional levels
106. In the light of the regional nature of many conflicts, cooperation in the area of
peace and security between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations such as the African Union, Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), and the European Union has generally intensified, for example
in the Central African Republic, Mali, Somalia and the Sudan, as well as with the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Afghanistan. The adoption of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region by 11 countries under the auspices of the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and the United Nations in 2013 is a n example of
intensified cooperation and new partnerships.
107. Regional consultations for the global study highlighted the range of ways in
which regional and subregional organizations have integrated global women and
peace and security obligations and commitments within their security, crisis response, human rights or peacebuilding efforts. As of May 2015, five
organizations — ECOWAS, the European Union, the Inter-Governmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), NATO, and the Pacific Islands Forum — had adopted
dedicated regional action plans on women and peace and security. Other notable
regional initiatives since 2010 include the development of a strategy on the theme
“Protection of Arab women: peace and security” by the League of Arab States (to be
complemented by a regional action plan on women and peace and security in 2015),
the adoption of an action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in
support of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, and the launch by the African Union of a
new five-year Gender, Peace and Security Programme for 2015 -2020. In a number
of regions, stronger focus on the women and peace and security agenda by key
regional organizations has contributed to an increase in related national action plans
by Member States and facilitated the sharing of lessons learned across regions. The
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, for example, in cooperation
with the Peace Research Institute Oslo published a study analysing the 27 national
action plans in the region highlighting good practices, gaps and challenges.
108. Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations to address conflict-related sexual violence has also intensified on the
basis of frameworks of cooperation signed between the African Union and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region with the Office of my Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. The frameworks essentially
strengthen collaboration to ensure that conflict-related sexual violence
considerations are systematically reflected in the work of those organizations. A
similar cooperation framework has been agreed with the League of Arab States and
is to be formally signed during the seventieth sessio n of the General Assembly.
I also welcome the adoption of the NATO Military Guidelines On The Prevention
Of And Response To Conflict-Related Sexual and Gender-Based Violence, which is
currently before NATO Member States for ratification.
109. Data show that despite low levels of women’s representation in senior
positions in regional organizations, there has been an upward trend since 2012

15-15656

35/54

S/2015/716

(S/2014/693, para. 12). 47 However, uneven data availability prevents robust trend
analysis. Information provided by NATO showed that women held 6 out of
38 (16 per cent) executive leadership positions at NATO headquarters (international
staff, excluding international military staff and delegations) as at December 2014,
and two out of seven (28 per cent) positions in country offices. In addition, one of
the two NATO special representative positions was held by a woman, bringing the
overall rate of women holding leadership positions to 19 per cent. In the European
Union’s External Action Service, women held 3 out of 28 (11 per cent)
headquarters-based executive positions (down from 13 per cent in 2013) and 31 out
of 135 (23 per cent) in country offices and missions (slightly up from 21 per cent in
2013). One of the two European Union’s External Action Service mediators in 2014
was a woman, while only 1 out of the 10 (10 per cent) special envoy and
representative positions was held by a woman. In the case of the Pacific Island
Forum Secretariat, women held four out of seven (57 per cent) headquarters -based
executive positions, but the rate of female special representatives or envoys was
low, namely, 5 per cent (2 of the 36 ministers). For the African Union Commission,
parity has been reached among its Commissioners, and in terms of top leadership
and the appointment of Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma as the African Union Commission
Chairperson in 2012 signalled an important development.
110. As a result of strengthened gender equality architecture and use of technical
gender expertise in regional organizations such as the African Union, European
Union, NATO and Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, tangible
changes are visible in the ways these organizations work. For example, a well functioning network of gender advisers and focal points is now in place across both
civilian and military elements of NATO institutions and field commands. The
planning process of the NATO Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan, the first
mission where allies and partner nations made the required gender expertise
available at all levels from the very start of the mission, illustrates that integrating a
gender perspective is now an integral part of the entire mission planning cycle. The
African Union established civilian protection and gender units in its field missions
and included gender experts in post-conflict needs assessment teams. All
16 common security and defence policy missions currently deployed by the
European Union have either a gender adviser or a focal point.
111. As seen in the NATO and African Union example, the appointment of h ighlevel representatives or envoys on women and peace and security is not only
contributing to a stronger gender focus across the work of those organizations but is
also strengthening partnerships with the United Nations as manifested through the
adoption of memorandums of understanding, joint missions and initiatives. For
instance, since her appointment in 2014, the African Union Special Envoy for
Women, Peace and Security, Bineta Diop has undertaken solidarity missions to the
Central African Republic, Nigeria and Somalia. In March 2014, the African Union
Special Envoy was appointed as a member of the African Union Commission of
Inquiry on South Sudan. Her engagement facilitated close interactions with South
Sudanese women, ensuring that there was a specific focus on the crimes committed
__________________
47

36/54

See, for example, S/2014/693, box 12. Executive positions, including headquarters high-level
executives (equivalent to International Standard Classification of Occupations No. 88, Major
Group 1: Legislators, senior officials and managers), special representatives or envoys, heads
of country offices, heads of missions and mediators.

15-15656

S/2015/716

against them during the conflict. In July 2015, the European Union External Action
Service announced the creation of a Gender Adviser post.
112. Efforts made by regional and subregional organizations to build systems for
monitoring progress and evaluating results enable them to hold the organizations
and their member States to account for the implementation of obligations and
commitments on women and peace and security. For example, the Council of the
European Union has adopted a set of indicators to assess progress on their
comprehensive approach to the implementation of Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). 48 Building on lessons learned and as a result of the
monitoring undertaken during the past few years, efforts are currently under way to
enhance the measurability and effectiveness of these efforts. For example, NATO
has included a monitoring and evaluation framework with indicators in its 2014
action plan for the implementation of policy on women and peace and security.
Allies and partner nations are briefed every six months on progress made and the
NATO Secretary-General publishes an annual report on the implementation of the
policy on women, peace and security. In 2015, the African Union initiated th e
development of a continental results framework on women, peace and security in
Africa. The framework will build on policy-level advancements across the continent
in recent years and will include recommendations for improving the collection of
data disaggregated by sex, particularly in fragile and post-conflict settings,
including through the deployment of gender experts, capacity -building, technology
development and the strengthening of national statistical institutions.
Ensuring more robust leadership, coordination and accountability within the
United Nations
113. In 2010, I committed to undertaking efforts towards the development of a
more comprehensive and measurable approach to implementing resolution 1325
(2000) and enhancing accountability. Since then, a set of indicators to measure
implementation has been designed (see S/2010/489), the Seven-Point Action Plan on
Gender-Responsive Peacebuilding (see A/65/354-S/2010/466) has been put in place
and the strategic results framework on women and peace and security has been
devised. All three frameworks are closely related, and yet their purposes are slightly
different. The frameworks have been useful to highlight are as of progress and
stagnation, such as women’s representation in managerial positions in the United
Nations system and the financing of the women and peace and security agenda.
However, significant overlapping between frameworks and measurability issues
stemming from inadequate formulation of indicators and targets have hampered the
efficient use of the frameworks for accountability, advocacy and programming.
I call upon all actors in the context of the women and peace and security agenda to
focus on data collection where baselines do not exist, addressing any gap areas and
stimulating better implementation of the frameworks before 2020.
114. Gender experts must be represented at all levels of the United Nations peace
and security architecture, including amo ng leadership positions. Recent trends show
fluctuations between 15 and 25 per cent in the proportion of peacekeeping and
__________________
48

15-15656

The full list of indicators is available from http://register.consilium.europa.eu/doc/srv?l=EN&f=
ST%2011948%202010%20INIT. Data is compiled and reported biannually, but availability is
still low for some of the indicators.

37/54

S/2015/716

special political missions headed by women since 2011. 49 An all-time high was
reached in May 2015, when women led almost 40 per cent of peacekeeping
missions. The proportion of women deputy heads has increased from 17 per cent in
2011 to 24 per cent in 2014. Considerable efforts are still needed to achieve the
gender parity goal for the positions of special representatives and special env oys, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/144.
115. Improvement has also been slow at the managerial level (P -5 to D-2 levels);
21 per cent of positions were held by women in peacekeeping missions in 2011,
compared with 33.4 per cent in 2014. In special political missions, the rates
increased from 18 to 29 per cent in the same time period. In other United Nations
entities in conflict and post-conflict countries, 50 this proportion varies widely, with
entities such as the International Fund for Agricultural Development, UNFPA or
UN-Women reaching or even surpassing equal representation of women, and others
such as the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and th e Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) falling below the 20 per cent mark. In
most United Nations entities the rates of women representation were higher in lower
grade professional positions than at managerial levels. UNDP and UNAIDS scored
high on gender balance across all levels, reporting overall rates beyond 40 per cent.
116. As of May 2015, four women were appointed in my good offices capacity,
including as special envoys, advisers or coordinators. Six (19 per cent) of a total of
31 resident coordinators in conflict countries were females. As recommended by the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations in its report ( A/70/95S/2015/446), efforts must be strengthened to appoint more women t o senior mission
leadership positions and to support the promotion of current staff through mentoring
programmes. In order to accelerate progress, the Department of Field Support, the
Office of Human Resources Management and the UN -Women Office of the Focal
Point for Women are currently implementing efforts to ensure the participation of at
least one woman in selection panels and of at least one woman candidate to be
shortlisted for mission leadership per position; strengthening the talent pipeline for
recruiting, promoting and retaining women senior managers; and addressing the
barriers identified in past reviews.
117. The dedication of United Nations senior managers, male and female, to
ensuring gender equality and the empowerment of women sends a strong s ignal
about the legitimacy of the issue and builds credibility at the working levels. It is
critical to ensure that gender equality goals are included in all key mandates,
instructions, operational guidance, terms of reference and senior -level compacts and
that those who do not deliver must be held to account. I welcome the request of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations for compacts to be established
between the Secretary-General and the Heads of missions in order to specify
performance indicators relating to gender.
118. To complement the support provided to missions by the Department of Political
Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations , the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations highlighted in its report that missions should have full
access to the policy, substantive, and technical support from UN -Women on
implementation of 1325 (2000) and successive resolutions. The call for greater
__________________
49
50

38/54

Data points registered annually as of 31 December.
See footnote No. 13 above.

15-15656

S/2015/716

coordination and coherence between UN-Women and peace operations has similarly
been made by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. I encourage the
strengthening of these partnerships since it would allow for capitalizing on limited
human and financial resources and leveraging each entity’s comparative advantages,
including linkages with different civil society organizations and the work of United
Nations country teams. Greater cooperation would also address concerns raised in
the report with regard to fragmentation in the system as well as issues raised by the
Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture in its
report (A/69/968-S/2015/490), including the silos regarding the implementation in
the system of the women and peace and security agenda. The role of UNDP,
UNFPA, UNICEF and other United Nations country team members responsible for
delivering on women and peace and security commitments in the field should
equally be recognized, and greater efforts should be made to ensure coordination
involving all actors. Enhanced partnerships between all key entities with technical
gender expertise in conflict and post-conflict settings are necessary as well,
including through the development of rosters of experts and improved inter -agency
forums. I note with concern the lack of senior-level leadership on women and peace
and security for the United Nations system as a whole, as highlighted by Member
States and civil society during the preparation of the global study. I call upon
UN-Women, given their role on women and peace and security coordination and
accountability, and upon all relevant entities to ensure that their senior leadership is
fully seized of the women and peace and security agenda and that they play their
role in bringing relevant information to the attention of the Security Council. In
addition, I take note of the recommendation of the global study on the need for
dedicated high-level representation in UN-Women on the women and peace and
security agenda to further its accountability, visibility and imple mentation.
Boosting data availability and national statistics
119. Data on women and peace and security remains scarce, although important
efforts are under way to increase its production and quality. For instance, data to
monitor the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is compiled annually, and it is
contained in the reports of the Secretary-General to the Security Council (for
example, see S/2014/693). However, data is still not available for 36 per cent of the
indicator series (see S/2010/498) designed for this purpose. Existing figures mostly
refer to work of international entities or implementation proce sses. It is worth
noting that with the establishment of the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements under Security Council resolution 1960, the United Nations system
has considerably increased its capacity to gather timely, reliable and objective
information on incidents and trends concerning conflict-related sexual violence (see
S/2015/203).
120. However, data collection at the national level continues to lag behind. Reasons
for the lack of national statistics on women and peace and security include
inadequate coordination between peace and security institutions and national
statistical systems, lack of political will and understanding of the critical role that
quality statistics can play in promoting peace through targeted interventions, limited
statistical capacity in fragile and developing settings, safety concerns affecting
household survey data collection and administrative record keeping, and
confidentiality concerns and statistical laws preventing t he dissemination of
security-related data.

15-15656

39/54

S/2015/716

121. As detailed in the global study, however, numerous international and regional
initiatives are driving coordinated methodology for data production relevant to
women and peace and security. For instance, the Statistical Commission of the
Department of Economic Affairs of the Secretariat recently endorsed the
International Classification of Crime for Statistical Purposes, which is intended to
enhance the registration and comparability of crime statistics, includ ing statistics on
violence. Efforts by the Friends of the Chair to the Statistical Commission on the
indicators on violence against women led to the adoption of a core set of nine
indicators (see E/CN.3/2009/13) in 2009 that the Inter-Agency and Expert Group on
Gender Statistics has taken forward for the refinement and production of
methodological guidelines and the design of model survey questionnaires.
Perception surveys such as those conducted within the framework of the Strategy
for the Harmonization of Statistics in Africa are a prime example of a bottom -up
initiative that is making a difference in the official measurement of governance,
peace and security issues across Africa, including from a gender per spective. 51 Data
for the Minimum Set of Gender Indicators (see E/CN.3/2009/13) and other sector
specific initiatives launched by United Nations entities, 52 are also relevant to
measure progress towards the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. In addition, the Praia Group is expected to play a pivotal role in
jumpstarting the production of country-level governance, peace and security
statistics to inform sustainable development goals monitoring and to integrate
gender as one of its key thematic areas.
122. To accelerate progress both in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the women and peace and security agenda, I reiterate the call for all national
Governments to prioritize the production of statistics on women and peace and
security and to increase their use for policymaking. Financial and technical support
from bilateral and multilateral actors is necessary in order for this become a reality.
I expect all national Governments, international and regional entities to address the
production of data related to women and peace and security in a holistic manner.
Supporting civil society
123. The essential role of civil society, including women ’s organizations in conflict
prevention, peacemaking and post-conflict recovery, is addressed in the women and
peace and security agenda. One of the aims of preparing the global study was to
capture the diverse voices of civil society activists working for peace, security and
gender equality by undertaking consultations, conducting a global survey of civil
society organizations, inviting on-line submissions and forming a high-level
advisory group comprised mostly of representatives of civil society. These steps
__________________
51

The Strategy for the Harmonization of Statistics in Africa is a continent -wide effort to generate
comparable statistics for decision-making in Africa. It covers the adoption of international
standards adjusted to African realities, as well as efforts to enhance coordination and production
of harmonized statistics. As a result, two “add-on” household survey modules and two schedules
of administrative items have been developed, one on Governance and one on Peace and security
statistics. Implementation of data-collection exercises utilizing these modules is either ongoing
or has already been undertaken in at least 13 African national statistics offices.
52
Entities include Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs indicators on world
humanitarian data, UNHCR statistics on refugees, asylum -seekers, internally displaced people
and other populations of concern, the Gender and Land Rights Database of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and the human rights indicators o f the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

40/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

have helped to ensure that, in policymaking circles, including the Security Council,
attention is paid to the expertise offered by civil society during the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
124. Women’s organizations play a vital role in mitigating conflict and building
peace, delivering services, monitoring government action and holding Governments
to account on their human rights obligations and commitments to women and
girls — contributions I have recognized and encouraged in previous reports (see
S/2013/525 and S/2012/732). Despite this important work, members of civil society
and women human rights defenders are often the targets of threats and violence
during and after armed conflict (see S/2013/525), and laws and regulations are
increasingly imposed in order to shrink their space for engagement. I echo the
findings of the global study that inadequate engagement with civil society is a
missed opportunity for Member States, regional organizations and international
entities. Greater political and financial support is needed, including for grass -roots
organizations and those representing women victims of intersectional
discrimination. Civil society is often in the best position to share local concerns
with national leaders, bringing the perspectives of women and girls at the grass roots level to the national, regional and global levels and to deliver services.
Exploring the role and power of the media
125. In the years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), there has been a
broad change in the abilities of women and girls to represent themselves and their
causes in the media, ranging from traditional and less gender -inclusive mediums
such as television and printed news, to newer and more widely accessible platforms,
including social media. Media outlets can play a pivotal role in spreading messages
relating to women and peace and security, with information that is tailored and
accessible to women and girls and which is representative of their experiences. In
Fiji, the feminist media network FemLINK PACIFIC uses radio and television based dialogue to draw rural women and government officials together to discuss
development and human security challenges. The global study also highlights the
role of investigative journalism in bringing greater visibility to issues such as
conflict-related sexual violence, breaking taboos and galvanizing action.
126. Portrayals of empowered women in the media continue to be rare. A 2015
analysis undertaken by the Global Media Monitoring Project in 15 conflic t and
post-conflict countries found that only 13 per cent of the stories in th e news media
on peace and security-related themes included women as the subject and that
women were central to the story in only 6 per cent of stories. The analysis also
found that a woman was more than twice as likely as a man to be identified as the
victim in a story, as opposed to one having a leadership role.
127. In my previous annual reports, I have described the gender -specific threats and
violence women journalists face in conflict environments (see S/2013/525 and
S/2014/693). Since 2000, 446 journalists have been killed on the job in conflict and
post-conflict countries, 53 and 64 per cent of all women journalists killed died in
conflict countries. A shocking 70 per cent of women journalists killed worldwide
were murdered, the others having been killed in crossfire or as a result of dangerous
assignments. The global study echoes my urgent call to ensure the protection of
__________________
53

15-15656

Available from https://www.cpj.org/killed/.

41/54

S/2015/716

women war correspondents and all media personnel reporting on women’s rights
issues (see S/2013/525), while also encouraging a more inclusive and participatory
approach to media, which empowers women and girls affected by armed conflict.
Financing the women and peace and security agenda
128. The failure to allocate sufficient resources to implement commitments on
women and peace and security has been one of the most persistent obstacles to
achieving progress over the past 15 years. Although the gender focus of bilateral
aid, multilateral interventions, funding to civil society and national public
expenditures has modestly increased in the past decade, the shift has neither been
sufficient nor transformative.
129. In conflict and post-conflict settings, where domestic finance is often depleted
and private finance, technology and innovation investments are equally lacking,
international donor funds make up the bulk of financing for development. Analysis
of bilateral sector-allocable official development assistance data from OECD-DAC
donor countries shows that support for gender equality and women ’s rights in fragile
states has grown by 10 per cent on average per year since 2008. 54 Nevertheless, in
2012-2013, just 6 per cent of all aid 55 to fragile States and economies targeted
gender equality as the principal objective. 56 Large disparities exist beyond these
aggregates; Sweden, for instance, has increased the proportion of its aid towards
gender equality fivefold since 2000, and 43 per cent of Canada ’s interventions in
fragile States in 2012-2013 had gender equality as a principal objective.
130. Most international donor aid in support of gender equality in fragile States is
allocated to social sectors such as education and health, while significant gaps
remain in economic and peace and security sectors. Within the peace and security
category, 57 only 28 per cent of allocations had a gender equality focus in 2012 -2013,
and only 2 per cent targeted it as a principal objective. Allocations to support
civilian peacebuilding, conflict prevention and resolution were the most gender sensitive in this category; 41 per cent of aid to these sectors targeted gender equality
as a significant objective and 4 per cent as a principal objective. I encourage all aid
providers, including non-Development Assistance Committee donor countries, to
record the gender focus of all aid contributions, disseminate the information and
utilize it to enhance aid effectiveness and inform policymaking, planning and
budgeting to accelerate change. I also encourage donors, including those supporting
the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States and providing humanitarian aid, to
target long-term development outcomes, reduce aid volatility and consistently
integrate a gender perspective throughout all interventions.
131. Multilateral donors such as development banks have an important role to play
in furthering gender equality in conflict settings through their interventions.
Notably, 97 per cent of World Bank allocations in 2014 to fragile States were
gender-informed operations, which address gender in the analysis, actions or
__________________
54

See footnote No. 10 above.
When quoting OECD-Development Assistance Committee figures, “aid” refers to bilateral
sector-allocable official development assistance allocated by DAC members only.
56
Guidelines for marking aid as having principal or significant objective available from
http://www.oecd.org/investment/stats/37461060.pdf.
57
According to one of the OECD-Development Assistance Committee subcodes, the description is
“Conflict prevention and resolution, peace and security”.
55

42/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

monitoring of the projects with data disaggregated by sex and other indicators.
However, the allocations were much lower in fragile States ($3 ,382.4 million) than
in non-fragile countries ($34,156.8 million). In 2014, 54 per cent of the Asian
Development Bank projects, loans and grants approved for fragile States in Asia and
the Pacific were rated as having effective gender mainstreaming, while only 14 per
cent focused specifically on promoting gender equality. 58 The African Development
Bank has made a commitment to introduce a marking system in the course of 2015.
I applaud the efforts undertaken by these entities to track the gender focus of their
interventions, and I encourage all development banks to further strengthen the
gender focus and tracking of financial allocations in conflict settings. Donor
conferences are critical for donors to identify a country’s post-conflict priorities and
to plan interventions accordingly. A review of 22 major donor conferences 59 held
since 2010 indicates that women were not consistently invited to formal
proceedings; however, when formal participation mechanisms existed, gender
equality interventions were often targeted in donor pledges.
132. At present, only 15 per cent of United Nations entities that reported data on
the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, have systems to track the gender focus of their resource
allocations, although efforts are under way to roll out gender marker systems across
more entities. Differences in methodology, however, limit full comparability and,
while some entities screen the totality of their allocations, others, especially
emergency response and humanitarian agencies, encounter challenges in gender
marking, which results in an unreliable picture of whether commitments to gender
equality are being met.
133. Available data for specific interventions in conflict and post -conflict settings
indicate that, although the proportion of allocations targeting gender equality as a
principal objective has generally increased since 2011, much stronger efforts are
needed. For instance, the UNICEF proportion of these allocations has increased
from 11 to 19 per cent in three years, while the UNDP proportion has largely
remained constant, standing at 4.2 per cent in 2014. The UNFPA proportion was
11.6 per cent in the same year. In absolute terms, however, UNDP funded the largest
volume of interventions, a total of $71.7 million, which largely targeted the
improvement of women’s livelihoods ($13.6 million) and access to justice, redress
and citizen security ($7.2 million). By comparison, UN -Women field-level
programme expenses in peace, security and humanitarian action totalled
$17.75 million in 2014.
134. Despite the good practices in effect, the goal of allocating a minimum of
15 per cent of peacebuilding funds to projects whose principal objective is to
address women’s specific needs and to advance gender equality, as set out in t he
Seven-Point Action Plan remains unmet. Only 2.1 per cent of Peacebuilding Fund
interventions met this criteria in 2011. Owing to efforts such as the Gender
Promotion Initiative, that figure rose beyond 12 per cent in 2013 and stood at
9.3 per cent in 2014 (a total of $8.22 million). As highlighted in the global study
and recognized by the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
__________________
58
59

15-15656

Data available from http://adb.org/projects/search/48419,21303?keyword=.
For Afghanistan, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Libya, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan, the
Sudan/Darfur, Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen and Palestine.

43/54

S/2015/716

Peacebuilding Architecture (A/69/968-S/2015/490), an additional push is needed not
only to meet it but preferably to surpass it.
135. Much larger sums are consistently allocated to interventions that target gender
equality as a “significant objective”, an extremely important category to ensure that
gender is effectively mainstreamed in large-scale interventions. UNDP allocated
$357.3 million in 2014, or 20.3 per cent of all funds to conflict and post -conflict
countries, compared with 23 per cent in 2011. 60 In the case of UNICEF, these have
shifted from 48 to 52 per cent. Only the Peacebuilding Fund has achieved a
substantial improvement, from 66 to 81 per cent, in the same time period. Trend
data is not available for UNFPA, but the figure was 46 per cent in 2014. Large
volumes of resources remain unmarked, however, in United Nations e ntities that do
not use gender markers. For instance, the total peacekeeping funding for the fiscal
year 2014/15 amounted to $8.47 billion, and the annual budget for special political
missions was approximately $590 million, 61 neither of which was marked for gender
focus. Each United Nations entity should therefore establish reporting systems to
track the gender focus of relevant budgetary allocations where pos sible, including in
non-project-based interventions and in field missions.
136. In resolution 2122 (2013), the Security Council called upon Member States to
develop dedicated funding mechanisms and to increase their contributions to civil
society at the local level. However in 2012-2013, only $130 million of aid from
OECD-Development Assistance Committee countries went to women’s organizations,
a small amount compared with the $31.8 billion of total aid to fragile States over the
same period. 62 Data compiled between February and March 2015 on the basis of 317
completed surveys from 72 countries and 16 focus group discussions indicates that
most organizations receive the largest amount of funding for work on advocacy and
technical capacity-building (43 per cent), with very few organizations (11 per cent)
receiving most of their funding for core functions. Challenges on accessing
resources have been intensified as a result of a shifting funding environment and
donors giving preference to large organizations capable of meeting specific
reporting and auditing requirements. I encourage bilateral and multilateral donors to
increase resources and access to capacity-building for women’s organizations in
fragile settings.
137. Special funds, such as the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions to
Eliminate Violence against Women and the United Nations Fund for Gender
Equality, both of which are managed by UN-Women, and the Multi-Partner Trust
Fund of the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict 63 have been
__________________
60

The figures reflect gender marker ratings for the countries and areas of which the Security
Council is currently seized and which have been considered by the Council at a formal meeting
during the period from 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2014 ( S/2014/10); and countries with a
peacekeeping or special political mission in 2014.
61
For 2014, the countries and areas are Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, the Central
African Republic, Colombia, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea -Bissau, Haiti, Iraq,
Kosovo, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Mali, Nepal, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, State of Palestine, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Uganda, Ukraine, Western Sahara and Yemen.
62
See footnote 10 above.
63
Managed by the secretariat of United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, with
the Multi-Partner Trust Fund Office of the United Nations Development Programme serving as
the administrative agent.

44/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

important multilateral funding sources exclusively dedicated either to support
gender equality work or address conflict-related sexual violence, despite their
relatively small envelopes. While these funds support some projects in conflict and
post-conflict settings, a significant funding gap still exists. To fill the gaps, the
global study proposed the creation of a Global Acceleration Instrument for Women,
Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action, a pooled financing mechanism backed
by Member States, United Nations entities and civil society. In considering the
creation of such an instrument, it is essential to ensure that it does not duplicate or
undermine existing structures such as the Multi-Partner Trust Fund of the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, which has been an important
arrangement to foster coordination and innovation.
138. National spending on military defence largely surpasses investments for
sustainable peace and development. In 2014, global military spending
($1.7 trillion) 64 was thirteen times higher than development aid allocations
(approximately $130 billion). Moreover, inequality has increased in almost all
countries, and public institutions are unable to address the basic needs of all. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development created an unprecedented debate about
the opportunities for all countries to achieve development. Although the need to
ensure peaceful societies is globally recognized at the heart of the Charter of the
United Nations, practical discussions on resourcing and policy shifts are needed to
translate those aspirations into reality. The global study suggests the reduction of
excessive military spending as one concrete measure in this regard.

I.

Security Council
139. The Security Council has played a central role over the past 15 years in
establishing the normative framework for women and peace and security. However,
the findings of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations are echoed in
the global study, in which deficits in the implementation of the agenda are
highlighted. The global study describes how improved Counc il working methods,
combined with enhanced gender conflict analysis, can trigger a shift towards
viewing the women and peace and security agenda as a tool to enhance the
Council’s own objectives and effectiveness.
Strengthening the quality of information and analysis flowing into the Council
140. With resolution 2122 (2013), the Security Council set out mechanisms to
improve its information flow, including through regular briefings on issues
regarding women and peace and security from the head of UN -Women, my Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, special envoys, the Departments of
Political Affairs and Peacekeeping Operations, commissions of inquiry and other
relevant United Nations entities. In addition, it stressed the importance of en suring
that mission mandates include provisions on women and peace and security, such as
the availability of expertise on gender-related issues and of mainstreaming a gender
perspective into disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security sector an d
judicial reform and electoral assistance. It is important to maintain the progress
achieved with setting up the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements to
ensure that the Council receives timely, reliable and objective information on

__________________
64

15-15656

Data available from www.sipri.org/research/armaments/milex/recent-trends.

45/54

S/2015/716

conflict-related sexual violence and that increased efforts in this regard are made by
the broader United Nations system, Member States and civil society.
141. Analysis of country-specific and thematic reporting to the Security Council
since 2000 shows that issues on women and peace and security have received
increased attention over time, as has the use of data disaggregated by sex. In 2000,
only 50 per cent of country-specific reports to the Council contained references to
women and peace and security, compared with 89 per cent in 2014. 65 Data compiled
using the indicators related to resolution 1325 (2000) 66 confirm this trend since all
23 (100 per cent) periodic reports submitted in 2014 by special political missions
included references to women and peace and security, and 32 (84 per cent) of 38
periodic reports submitted by peacekeeping missions included such references.
Prevalent topics in reports included political participation, sexual violence and
justice-related issues, with increased mention of civil society, re fugees and
internally displaced persons. However, it is still necessary to improve the quality of
women and peace and security issue analysis and to strengthen links between
reported information and actionable recommendations, to include these into
outcomes of the Security Council and to ultimately ensure their implementation by
designated stakeholders. Efforts being undertaken by field missions and United
Nations departments 67 to register and measure the depth and quality of gender
analysis in mission reports are commendable and need to be supported. I call for
increased investment in capacity to compile, analyse and report relevant data in all
United Nations missions.
142. The United Nations system as a whole would also benefit from increased
resources for data collection on women and peace and security. The indicators
related to resolution 1325 (2000) are intended to gauge progress across the agenda ’s
issues. The indicators are included in my annual reports on women and peace and
security and should be reflected in country reports received by the Security Council.
The global study recommends that all of the reports of the Secretary -General to the
Council include data disaggregated by sex as part of their analysis.
143. Civil society organizations and women human rights defenders are key actors
for implementation, often being the only ones delivering services and sustaining
dialogue in conflict-affected communities. Over the past 15 years, the Council has
regularly heard from women civil society leaders during the annual debate on
women and peace and security. In recent years, it has also heard from such leaders
during the annual debate on sexual violence in conflict. On occasion, Council
members have heard from women on specific country situations, such as the Arria
Formula meeting on women’s participation in resolving the Syrian conflict, held on
17 January 2014. Consistent engagement with women, acting as information
__________________
65

Both the Security Council and the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security monitor
and report on how issues regarding women and peace and security have been reflected in the
reporting to and outcomes of the Security Council.
66
Since 2010, the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
have reported data on the indicator entitled “Extent to which United Nations peacekeeping and
special political missions include information on violations of women’s and girls’ human rights
in their periodic reporting to the Security Council”.
67
The Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat, for instance, compiles and reports data
annually on the average number of paragraphs per report devoted to women and peace and
security, the proportion of reports including data disaggregated by sex and the main thematic
areas in each report.

46/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

providers and partners in civil society organizations, is needed during thematic
debates and country-specific deliberations.
Consistent leadership on women and peace and security within the
United Nations system
144. The global study describes a number of steps the United Nations can take to
address many of the current implementation gaps, through consistent direction from
the Organization’s leadership. In addition, as a good practice, there has been notable
interaction between the Security Council and the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, who has briefed the Council not only on her broader mandate
but also on country-specific situations. The global study recommends that the
Security Council act on its intent to extend that practice to the Executive Director of
UN-Women with greater frequency, which I have also recommende d (see
S/2013/525), in particular when the Council is considering a mandate to support
post-conflict structures in a country-specific situation, which should ensure broad
participation and decision-making by women.
145. Regarding Security Council missions, whenever the women and peace and
security agenda has been incorporated into the terms of reference of the visit, the
Council has engaged with stakeholders on the ground, albeit to varying degrees.
However, when such issues were not included, concerns about women and peace
and security have been subsequently overlooked. I encourage the Security Council
to act on its commitment to meet with local women and women’s organizations in
the field, by consistently incorporating a gender perspective into its terms of
references for missions, including specific visits focused on the issue of women and
peace and security. I also welcome a possible Security Council mission focused on
women and peace and security, pursuant to resolution 2122 (2013). I am confident
that such an exercise would set a good practice benchmark for future missions.
146. In 2014, the Security Council undertook two field missions: Mali in January
and February; and Europe (Belgium and Netherlands) and Africa (South Sudan and
Somalia) in August. For Mali, references to women and peace and security were
included in the mission terms of reference (see S/2014/72), the briefing on the
mission’s findings (see S/PV.7120) and in the mission report (S/2014/173). For the
mission to Europe and Africa, specific references to women and peace and security
were included in the terms of reference for the South Sudan and Somalia legs of the
mission (S/2014/579) and in the briefing on the mission’s findings (S/PV.7245).
147. Sanctions are a key tool used by the Security Council to enforce peace and
security. Since the mid-1990s, the Council has adopted targeted sanctions on
specific entities and individuals who are suspected of bearing the greatest
responsibility for serious violations of international law. Overall, there has been a
general trend to more systematically refer to gender issues in Council resolutions
related to sanctions regimes. According to the global study, as of April 2015, among
the 75 resolutions linked to 16 sanctions regimes currently active, 22 included
references to gender and women’s rights (29.3 per cent). The Council is increasing
the application of targeted sanctions and has used individual sanctions to explicitly
address sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict in four instances. The
global study highlights four areas where gender considerations could be better
operationalized in sanctions regimes: designation criteria, referral processes,
delisting and humanitarian exemptions. I continue to encourage the Council when

15-15656

47/54

S/2015/716

adopting or renewing targeted sanctions in situations of armed conflict, to include
designation criteria pertaining to violations of women ’s rights, including, inter alia,
acts of sexual violence and death threats or killings of women human rights
defenders and journalists. I also recommend that gender experts be included in
monitoring groups, teams and panels of relevant sanctions committees in order to
enhance information-gathering on alleged gender-based war crimes.
Advancing the women and peace and security agenda in the daily work of the
Security Council
148. The Security Council adopted 63 resolutions in 2014, 38 of which (60.3 per
cent) contained references to women and peace and security according to the global
study. This proportion is significantly lower than the 76.5 per cent figure of 2013
and 66 per cent of 2012. Specific references to resolution 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions were made in 37 per cent of the total resolutions in the period, while
70 per cent included broader references to gender. It is encouraging that the focus
on sexual and gender-based violence that dominated many resolutions is now
accompanied with an increased focus on participation. Notably, 44 per cent of the
2014 resolutions included mention of women’s participation, either in peace
processes, post-conflict peacebuilding, politics, national security institutions or
within the United Nations system.
149. According to the global study, of the 20 resolutions in 2014 that concerned the
establishment or renewal of mandates of all missions, 18 (90 per cent) contained
references to women and peace and security, an increase from 70 per cent in 2013
and 47 per cent in 2012. I remain concerned, however, about the lack of requests for
analysis across resolutions. Only 19 per cent of them included such references. In
addition, the global study highlights the meagre reflection of the important efforts
women’s organizations play in peace and security contexts, since less than 10 per
cent of Security Council resolutions included related references. Regarding
sanctions, only resolution 2153 (2014) on the situation in Côte d ’Ivoire included the
issue of sanctions with regard to sexual violence.
150. Political will and consistent oversight by the Security Council are central to
improving follow-up on the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. The global study recommends that, together with the permanent members
who lead the Council on the women and peace and security agenda and the issue
sexual violence in conflict, elected members of the Council take on an informal
co-leadership role to address these concerns. It also recommends the addition of a
mechanism to mainstream a gender perspective into all Council outcomes, connect
the Council to the security challenges and participation barriers women face and
make better use of analysis from gender advisers and other United Nations system
actors. I encourage the Council to review the recommendations and to act upon
them as soon as possible.

III. Concluding observations and recommendations
151. Consultations and research undertaken in preparation for the global study
emphasized that the peace and security context of today is different from that of
15 years ago. Entrenched cycles of conflict and fragility ha ve been exacerbated by
mass displacement, new weapons and media technologies, emerging threats such as

48/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

climate change, increased involvement of armed non-State actors and the rise of
violent extremism. The imperative to achieve peace is both more challengi ng and
more necessary than ever before. Against that backdrop, there is now an
unquestionable body of evidence proving that women’s meaningful participation
increases the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance, the credibility and quality of
peacekeeping, the pace of economic recovery in post-conflict settings and the
sustainability of peace agreements. Women’s participation is therefore central to
building inclusive and peaceful societies based on equality and respect for human
rights.
152. The 15-year anniversary and high-level review of the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) has raised high expectations for renewed
commitment to the full realization of the women and peace and security agenda. The
global study is a call to accelerate action on the transformative vision of resolution
1325 (2000) and puts forward a set of critical recommendations targeted at Member
States, regional and international organizations and civil society. Together, these
form a strong agenda for action. I will personally task the senior leadership of the
United Nations to make a priority of implementing recommendations related to
women and peace and security across all three peace and security reviews relevant
to the United Nations system. I will hold them accountable to demonstrating
concrete results by the end of 2016. I expect other actors to take action as well. To
deliver results, all stakeholders must significantly step up action in the five key
areas set out below, which together are fundamental to achieving the changes
envisioned in resolution 1325 (2000).
1.

Bringing women’s participation and leadership to the core of peace and security
efforts, including responses to new and emerging threats
153. More must be done to adopt targeted measures to re move obstacles and
incentivize the effective and meaningful participation and decision -making of
women in peace and security, shift attitudinal barriers, demonstrate impact and
support innovative actions. Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/303 on
strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution, I will continue to appoint women as chief or lead
mediators and as members of mediation teams in United Nations sponsored peace
processes, as well as ensure adequate gender expertise for all United Nations
processes. I invite similar efforts by Member States, and national, regional and
subregional organizations.
154. I encourage all actors involved in peace processes to make quantifiable, time sensitive commitments to ensure the direct and meaningful participation of women
during all phases of the process. This entails including women’s perspectives and
gender-responsive provisions in all meetings, consultations and agreements; training
all parties on gender-responsive obligations within their area of expertise; and
acknowledging and providing holistic support for women’s groups that are engaged
in track II diplomacy efforts. Unique opportunities exist to further support for, and
leverage the leadership and engagement of, women at the community level and to
link the efforts to high-level, national processes. The important role that women and
civil society can play in exerting influence over parties to armed conflict illustrates
the continuing need to increase the participation of women at all stages of mediation
and post-conflict resolution and to increase the consideration of gender -related
issues in all discussions pertinent to conflict. I encourage all actors to move beyond

15-15656

49/54

S/2015/716

limiting the participation of women’s groups to the role of observers and urge
instead their meaningful participation in formal and informal processes.
155. In view of the critical roles played by donor and friends groups, I encourage
such groups to incentivize women’s participation in peace talks, donor conferences,
national and regional dialogue processes and other peace and security forums. All
women, including those who have been displaced or who form part of marginalized
groups, must be engaged.
156. Women’s leadership in politics, public institutions and the private sector is
also essential for the maintenance of peaceful societies and the full achievement of
sustainable development. Women must be engaged at all levels in violence
prevention and response, security, justice systems, educational institutions and the
media. Women’s capacity and leadership must be promoted in national peace and
security institutions, which bear the ultimate responsibility for the implementation
of peace agreements and for the prevention of armed conflict. They must also be
key participants in strategies aimed at building the resilience of communities,
countries and regions against the spread of violent extremism. In November 2015,
I will present my plan of action to prevent violent extremism to the General
Assembly. It is informed by the increasing recognition of the gendered aspects of
violent extremism, including in recruitment strategies, and the need to promote
women’s participation and empowerment in efforts to prevent and counter violent
extremism. I call upon Member States and United Nations entities to invest in
gender-sensitive research and data collection in order to identify the drivers that
lead individuals to join violent extremist groups; and to examine the impacts of
counter-terrorism strategies on the lives of women and men in order to develop
targeted and evidence-based policy and programming responses.
157. Building the capacity of women and civil society groups to effectively engage
in efforts to counter and prevent violent extremis m is critical. National
Governments should ensure that in implementing the recommendations of the
Financial Action Task Force, they do not unwittingly or purposefully restrict or
control the work of civil society organizations, including those promoting ge nder
equality and women’s participation and leadership. In that connection, the Security
Council should include in future pronouncements about the Task Force the
necessary safeguards to discourage abuse and unintended impacts, including the
effect of counter-terrorism on humanitarian principles.
158. United Nations entities, international financial institutions and Member States
must ensure women’s participation and representation in all peacebuilding initiatives.
Previously agreed targets, including the Seven-Point Action Plan, must be met.
2.

Protecting the human rights of women and girls during and after conflict,
especially in the context of new and emerging threats
159. Despite 15 years of attention paid to the women and peace and security
agenda, the protection of women and girls remains an area of deep concern. Record
levels of displacement, ongoing crimes of sexual violence and other forms of abuse
of women and girls, deliberate attacks on women’s rights defenders, including by
new groups of violent extremists, and the risks and complications added by climate
change and new technologies, are posing significant challenges to the safety and
human rights of women and girls. International, regional and national responses
must address the full range of violations on the rights of women protected under

50/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

international humanitarian, refugee, and human rights law, from sexual and gender based violence to their right to health, education, food and water, land and
livelihood, nationality, and access to justice and remedy. I commend the increased
attention being paid to women’s rights in conflict settings as a result of the universal
periodic review, and the reporting mechanisms of the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women and other human rights bodies. I encourage a
rights-based approach to the issue of women and peace and security that recognizes
the need to address gender-based discrimination as part of our efforts.
160. The global study and its consultations highlighted that protection m ust be
underpinned by participation and that participation in itself is a measure of
protection. This means that more women should occupy decision -making positions
or positions of seniority within national justice and security institutions. United
Nations entities and Member States must plan, implement and monitor security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration with the aim of
improving security for women and girls and ensuring women’s participation in the
design and roll-out of such processes. Gender-sensitive security assessments must
include proper vetting and prosecution of alleged perpetrators. I urge Member States
to address the obstacles to women being recruited into national militaries and to
move beyond the barriers to the representation of women in United Nations
peacekeeping troops. I am committed to exploring ideas to incentivize greater
numbers of women peacekeepers, in accordance with the recommendation of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations. I also enco urage all actors to
adopt an approach to the re-establishment of the rule of law and justice in
post-conflict situations that is premised on providing victims with legal, medical,
psychosocial, reparative justice and comprehensive services, including for health
and reproducive health, alongside broader institutional reforms, in an effort to
further gender equality.
161. The emphasis on the rights of women and their leadership must also apply to
humanitarian action. The global study reconfirms that promoting women’s
empowerment and gender equality improves outcomes for everyone. More must be
done to address women’s rights to asylum and nationality; involve local women and
women’s organizations, including youth-led organizations, in the planning and
implementation of protection interventions; provide non -discriminatory services for
survivors of gender-based violence in line with international humanitarian law;
protect the reproductive health and rights of women and girls; improve the access of
girls to education in the context of armed conflict; and provide livelihoods for
women, including young women and adolescent girls. I hope that the World
Humanitarian Summit will bring all humanitarian actors together to agree on how to
take these important issues forward.
162. Significant progress has been made in promoting efforts to address the
conflict-related sexual violence agenda within the peace and security arena through
the consistent focus of the Security Council, strategic leadership in the United
Nations system and more coordinated action of all relevant United Nations entities.
Today, there is more reliable and timely information and analysis to inform
advocacy and action, increased focus on accountability as a vital aspect of
deterrence and prevention, greater awareness of the needs of survivors and
resources for comprehensive services. It is crucial for the Organization to build on
the momentum generated in this area in order to consolidate and reinforce efforts,

15-15656

51/54

S/2015/716

and apply some of the lessons learned to advance other important dimensions of the
women and peace and security agenda.
3.

Ensuring gender-responsive planning and accountability for results
163. Consultations for the global study highlighted the missed opportunities for
advancing gender equality when gender analysis and women’s participation are not
included from the outset in policy and programme planning. Locally driven and
conceived solutions offer the best chances for success when coupled with adequate
analysis, planning and resources. I call upon all actors involved in humanitarian
response, peacemaking or peacebuilding efforts to ensure that gender analysis and
women’s participation are part of all planning processes. I recommend that United
Nations entities populate data in existing women and peace and security
frameworks, address any gaps, eliminate overlap and work to meet targets by 2020.
Similarly, I encourage Member States to ensure adequate analysis and
implementation of related commitments through enhanced compilation a nd analysis
of national statistics on women and peace and security.
164. Within the United Nations, it is critical that the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda is actively supported by senior leadership, including,
but not limited to, my special representatives, special envoys and resident
coordinators. To ensure this, mandated priorities related to women and peace and
security should be included into senior leadership terms of reference, and their
performance should be assessed against these criteria. I reiterate my commitment to
revising senior leadership compacts to better mainstream gender considerations.
165. At the national level, Member States must also play their role on
accountability by investing in the collection of statistics on women and peace and
security and by utilizing them to inform national development strategies, national
security strategies and related international frameworks. Both conflict and non -conflict
countries are encouraged to adopt national and regional action plans through broadscale consultations, which are informed by best practices, are led by key ministries
and contain monitoring frameworks with specific indicators, accountability
mechanisms and dedicated financing. Better integration of the women and peace
and security agenda into national planning frameworks, such as United Nations
Development Assistance Frameworks and post-conflict and disaster needs
assessments should be prioritized. The global study also suggests the establishment
of an independent monitoring mechanism run by women’s civil society groups to
track compliance of humanitarian assistance with normative frameworks and
performance on gender equality.
166. From the policy level to the grass-roots level, reliable information and analysis
are lynchpins to better action on women and peace and security. As mandated by the
Security Council in resolution 2122 (2013), more actionable information must be
provided to the Council to better inform mission mandates, drawdown benchmarks
and policymaking. Members of the Council can use the direct questioning of reports
and briefings during meetings of the Council as a means to increase accountability
on the implementation of resolution 2122 (2013). I encourage the Council to
carefully consider the relevant recommendations of the global study aimed at
strengthening its own implementation of commitments, including the establishment
of an appropriate mechanism or procedure of the Council for monitoring
commitments and improving the flow and quality of information to the Council on

52/54

15-15656

S/2015/716

women and peace and security, strengthening sanctions regimes and ensuring
greater engagement with civil society and relevant Human Rights Council
mechanisms.
4.

Strengthening gender architecture and technical expertise
167. In order for the United Nations to accelerate the implementation of
commitments on women and peace and security, more must be done to ensure
coherence, coordination, adequate capacity, the use of comparative advantage and
targeted expertise. The global study recommends a range of measures to strengthen
the system’s capacity, including a dedicated high-level representative in UN-Women
to drive implementation in the system and beyond. I commit my senior leadership to
look into this recommendation, and call upon all Member States to provide adequate
resources to ensure that the women and peace and security architecture at
Headquarters, within missions and within United Nations country teams is better
staffed and resourced at the senior level, including in particul ar the gender capacity
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Political
Affairs at Headquarters and in the field, and in UN -Women country offices in
conflict-affected settings. As outlined in the report of the High -level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, I have decided to request that Senior Gender Adviser s
for United Nations peace operations be deployed in all special political missions and
multidimensional peacekeeping missions. I request the support of M ember States to
ensure that the advisers be housed in the offices of my Special Representatives,
supported by gender experts located within mission components. I also take note of
the recommendation of both the global study and the High -level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations that missions should have greater access to UN -Women policy
and technical expertise, alongside existing arrangements. Efforts to strengthen
coherence and coordination within the system and to maximize the use of
comparative advantage must be prioritized if the Organization is to meet the current
peace and security challenges. I am pleased that UN -Women, the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations are working on
arrangements to do so in the field missions. I commit to ensuring that UN-Women,
which is mandated to lead, promote and coordinate the accountability of the United
Nations system on gender equality and women’s empowerment, participates in
relevant senior management forums on peace, security and humanitarian affairs,
namely, the Inter-Agency Standing Committee/Executive Committee on
Humanitarian Affairs secretariat and the senior adviser group on peace and security.
168. More must be done to achieve gender balance in staffing at all levels in the
United Nations, but particularly senior leadership in missions. Diversity in
leadership brings different perspectives and strengthens the credibility of the system
as a whole. I commend the efforts made by initiatives such as the senior women
talent pipeline of the Department of Field Support, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs, and encourage them to
implement past recommendations and explore innovative solutions such as those
suggested in the global study. I also repeat my encouragement to Member States to
put forward more names of women for consideration in positions of senior
leadership. I commend the efforts of a growing number of Member States and
regional bodies to appoint high-level representatives on women and peace and
security and to encourage others to do the same.

15-15656

53/54

S/2015/716

5.

Financing the women and peace and security agenda
169. The consultations and research conducted for the global study confirmed that
the lack of sufficient funding for women and peace and security is a major challenge
for the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. Findings show
that gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls are still not
prioritized in financial interventions and peace and security responses. Women ’s
civil society organizations continue to face significant funding shortages despite
often being at the frontline of responses to crises. I call upon all actors, including
Member States, multilateral organizations and development banks, to ensure robust
financing of the women and peace and security agenda, including by adopting
specific targets and monitoring progress. I regret that within the context of the
United Nations efforts have fallen short of the target to allocate a minimum of
15 per cent of peacebuilding funds for projects whose principal objective is to
address women’s specific needs and advance gender equality. I urge all relevant
United Nations entities to ensure the target is not only met but surpassed by 2020.
That recommendation was reiterated in the report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture. I further recommend that a similar
15 per cent financing target be applied to all projects to address new peace and
security threats, including violent extremism, in recognition of the fact that these
threats will not be eliminated and sustainable peace will not be built without the
adequately resourced participation of women.
170. I am encouraged by the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to integrate greater gender analysis in budget planning, and recommend that gender
budgeting be utilized more systematically by peace missions, where possible, to
better plan and track resources for work related to the women and peace and
security agenda. Although the usage of gender marker systems and the indicators to
monitor the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) have helped increase
awareness of gender at the planning stage, I recommend that humanitarian and
peacebuilding programmes improve their ability to track gender at the implementation
and evaluation stages as well, thus ensuring that it becomes a non-negotiable part of
programming. I welcome the establishment of a pooled financing mechanism, the
Global Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Response, and call upon Member States to make significant pledges so that the
Instrument can make a transformative impact on the implementation of the agenda.
171. While some of these goals and proposed actions, in line with th e 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, may take longer to fully achieve, I strongly encourage
Member States to convene another review of the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda in 2020 in order to assess whether recommendations an d
commitments put forward in 2015 have been acted upon. I hope that the joint track
record in delivering results for women and girls will be strengthened across all
regions and that a path can be charted at the global level towards a durable peace
that benefits all.

54/54

15-15656
