General Assembly-Forty-second Session

156

strategy for sustainable and environmentally sound development" under the agenda item entitled "Development
and international economic co-operation".
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/188.

Countries stricken by desertification and
drought in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 39/208 of 17 December 1984
and 40/175 of 17 December 1985, and its decision 41/454
of 8 December 1986,
A ware that the prime responsibility in the strug~le
against desertification and the effects of drought rests wtth
the countries concerned, and that such action is an essential component of their long-term development,
Also aware that the problems of desertification and
drought are increasingly assuming a structural and_ endemic character, and that real and permanent solut10ns
must be found in a global effort based on concerted action
by the stricken countries and the international community,
Recalling the commitment of African Governments, as
expressed in the United Nations Programme of Action for
African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990, 60 to undertake and to continue as soon as possible measures to combat drought and desertification,
Recalling the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Desertification,55 and taking note of decisions 14/15 A and B of
18 June 1987 ofthe Governing Council ofthe United Nations Environment Programme46 concerning desertification,
Recalling with satisfaction the active support and the
commitment to action expressed forcefully by the international community, including the United Nations system,
at the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly,
on the critical economic situation in Africa,
Welcoming the initiative of the Government of Senegal
in convening the Ministerial Conference for a joint policy
to combat desertification in the countries of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the
Sahel and the Economic Community of West African
States, in the Maghreb countries, in Egypt and in the Sudan (COMIDES), and recalling with satisfaction the results achieved and the resolutions adopted by the Conference at its first and second sessions, held at Dakar in July
1984, 61 and in November 1985, 62 which set up COMIDES
as a ministerial consultation mechanism,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the proposals concerning concrete measures to be taken set out in the report
of the Secretary-General on the countries stricken by
desertification and drought;63
2. Takes note also of the sustained and praiseworthy
efforts made by the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahel to combat desertification
and drought, and of its fruitful co-operation with Governments and the organs and bodies of the United Nations
system;

3. Welcomes the progress made since the establishment by six East African countries ofthe Intergover~m_ental Authority for Drought and Development and mvttes
the international community to continue to support the
implementation of the Plan of Action of the six countries
and to furnish them with sufficient financia! and technical
resources for this purpose;
4. Appeals urgently to the members ofthe international
community, particularly donor countries, while strengthening their support for the United Nations Programme of
Action for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990, to continue to support the Ministerial Conference for a joint policy to combat desertification, the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the
Sahel and the Intergovernmental Authority for Drought
and Development;
5. Reaffirms the role of the United Nations SudanoSahelian Office in the co-ordination of the efforts of the
United Nations to help the States members ofthe Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the
Sahel and the Intergovernmental Authority for Drought
and Development to carry out their programmes;
6. Appeals to ali Governments to increase their support for the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office, m
particular by making voluntary contributions to it at the
United Nations Pledging Conference for Development
Activities, but also by financing directly the projects sponsored by the Office, which enable it to respond to the priority needs of the Sudano-Sahelian countries;
7. Welcomes with satisfaction the establishment of the
Special Programme for Sub-Saharan African Countries
Affected by Drought and Desertification by the International Fund for Agricultura! Development; 64
8. Takes note with satisfaction of the generosity and
solidarity with which the international community has responded to the assistance needs resulting from the emergency in Africa, particularly with regard to food aid and
its transport, medical assistance and the threat of grasshoppers and locusts;
9. Also appeals to ali members of the international
community, the organs and bodies ofthe United Nations,
regional and subregional financia! institutions, and nongovernmental organizations to continue to give their full
support in ali forms, including financia) and technical aid
or any other form of assistance, to the development efforts
of the countries stricken by desertification and drought;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1989, a report on the implementation of the present
resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

60 Resolution S-13/2, annex.
61 See A/39/530, annex.

• 62 See A/C.2/40/10, annex.
63/ A/41/346-E/l 986/96, paras. 53-77.

64 See IFAD, GC 9/L.7.
