S/2016/27

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 January 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 35 of Security Council
resolution 2232 (2015), in which the Council requested me to report every 120 days
on the implementation of the resolution, including on the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), and paragraph 17 of Security
Council resolution 2245 (2015), in which the Council requested me to report on the
implementation of that resolution, specifically any challenges faced by the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) in carrying out its mandate, as part of
my regular reporting on Somalia. The report covers major developments during the
period from 1 September to 31 December 2015.

II. Political and security overview
A.

Political developments
2.
The reporting period saw continued progress towards the building of a federal
State in Somalia, including the development of the framework necessary for a
political transition in 2016. Somali stakeholders launched a broadly inclusive
consultative process to determine the most appropriate and feasible electoral model to
be implemented in 2016. The National Consultative Forum convened in Mogadishu
on 19 and 20 October, and the meeting was followed by public consultations in each
of Somalia’s emerging federal states as well as in the Banadir, Hiraan and Shabelle
Dhexe regions, on 16 and 17 November, and for “Somalilanders” and Somalis in the
diaspora on 22 November and 5 December, respectively. Women, youth, civil society
representatives and minority groups were active participants in the consultations and
the Forum.
3.
While acknowledging that “one person, one vote” elections would not be
possible in 2016, the Forum adopted the Mogadishu Declaration on 16 December, in
which it reiterated that there should be no extension of constitutionally mandated term
limits and outlined a number of key principles and actions to be taken in relation to
the 2016 electoral model. It was also agreed that Somali leaders would reconvene and
endorse a detailed electoral model and implementation plan and a political road map
for the period from 2016 to 2020 by 10 January 2016.

16-00036 (E)

120116

*1600036*

S/2016/27

4.
Further to the political dialogue, the parliamentary motion to impeach the
President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, mentioned in my previous report ( S/2015/702),
was dropped. The Speaker of the Federal Parliament, Mohamed Osman Jawari, and
the Prime Minister, Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, agreed that allegations would be
investigated and measures instituted to eradicate corrupt practices.
5.
The President and a number of senior officials of the Federal Government of
Somalia visited Beledweyne, in the Hiraan region, from 21 to 23 December to
advance the state formation process in the Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe regions. An
agreement was reached in support of an earlier presidential decree that Jowhar, in
Shabelle Dhexe, would serve as the site of the state formation conference, which is
expected to be held in early January 2016, and that Buulobarde, in Hiraan, would be
the capital of the new State. The new Governor took office in Hiraan after the removal
of his predecessor, who is facing investigation and possible charges for alleged
involvement in the killing of a third-party contractor for the Mine Action Service in
Beledweyne on 14 November. The state formation process is expected to be
completed before the ministerial meeting of the High-level Partnership Forum on
23 and 24 February 2016, although continued intra-clan divisions and inter-clan issues
could cause further delays.
6.
The Galmudug Interim Administration made progress towards the establishment
of its governance institutions in the interim capital of Cadaado. Efforts were made to
reach out to communities in accessible districts, disarm clan militias, train secur ity
forces and improve an airstrip in south Gaalkacyo. The Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama’a
group, which controls parts of the Galguduud region, including Dhuusamarreeb,
continued to challenge the legitimacy of the Galmudug Interim Administration. On
9 September, militias from the group clashed with pro-Administration Marehan clan
militias, resulting in several casualties. The Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, with support from UNSOM, began to facilitate dialogue between the
Galmudug Interim Administration and Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama’a to reach an agreement.
7.
Political mistrust between the Galmudug Interim Administration and Puntland
erupted, with armed clashes near Gaalkacyo on 22 November, resulting in a
significant number of casualties and the displacement of civilians. Triggered by a
dispute over road construction near the boundary between the two administrations,
fighting flared up repeatedly before collective mediation efforts by the Prime Minister
and the involvement of the leaders of all other existing interim regional
administrations resulted in the signing of a ceasefire agreement by the Presidents of
Puntland and Galmudug on 2 December. The situation has since remained calm.
8.
In Kismaayo, in Juba Hoose, Sheikh Ahmed Islam “Madobe” was inaugurated
as President of Jubaland (Interim Juba Administration) on 12 September in a
ceremony attended by the President and the Prime Minister of Somalia and the leaders
of the existing interim regional administrations. Progress was made towards the
resolution of disputes between clans and within the Marehan clan, with the commitment
by the President of Jubaland to increase the number of seats in the regional assembly to
accommodate underrepresented communities. On 30 December, the regional assembly
approved a request by the President of Jubaland for a three-month extension of the
deadline of 5 January 2016 for the nomination of his Cabinet.
9.
The formation of the regional assembly of the Interim South -West
Administration was completed with the swearing-in of 146 members, including
30 women, on 28 December and the election of a Speaker and two Deputy Speakers

2/20

16-00036

S/2016/27

on 3 January. Continued grievances over representation by members of the Ogaden
clan led to the declaration of a breakaway “Upper Bakool” administration on
28 December. This also deepened tensions between Puntland and the Interim South West Administration, including over the model for the 2016 electoral process.
10. In Puntland, the Speaker, Said Hassan Shire, resigned on 28 October in response
to an impeachment motion against him signed by 40 members of Parliament. On
9 November, Ahmed Ali Hashi was elected as the new Speaker.
11. In “Somaliland”, the President, Ahmed Mohamed Mohamoud “Silanyo”, issued
a presidential decree on 10 September setting 28 March 2017 as the date for
presidential and parliamentary elections. On 26 October, nine Cabinet ministers,
including the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, the Minister
of the Presidency and the Minister of Justice, and the government spokesperson,
officially resigned from their posts in protest against the alleged support of the
President of “Somaliland” for the candidacy of the Chair of the ruling Kulmiye Party,
Musa Bihi Abdi. Further resignations followed. The Kulmiye Party held its long
overdue congress on 10 November and elected presidential and vice-presidential
candidates. Other parties are expected to announce their candidates in early 2016.

B.

Security developments
12. In central and southern Somalia, the security situation remained volatile, with
Al-Shabaab continuing to launch attacks on African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and Somali national army positions and civilian targets. On 1 September,
the anniversary of the death of former Al-Shabaab leader Ahmed Abdi Godane, more
than 100 Al-Shabaab fighters stormed an AMISOM base in Janale, Shabelle Hoose.
More than 20 AMISOM soldiers were killed and 23 wounded, while others remain
missing. Shortly afterwards, AMISOM began to realign its forces by vacating previously
recovered areas in Shabelle Hoose, including Kurtunwarey, Ceel Saliini, Cambarey,
Golweyne and Busley, on 4, 5 and 9 September. In the Hiraan region, AMISOM vacated
Buq-Aqabla and Xarar-Lugoole on 6 and 26 September, respectively. On 13 November,
AMISOM withdrew from Fidow, on the border between the Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe
regions. All the locations were immediately seized by Al-Shabaab.
13. In Mogadishu, a suicide vehicle laden with explosives detonated as a United
Nations convoy was leaving Villa Somalia on 21 September. An escort vehicle was hit
and 12 people were killed, including a Somali escort guard. On 1 November, a
complex attack on the Sahafi Hotel resulted in at least 15 fatalities. Al -Shabaab
claimed responsibility for both attacks. On 14 December, a staff member of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and a
non-governmental organization (NGO) worker were killed by unknown gunmen while
travelling in a car. There is no evidence at this stage to suggest that the UNHCR staff
member’s affiliation with the United Nations was the reason for the attack.
14. Asymmetrical attacks along main supply routes also intensified. On
13 September, a convoy escorting officials from the Interim South -West
Administration was hit by three roadside bombs in the Bay region. On 16 September,
Al-Shabaab fighters ambushed a convoy escorting the Beledweyne District
Commissioner in the Hiraan region. On 11 November, the President of the Interim
South-West Administration was targeted in an attempted suicide attack along the

16-00036

3/20

S/2016/27

Afgooye corridor in the Shabelle Hoose region, for which Al -Shabaab claimed
responsibility.
15. In the Hiraan region, a United Nations third-party contractor was shot dead in
Beledweyne on 14 November, allegedly by security guards of the Governor of the
region, which sparked a stand-off between clan militias, increased tensions in the
town and led to a restriction of United Nations movements. Normality has since been
restored following the arrest of suspects and the institution of investigations against
the Governor.
16. Divisions within Al-Shabaab emerged during the reporting period. In Puntland,
on 22 October, a senior Al-Shabaab leader, Sheikh Abdiqadir Mumin, pledged
allegiance to Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) with a group of
approximately 20 fighters in the Galgala Mountains. Following that development, the
Al-Shabaab leadership commenced a crackdown on pro-ISIL members by arresting
and assassinating them. In Juba Dhexe, Al-Shabaab operatives arrested two ISIL
supporters in Saakow on 27 October and a pro-ISIL faction leader, Sheikh Hussein
Abdi Gedi, was killed in an ambush by Al-Shabaab militants on 23 November.
17. In the disputed Sool region between Puntland and “Somaliland”, separatist
“Khatumo State” militias attacked “Somaliland” forces in Xudun on 18 September.
Tensions remain high.

III. Support for peacebuilding and state-building efforts
A.

International coordination and political support
18. My Special Representative continued to work closely with federal and regional
leaders in Mogadishu, Garoowe, Baidoa and Kismaayo to advance state formation,
federalization, the review of the Provisional Constitution and consultations on the
2016 electoral process. He emphasized the importance of the latter being a Somali -led
and owned inclusive and transparent process that would ensure a more representative
and accountable Parliament, with greater representation for women, youth and persons
with disabilities. In addition, my Special Representative regularly interacted with the
diplomatic corps in Nairobi and with international partners based in Mogadishu, who
convened at regular intervals to coordinate policy and donor support.
19. The New Deal Compact mechanisms continued to serve as the framework for
the coordination of international support to Somalia’s peacebuilding and statebuilding processes. By the end of the reporting period, the United Nations
Multi-Partner Trust Fund had disbursed $34.8 million to joint programmes developed
and approved through the Compact’s architecture, covering all of its Peacebuilding
and State-building Goals. A review was initiated to assess progress made against the
priorities, milestones and cross-cutting issues of the Goals and on commitments made
by the Federal Government and international partners.
20. Preparations began for the third ministerial meeting of the High -level
Partnership Forum, to be held on 23 and 24 February 2016 in Istanbul, Turkey. The
Forum will review progress made in 2015 on the implementation of the New Deal
Compact and will consider how the partnership can be continued beyond the end of
the Compact in 2016. Discussions will also focus on the outcomes of the consultative

4/20

16-00036

S/2016/27

process for the 2016 electoral process, progress in the security sector and the
acceleration of the economic recovery.
21. On 8 December, in Mogadishu, the President and my Special Representative
co-chaired an ambassadorial-level meeting of the High-level Partnership Forum. The
meeting was the first to be attended by all regional Presidents, in addition to the Speaker
of the Federal Parliament, a broad range of Somali stakeholders and 29 international
delegations, and reviewed developments under the Compact and milestones to be
achieved by the time of the holding of the ministerial meeting. UNSOM and the United
Nations country team are closely involved in the preparations.

B.

Inclusive politics
Development of a federal system
22. Despite significant progress in the establishment of state structures at the
regional level, considerable challenges remain. State formation processes have not yet
led to broadly supported and sufficiently detailed arrangements for federal state
structures. Interim regional administrations are still struggling to establish authority,
being faced with an absence of revenue, a lack of government infrastructure and
insufficient staff levels. Significant support will continue to be required from
international partners to bridge those gaps.
23. On 24 and 25 November, Ministers of Information from the Federal Government
and existing interim regional administrations ratified a cooperation protocol on the
media and information at their first media-related inclusive conference. The protocol
included an agreement to increase the exchange of information, devise a unified
communications strategy to combat terrorism and counteract violent extremism,
establish cooperation with private and public media and engage in awareness -raising
and reconciliation, constitutional, federalist and electoral activities. On 28 December,
the Parliament of Somalia passed the country’s Media Law. The Ministry of
Information and the National Union of Somali Journalists have requested UNSOM
support in implementing the Law through stakeholder training and capacity-building.
24. Parliament endorsed the Anti-Money-Laundering and Counter-Terrorism
Financing Law on 26 December.
Constitutional review process
25. The constitutional review process has been slow in advancing, and continuous
cooperation and coordination among the Oversight Committee, the Independent
Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission and the Federal Ministry of
Constitutional Affairs remains crucial. On 15 September, the Speaker of the Federal
Parliament presented a proposal for the review of the Provisional Constitution, which
included the preparation of draft amendments by the end of 2015, consultations,
outreach and civic education, and approval by Parliament by March 2016.
26. At the request of the Prime Minister, three international constitutional experts
visited Mogadishu from 26 to 30 October for a high-level workshop facilitated by the
United Nations Development Programme and UNSOM. The Prime Minister, the
Speaker of the Federal Parliament, delegates from the Independent Constitutional
Review and Implementation Commission, the Oversight Committee and the Federal
Ministry of Constitutional Affairs and several members of Parliament participated in

16-00036

5/20

S/2016/27

the workshop, which provided a platform for open dialogue on the constitutional
review. On 9 November, following the discussions at the workshop, the Independent
Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission presented revised chapte rs 1
and 4 of the Provisional Constitution and received instructions from the Oversight
Committee for the review of chapters 2, 3 and 5. A subsequent expert workshop to
review chapters 1 to 8 from a technical point of view began in Nairobi on 28 December.
Preparations for elections
27. In addition to consultations on selecting an appropriate electoral model for 2016,
the National Independent Electoral Commission started preparations for the eventual
conduct of “one person, one vote” elections in 2020. The Commission held its first
strategic planning retreat from 29 September to 2 October, following which it adopted
its vision, guiding principles and mission statement and its action plan for the period
from October 2015 to December 2016. Communications strategy development training
took place on 8 October, which aimed at enhancing the Commissioners’ skills in
disseminating information on the work of the Commission. Commissioners undertook
study visits to the United Republic of Tanzania from 21 to 28 October and to Turkey
from 31 October to 6 November.
28. Somali stakeholders conducted a consultative workshop on the political party
bill, organized by the Ministry of the Interior and Federal Affairs, from 21 to
23 November, ahead of parliamentary consideration of the bill.

C.

Rule of law and security institutions
Security sector assistance and reform
29. The Federal Government is currently developing a national security policy and a
national defence act and has acknowledged the importance of enha ncing mechanisms
for civilian oversight of the security sector. International partners continued to urge
the building of a national security sector architecture within a federal system that
clearly identifies the roles and responsibilities of security institutions at the federal
and regional levels. On 9 September, in an official statement, the President committed
to substantive security sector reform, including timely and adequate pay by electronic
means, an audit of the sector, the establishment of an interim procurement board, the
transfer to a unified biometric registration system and the implementation of a
national threat assessment. Meaningful financial and equipment support for the
Guulwade (Victory) Plan, which aims at enhancing the ability of the S omali national
army to undertake joint operations with AMISOM and assume greater responsibility
for security, has yet to materialize.
30. At a Peacebuilding and State-building Goal 2 (Security) working group meeting
on 9 September, the Federal Ministry of Finance committed itself to establishing an
accountable and transparent security sector payroll system that allowed for the
reliable, sustainable and harmonized delivery of salaries and stipends for 22,000
Somali national army and 12,500 Somali police force personnel. Several donors are
working closely with the Federal Government on wider reform commitments made by
the President as a complement to their contribution to security sector personnel
payments. By the end of the reporting period, a total of 19,800 Somali national army
and 6,748 Somali police force personnel were biometrically registered in the human
resources system.

6/20

16-00036

S/2016/27

31. UNSOM continued to support the work of the National Integration Commission.
As at 31 December, the Commission had integrated 1,518 militias from the Interim
Juba Administration into the Somali national army, before anticipated losses and
desertions, in line with the target of 1,350.
32. In September and October, UNSOM and the Mine Action Service conducted
weapon-marking and registration training for 20 representatives from the security and
justice sectors. On 15 October, the Mine Action Service handed over three weapon marking machines to the Federal Government.
Police
33. The development of the Heegan (Readiness) Plan was completed by the end of
October, as requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2232 (2015). The Plan
seeks to establish basic policing services across Somalia. It envisages a police service
of 12,874 personnel, based on a federal policing model. At a Peacebuilding and Statebuilding Goal 2 working group meeting on 28 October, the Plan was welcomed by
international partners as a living document that needed further work, and agreement
was reached at the working group meeting on 9 December to further refine technical
aspects to allow for its implementation. From 27 to 29 September, the Somali police
force, supported by UNSOM and AMISOM, held its first workshop in Mogadishu on
a new policing model for Somalia, attended by representatives from all exi sting
interim regional administrations.
34. The Juba police training camp opened in Kismaayo on 23 October. In addition,
200 recruits graduated from a programme funded by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and implemented with the support of AMISOM police in
Baidoa. On 11 November, stipend payments to the Somali police force recommenced,
with a total of $4.3 million paid to 5,200 officers to cover eight months of arrears. On
9 September, 56 police patrol vehicles donated by Japan were handed over to the
Somali police force in Mogadishu, 21 of which were distributed to subfederal entities.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
35. UNSOM supported the Federal Government in launching a strategic
communications plan for the national programme for disengaged combatants,
coordinating two workshops in Mogadishu on 1 and 26 November. The plan, which
highlights the benefits of the national programme, is intended to trigger further
defections from Al-Shabaab. As at 13 December, 345 males were being hosted in the
centres of the national programme: 225 in Mogadishu (Serendi Facility), 25 in
Beledweyne (Hiil Walaal Facility) and 95 in Baidoa. Beneficiaries receive vocational
training, traditional dispute resolution training and trauma therapy. Individuals are
reintegrated into society upon the determination of an exit board. The International
Organization for Migration, with funding support from UNSOM, opened the first safe
house for disengaged female Al-Shabaab combatants on 1 November in Baidoa,
which is currently hosting the first 16 female and 20 dependent child beneficiaries.
Maritime security
36. The Federal Government, with support from UNSOM, continued to draft the
Naqude (Captain) Plan to train and equip the Somali Navy and Coast Guard.
Capacity-building for the maritime police force, drafted with support from UNSOM,
was incorporated into the Heegan Plan. The Government raised fundin g, with

16-00036

7/20

S/2016/27

UNSOM assistance, for the re-establishment of a Somali maritime administration
department and began to develop a new Somali maritime code.
Mine action
37. On 1 October, the Council of Ministers approved the national mine action
legislation, policy and budget of the Somalia Explosive Management Authority, and
the Federal Government ratified the Convention on Cluster Munitions. On
4 December, the Federal Government launched the Badbaado (Protection) Plan, which
outlines the international support required to coordinate and implement explosive
hazard management operations in Somalia.
38. Earlier in the reporting period, Somali teams worked on a UNMAS project to
assess and mark explosive hazards for destruction in 76 communities along the
Somali-Ethiopian border.
Justice and corrections
39. UNSOM continued to support the development of the Onkod (Thunder) Plan to
build an effective federal Custodial Corps through legislative reform, organizational
restructuring and infrastructure development. As at 31 December, 1,317 prison staff
were biometrically registered in the human resources system for the security forces.
UNSOM completed five training courses for 126 staff in Mogadishu and Baidoa,
focusing on basic prison officer duties, human rights and emergency medical training,
and conducted the first all-female workshop for 32 female Custodial Corps officers
from six prisons, addressing gender equality issues. UNSOM supported the Federal
Ministry of Justice in planning a consultative workshop, tentatively scheduled for
January 2016, to determine the framework of a new justice and corrections model for
Somalia in the context of federalism.
40. On 22 October, UNSOM organized a workshop with national counterparts to
identify priorities and key deliverables for the implementation of the Somalia Joint
Rule of Law Programme. The Peacebuilding and State-building Goal 3 (Justice)
working group, in its meetings on 28 October and 10 December, approved the
deliverables and agreed on a schedule to guide the implementation of the Programme.

D.

Economic foundations
41. On 5 October, the Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility Steering
Committee granted approval for a joint programme on sustainable charcoal reduction
and alternative livelihoods. In accordance with Security Council resolution 2036
(2012), the programme will seek to curb regional trade in charcoal while promoting
alternative sources of domestic energy and livelihoods.
42. In early November, the World Bank launched the Somalia Economic Update, the
first in a series of reports designed to stimulate debate on economic policy and public
financial management reform. The report noted that Somalia’s economy had remained
resilient despite two decades of conflict and was driven mainly by the priv ate sector.
The gross domestic product of Somalia was estimated at $5.4 billion (2013), or $435
per capita, placing Somalia among the five poorest countries in the world. The report
found that remittances provided a lifeline to the Somali economy and that massive
infrastructural gaps created high costs for businesses.

8/20

16-00036

S/2016/27

43. Approval was granted for the World Bank project to support remittance flows to
Somalia, in compliance with international anti-money-laundering and counterterrorism financing regulations, and to the special financing facility for local
development to rehabilitate critical local infrastructure. A transport needs assessment
was completed to inform priority projects for potential funding through the African
Development Bank-led Somalia Infrastructure Trust Fund.
44. From 11 to 14 December, my former representative on the human rights of
internally displaced persons, Walter Kälin, conducted a scoping mission in Mogadishu
as part of his assignment to develop a comprehensive strategy for durable solutions
for the 1.1 million internally displaced persons in Somalia. The visit was met with
enthusiasm by the Federal Government and international partners. As an initial
finding, Mr. Kälin concluded that the protracted nature of displacement in Somalia
required a stronger emphasis on development efforts and the mainstreaming of issues
relating to internally displaced persons into development planning.

E.

Revenue and services
45. On 2 October, the second World Bank Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing
Project was launched to support the Federal Government in developing a more robust
payroll system for civil servants and in expanding service delivery in health care and
education. Subsequently, the Federal Minister of Finance convened a meeting in the
first week of November with counterparts from the existing interim regional
administrations and Puntland, signalling both the mandate and the ability of the
Federal Government to play a role in coordinating Somali regions, particularly on the
issue of fiscal management.
46. The United Nations and the World Bank continued to collaborate on their
respective national funding mechanisms, designed to channel funds directly to
government entities, in support of the increased use of national systems and str onger
macroeconomic and fiscal management. The Peacebuilding Fund confirmed an initial
allocation of $2 million through the United Nations mechanism. Functional reviews
were undertaken to help the Government to strengthen internal ministerial structures.

F.

Cross-cutting issues
Stabilization and community recovery
47. Efforts continued to coordinate Government, AMISOM and international efforts
for the stabilization of districts recovered from Al-Shabaab. Joint planning and
synchronization between military and civilian actions remain a challenge. It remains
imperative that military operations provide the conditions necessary for stabilization
in recovered areas, as recognized by the United Nations-African Union benchmarking
review.
48. In October and November, access to some districts was affected by the floods
caused by heavy rains brought on by the El Niño phenomenon. All districts have some
level of deployment of caretaker administrations, with the exception of Baardheere,
where a caretaker administration has been identified but not yet deployed. The
training of 130 police officers to be deployed to the districts has been completed,

16-00036

9/20

S/2016/27

although deployment to newly recovered areas continues to be a challenge, despite
agreements and the initial allocation of resources from the Peacebuilding Fund.
49. Some level of economic activity was reported in most districts, owing mainly to
the mobilization of the community and sometimes with injections of capital from the
diaspora. In addition to the rehabilitation of administrative offices, schools, police
stations, courts and health-care facilities, community projects were ongoing in nine
districts with the support of the Somalia Stability Fund, the United States Agency for
International Development and AMISOM quick-impact projects.
Human rights
50. During the reporting period, a total of 123 civilian casualties were documented,
compared with 113 over the previous reporting period. Of those, Al -Shabaab or
unidentified armed individuals were implicated in the killing of 95 people, with
Somali security forces implicated in the killing of 27 people and AMISOM forces
implicated in 22 killings.
51. The military courts handed down four death sentences. The Interim Juba
Administration executed 14 people without due process. More than 60 suspected
wives of Al-Shabaab members were forcibly displaced. More than 300 people, 250 of
whom were in Puntland, were arrested during security sweeps targeting Al -Shabaab
elements. Most were released after screening. In Puntland, house-to-house searches
targeted youth, mostly from outside Puntland.
52. Freedom of expression continues to be challenged. In separate incidents, the
National Intelligence and Security Agency and Puntland and “Somaliland” authorities
arrested various media workers for hosting shows or publishing news stories on the
country’s political situation. Puntland authorities also banned more than 35 media
websites. Four musicians were arrested in “Somaliland” for allegedly promoting
Somali “union” in Mogadishu.
53. The non-payment of salaries to security personnel continued to be a challenge
and was linked to violations of human rights by security forces and the erection of
illegal checkpoints to extort money from civilians in parts of southern and central
Somalia.
54. UNSOM provided training on international human rights and humanitarian law
for security forces and civil society organizations, including 79 members of the
Somali national army, 25 Somali police force personnel and 54 civil society
representatives. The Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights emphasized
matters relating to human rights due diligence policy in his discussions with
AMISOM and federal and regional interlocutors during his visit to Somalia from 14 to
17 November.
55. Following work with UNSOM on the implementation of the recommendations
of the universal periodic review in 2012 and on the creation of a human rights road
map, the Federal Government submitted its national report for the second cycle of the
universal periodic review for January 2016, and the Parliamentary Committee on
Human Rights held regional consultations on the National Human Rights Commission
bill. The mandate of the independent expert appointed by the Secretary-General on the
situation of human rights in Somalia was renewed by the Human Rights Council in its
resolution 30/20.

10/20

16-00036

S/2016/27

56. UNSOM, in consultation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, provided detailed comments on the Counter-Terrorism bill of June 2015
to guide the legislature in ensuring that the bill conforms with international legal
standards. The bill is expected to be considered imminently by Parliament.
Gender equality and women’s empowerment
57. On 15 September, with UNSOM support and the presence of more than
50 federal, regional and civil society representatives and international partners, the
Federal Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development launched the national
gender policy formulation process in Mogadishu. It is expected that, upon completion,
the policy will provide an overall framework for the advancement of women’s rights,
gender equality and the women, peace and security agenda in Somalia.
58. Women actively participated in consultations on the 2016 electoral process.
Women’s groups also held their own consultations to determine a common position
and enhance their advocacy at the National Consultative Forum.
59. On 28 October, my Special Representative hosted an open day with more than
60 women leaders, peacebuilders, activists, Federal Ministers, Federal members of
Parliament, women in security sector institutions, youth and students. At the event,
women leaders shared their concerns and recommendations on how to advance the
women, peace and security agenda and increase the representation of women in the
2016 electoral process.
60. From 2 to 6 December, with United Nations support, 28 women leaders,
including Federal members of Parliament, civil society representatives and peace
activists, undertook a peace mission from Mogadishu to Gaalkacyo to advocate for
and negotiate peace.
Child protection
61. On 1 October, Somalia became the 196th State to ratify the Convention on the
Rights of the Child.
62. On 21 October, UNSOM and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
organized a one-day workshop to develop a capacity-building and training plan for the
Child Protection Unit of the Somali national army to support the Federal Government
in the implementation of signed action plans, the dissemination of policies throughout
army units and the setting up of systems to ensure compliance.
63. As at 14 November, the Federal Government, with support from UNSOM and
UNICEF, had facilitated the release of 79 boys from facilities in Mogadishu and
Beledweyne, where they had been held as part of the rehabilitation programme for
defectors from Al-Shabaab. The children were handed over to UNICEF-supported
NGOs and enrolled in community-based reintegration services. This brought the total
number of supported children affected by the conflict since December 2014 to 749
(620 boys and 129 girls) and concluded a long period of intensive United Nations
advocacy for children affected by armed conflict. It is an important achievement by
the Government in its commitment to implement Somalia’s action plans on children
and armed conflict.
64. At least 157 incidents of grave violations against children were documented in
the reporting period, in particular killing and maiming and recruitment and use,

16-00036

11/20

S/2016/27

affecting 146 children (128 boys and 18 girls) and mainly perpetrated by the Somali
national army and Al-Shabaab.
Prevention of sexual violence
65. In accordance with the requirements set out in Security Council resolution 1960
(2010), the United Nations formed a working group on the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements with regard to conflict-related sexual violence on 5 November
to ensure the systematic gathering of timely, accurate and reliable information on such
violence against women, men and children in Somalia. The information will be used
to promote increased and timely action to prevent and respond to conflict-related
sexual violence.
66. The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
mandated by the Security Council in its resolution 1888 (2009), continued to support
efforts to address sexual violence in Somalia, including the submission of proposed
revisions to the rape and sexual violence bill currently before the “Somaliland”
parliament.

IV. Humanitarian situation
67. The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains worrying. The El Niño
phenomenon caused flooding from the start of the rainy season in October,
cumulatively affecting 145,000 people and displacing an estimated 60,000 people
across southern and central Somalia. Early warning, preparedness and response
activities continued, with the collaboration of federal and regional authorities. The
risk of flooding remains. Overall, 4.9 million people need assistance: 308,000 children
under 5 years of age are acutely malnourished and 56,000 are severely malnourished.
More than 1.1 million people remain internally displaced. In “Somaliland”, the El Niño
phenomenon has exacerbated drought conditions, severely affecting livelihoods, and
nearly 129,000 people are estimated to be food insecure. The authorities issued a
drought appeal on 10 August.
68. From January to October 2015, nearly 220,000 acutely malnourished children
under 5 received life-saving nutrition services. More than 1.5 million people received
basic health-care services; protection services reached 303,000 people, including
42,802 children; household and shelter assistance reached 145,000 people; and 44,000
learners accessed education activities. Around 100,000 people received cash transfers.
In October, around 406,000 people received food assistance, 393,000 received livelihood
support and 621,000 received livelihood seasonal inputs. On 15 November, the
authorities launched a nationwide measles immunization campaign targeting 4.4 million
children. Somalia has successfully controlled polio, with no new cases reported in the
past 15 months.
69. Since 8 December 2014, UNHCR has assisted 5,823 Somali returnees from
Kenya. Since the onset of the conflict in Yemen, UNHCR has registered 29,640
persons arriving from Yemen, including 26,282 Somali returnees, 3,138 Yemeni
refugees and 220 others.
70. Humanitarian funding since January 2015 totalled $543 million, including $328
million (38 per cent) of the $863 million requested for the Humanitarian Response

12/20

16-00036

S/2016/27

Plan for Somalia for 2015. There were shortfalls across all sectors. Of the $30 million
requested for El Niño preparedness and response, $14 million was received.
71. The operating environment remains dangerous, with an increase in attacks
against humanitarian workers. In 2015, 120 violent incidents affecting humanitarian
organizations were recorded, compared with 75 in 2014. Twelve humanitarian
workers were killed, 17 injured, 36 arrested and 8 abducted. Administrative
impediments continued to disrupt aid delivery. On 18 November, the Deputy Prime
Minister convened 20 local and international NGOs for a round -table discussion with
the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator on the national policy on NGOs, the
accelerated and unimpeded delivery of services and strengthening the role of local
NGOs as implementing partners.
72. Road access to 28 districts in southern and central regions and Buhoodle district
in the north was severely constrained by illegal checkpoints, road blockages and
insecurity, which affected commercial activity, the movement of people and
humanitarian assistance. The main roads most affected remained the BeledweyneBuulobarde-Mogadishu, the Mogadishu-Baidoa-Doolow and the Mogadishu-MarkaBaraawe-Kismaayo roads. Since July, new military offensives have exacerbated the
restrictions. The presence of Al-Shabaab on roads between Diinsoor and Ufurow, in
the Bay region, and Baardheere, in the Gedo region, is a concern. Flooding and poor
road conditions have rendered some roads in the Hiraan, Shabelle Dhexe, Juba Dhe xe,
Juba Hoose and Shabelle Hoose regions impassable.

V. Targeted sanctions
73. On 18 September, the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator briefed the Security Council Committee on
Somalia and Eritrea on the report submitted pursuant to paragraph 42 of Council
resolution 2182 (2014) (see S/2015/731, annex). The Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring
Group presented its final report on Somalia to the Committee o n 22 September
(see S/2015/801). The Federal Government submitted its second report pursuant to
paragraph 9 of Council resolution 2182 (2014) to the Council on 29 September. On
20 November, I appointed eight experts to serve on the Monitoring Group until
15 December 2016 (see S/2015/898).

VI. Support to the African Union Mission in Somalia, the
Somali national army and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia
74. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2245 (2015), the United Nations
Support Office to the African Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA) was renamed the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The Support Office is
developing compacts with AMISOM and UNSOM to support those entities, which are
expected to be finalized in early 2016.
75. The Director of UNSOS visited Addis Ababa in November and December for
consultations with the African Union, the newly appointed Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia, AMISOM troop contributing countries and Member States on the implementation of Security Council

16-00036

13/20

S/2016/27

resolution 2245 (2015). Preliminary meetings between the aforementioned Special
Representative and my Special Representative took place in mid -December.
76. The Director of UNSOS concluded negotiations with African Union and
AMISOM representatives on the final draft umbrella memorandum of understanding
between the African Union and the United Nations on the provision of logistical
support to AMISOM. The memorandum of understanding is expected to be signed in
the coming weeks. UNSOS has also commenced negotiations with the African Union,
AMISOM and troop-contributing countries on the tripartite memorandum of
understanding on contingent-owned equipment. It is negotiating maintenance and
repair contracts to ensure that at least 75 per cent of vehicles donated under the
memorandum of understanding are kept operational, as required by the Security
Council in its resolution 2245 (2015).
77. As part of its civilian staffing review, UNSOS identified 31 posts critical in
meeting immediate surge requirements, estimated to cost around $2 million and to be
funded under general temporary assistance from existing resources. Subject to
approval, staff will be assigned to the general temporary assistance positions during
the first quarter of 2016. UNSOS is also implementing internal restructuring, in line
with the global field support strategy.
78. UNSOS, in coordination with United Nations Headquarters, is working with the
Government of the United Kingdom on the deployment of 70 uniformed personnel
pledged by that country. Possible areas of engagement are the establishment of
mission enabling units, engineering construction projects, military medical capability,
enhancement of the potable water supply capacity of AMISOM, military information
and analysis and the repair of combat vehicles and heavy equipment.
79. UNSOS continued to provide logistical support to AMISOM in all sectors.
However, insecure main supply routes remained a challenge to the movement of
UNSOS convoys by road. With regard to air support, UNSOS deployed 10 rotary and
4 fixed-wing air assets at the main and sector hubs, enabling significantly improved
air movement within southern and central Somalia. In addition, the implementation of
an all-inclusive standby contract has enhanced operational flexibility for UNSOS,
resulting in reduced mission costs and better utilization of available resources. The
United Nations continues to negotiate with the Government of Uganda on a letter of
assist for the deployment of five military helicopters to AMISOM.
80. UNSOS has been conducting night-time helicopter search and rescue operations
and medical and casualty evacuations, which have enhanced its capability to provide
vital emergency support. It has also been conducting a robust aviation security and
operational risk management programme in its area of operations, with the support of
AMISOM, the United Nations country team, the Federal Government and the
International Civil Aviation Organization.
81. UNSOS supported the rotation of Burundian and Ugandan troops and some of
the Djibouti troops during the reporting period, as well as the deployment of 600
additional Ethiopian troops and contingent-owned equipment to Kismaayo. The
remainder of the Djibouti troops will be rotated in January 2016.
82. UNSOS trained 507 AMISOM personnel in the areas of conduct and discipline,
gender, HIV/AIDS, child protection, medical services, water treatment, radio
communications, diesel kitchen operations, logistics and fuel operations.

14/20

16-00036

S/2016/27

83. UNSOS encountered difficulties in the delivery of support arising from the non implementation by the host country of some of the provisions of the status-of-mission
agreement. Violations included the failure to grant gratis visas and work permits,
occasional demands to United Nations contractors for payment and the detention of
contractor personnel pending such payment.
84. The Mine Action Service continued to train, equip and mentor 13 AMISOM
teams in improvised explosive device mitigation measures and explosive ordnance
disposal. To address the threat from improvised explosive devices and support
AMISOM mobility, the Service continued to provide data, analysis and advice
through staff at AMISOM Force Headquarters, sector headquarters and the AMISOM
integrated support office. AMISOM also utilized the Service’s community -based
explosive hazard survey and clearance teams along main supply routes to obtain a
clearer vision of the security landscape. AMISOM used information provided by the
Service on community priorities and the condition of towns and villages in newly
recovered areas.
85. Planning for the establishment and operationalization of mission enabling units
has begun, and an African Union and United Nations steering group will commence
work in the coming weeks to establish governance structures, including standard
operating procedures and command and control.
86. UNSOS has pre-positioned supplies to support more than 1,500 Somali national
army troops in Sector 2 (Juba Hoose and part of Juba Dhexe).
87. Since my previous report, the Trust Fund in support of the Somali national army
received a total contribution of $16.3 million from the United States of America and
Denmark. UNSOS spends around $1 million each month to support the Somali
national army, mainly on rations, delivery costs and aeromedical/casualty evacuations.
The current balance of the Trust Fund in support of AMISOM is $1.7 million.
88. Pursuant to paragraph 15 of Security Council resolution 2245 (2015), UNSOM
and UNSOS are in discussion with United Nations entities that may have capacity to
deliver the non-lethal support package to the Somali police force and the Puntland
forces earmarked for integration into the Somali national army.
89. UNSOS continued to support UNSOM activities, including the National
Consultative Forum and High-level Partnership Forum meetings. UNSOS also
provided support for the expansion of UNSOM in Mogadishu and the regions by
completing accommodation and office facilities that met minimum operating security
standards in Beledweyne and Baidoa.
Human rights due diligence policy
90. My Special Representative provided a formal update to AMISOM on the
outcome of the UNSOM investigations into the alleged human rights violations by
AMISOM during the previous reporting period and requested AMISOM to provide a
written update on investigations or further actions it has taken in that regar d.
91. Joint efforts by UNSOM, UNSOS and AMISOM are being put in place to
strengthen accountability and investigative measures to address violations by
AMISOM within the human rights due diligence policy framework. The human rights
due diligence task force conducted a general and preliminary risk assessment and a
human rights due diligence assessment of air assets. My Special Representative

16-00036

15/20

S/2016/27

communicated key elements of the risk assessment to AMISOM, including
recommendations to AMISOM on mitigating measures to establish an effective
complaint handling mechanism, ensure victim and witness protection and regularly
communicate with the United Nations on how allegations are addressed, and the need
for commanders to ensure that all troops were trained in human rights and
international humanitarian law.

VII. United Nations presence in Somalia
A.

Expansion of the United Nations presence
92. During the reporting period, the number of international staff averaged 432
across Somalia, while the number of national staff averaged 1,037. The international
staff average for Mogadishu was 294, factoring in a reduction in the number owing to
significant damage to the United Nations common compound as a result of the attack
on 26 July on the nearby Jazeera Palace Hotel. Displaced staff of the United Nations
funds and programmes and the specialized agencies were accommodated at the main
UNSOS/UNSOM compound at Mogadishu International Airport, with some thirdparty contractor staff moved to commercial compounds.
93. Regional expansion of UNSOM is ongoing, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2232 (2015). A total of 18 international and 16 nationa l staff are currently
deployed in regional offices in Baidoa (4 international, 4 national), Kismaayo
(3 international, 3 national), Beledweyne (3 international) and Garoowe (8 international,
9 national), supporting regional authorities in the areas of good offices, security sector
reform, human rights, civil-military coordination and stabilization.

B.

Integration
94. UNSOM and the United Nations country team continued to cooperate to
implement the approved joint programmes under the New Deal Compact throughout
Somalia. In addition, UNSOM and country team integrated teams continued to
provide support on elections, constitutional review, the Somalia Joint Rule of Law
Programme, human rights and protection and the Gender Adviser’s integrated office.
Currently, all project managers of the Joint Rule of Law Programme are co -located in
the UNSOM/UNSOS compound in Mogadishu. Members of the country team are also
accommodated intermittently in UNSOM/UNSOS premises in all regional offices.

C.

Staff safety and security
95. Additional security measures have been implemented along Airport Road in
Mogadishu, including the designation of gates for traffic and restrictions on certain
types of vehicles.
96. In Beledweyne, the final field safety and security survey was completed and a
staff ceiling of 13 international staff was consequently approved.
97. Garoowe airport was closed for runway repairs on 9 December. An airstrip at
Conoco, 39 km away, was identified as an alternative by the Puntland Government
and assessed for suitability by the UNSOS aviation unit, the United Nations

16/20

16-00036

S/2016/27

Humanitarian Air Service and the Department of Safety and Security. At the time of
reporting, the Conoco airstrip was being used by the United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service, with preparations under way for the construction of critical enabling
infrastructure for the resumption of UNSOS air operations.

VIII. Observations
98. I commend the historic consultations that have taken place in Mogadishu and
across Somalia, including for the Somali diaspora, within the framework of the
National Consultative Forum, to determine the 2016 electoral process. This major
exercise in participatory politics is a manifestation of the commitment of the Somali
people to democracy and a demonstration of how Somalia is returning to peace and
security. For the first time in decades, Somalis — including youth, women, traditional
elders and religious leaders — have actively had a collective say on shaping their
political future.
99. I also warmly welcome the adoption of the Mogadishu Declaration on
16 December. Somalis have reiterated their commitment that there will be no
extension of the constitutionally mandated term limits of the legislature and the
executive. Through the Declaration, they have agreed that more Somalis than at any
time since the civil war, including a significant number of women and youth, will take
part in choosing the people’s representatives and the Government. They have pledged
to ensure that Somalia’s electoral colleges and the new Parliament will be more
inclusive and representative, and that Somalis will have a road map for elections
through universal suffrage to be held by 2020.
100. Many steps remain to be taken before the electoral transition in 2016. Above all,
it is critical that all Somali leaders respect and support the principles and actions in
the Mogadishu Declaration and work swiftly to implement them.
101. I call upon the relevant stakeholders to expedite the process of state formation in
Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe. I welcome the leadership role of the Federal Government
in this regard, and call upon it to ensure a transparent and inclusive process with the
participation of all relevant communities that addresses long -standing grievances and
tensions that need to be resolved. I also urge progress on the clarification of the status
of Mogadishu.
102. I applaud the collective effort of the federal and regional leaders to end the
fighting, which started in Gaalkacyo on 22 Nove mber and resulted in the needless
killing, wounding and displacement of a large number of civilians. The incident
underlined the urgent need to make progress on intercommunal reconciliation and to
address outstanding disputes within and among existing and emerging federal states.
103. I am disappointed that the review of the Provisional Constitution did not
advance sufficiently during the reporting period. The proposal presented by the
Speaker of the Federal Parliament on 15 September for the constitutiona l review
provides useful guidance on what could be accomplished in the time available. I urge
the relevant institutions to expedite their efforts. It is also critical for the review
process to hear from a cross section of Somali society so that the future Constitution
is broadly owned across the country. In particular, targeted efforts are needed in order
to include voices from youth, women and marginalized groups.

16-00036

17/20

S/2016/27

104. Continued attacks by Al-Shabaab remind us of the ever-present threat posed by
violent extremists. But such attacks cannot disguise the fact that the group is steadily
losing support. Al-Shabaab is also facing serious internal division, with some
members wishing to align the group with ISIL. The evolution of Al -Shabaab into an
arm of ISIL would present serious challenges to peacebuilding and state-building in
Somalia. I reiterate the need to maintain the pressure on Al-Shabaab under a
comprehensive approach. The threat of violent extremism must be countered by creating
space for inclusive politics, stabilizing recovered areas and pursuing economic recovery,
reducing youth unemployment and enhancing education, countering extremist rhetoric
and ideological appeal and encouraging further defections from Al-Shabaab by
providing a future for disengaged combatants.
105. I pay tribute to AMISOM and the Somali national army for the progress they
continue to make in difficult conditions, and I urge them to sustain their operations. I
call upon the Federal Government and the interim regional administration s to expedite
the establishment of district and local administrations in newly recovered areas and to
ensure the delivery of basic services to the population to consolidate hard -won gains.
106. I take note of the European Union’s decision to reduce its contribution to
AMISOM, and I urge Member States and international partners to ensure the
sustenance of their investment in Somalia and explore opportunities to cover the
funding gap.
107. I welcome the establishment of UNSOS as the successor to UNSOA. UNSOA
played an important role as a responsive and efficient strategic enabler in Somalia.
The United Nations sees its partnership with the African Union as a successful
collaboration. I look forward to strengthening this joint effort. UNSOS has a key role
to play in the next phase of the relationship.
108. I am seriously concerned about the spike in reported executions in the Interim
Juba Administration, civilian casualties linked to AMISOM and Somali security
forces and the killing of a United Nations third-party contractor in Hiraan and a
UNHCR national staff member in Mogadishu. I strongly urge the full investigation of
those incidents and the prosecution of the perpetrators. I commend the Federal
Government’s engagement with the United Nations on human rights issues, including
the submission of its national report to the Human Rights Council in October for the
second cycle of the universal periodic review, and the consultative process on the
National Human Rights Commission bill in November.
109. I remain extremely concerned about the fragile humanitarian situation in Somalia.
More than 4.9 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance. The humanitarian
impact of the El Niño phenomenon is also of serious concern. I urge all parties to
facilitate timely, unhindered and safe access for humanitarian actors and to find durable
solutions for the 1.1 million Somalis who are internally displaced. I reiterate my appeal
to donors to increase support to the humanitarian appeal for Somalia.
110. I stress the importance of the Federal Government finalizing its national security
policy and deciding on a national security architecture without further delay, and
making concrete progress on the integration of regional forces into the Somali
national army. I urge all partners to commit themselves to mobilizing the resources
necessary to support the Somali national army and the Somali police force, and to
support the National Integration Commission in its work. I remain concerned by the
serious implications of the non-payment of salaries to security personnel, but I am

18/20

16-00036

S/2016/27

encouraged by the commitments made by the Federal Government and the
international community to address the situation. UNSOM, in collaboration with
Somali and international partners, will continue to develop options for support to
3,000 Puntland forces and the Somali police force.
111. I am encouraged by the progress made in channelling funding through the
United Nations Multi-Partner Trust Fund and the initial implementation of joint
programmes, including on the rule of law, under the New Deal structure. I stress the
importance of the international community increasing contributions to these initiatives
as essential to providing basic services to the Somali people.
112. I pay tribute to my outgoing Special Representative, Nicholas Kay, and I thank
him for his dedicated service over the past two and a half years and his capable,
courageous and committed leadership. He has overseen a true transformation of the
United Nations effort in Somalia, and I am grateful for his wise counsel and political
support to the country during a crucial period in its history. I warmly welcome the
new Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of AMISOM, Francisco Caetano José Madeira.
113. I also commend my Deputy Special Representatives and the staff members of
UNSOM, UNSOS, the United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized
agencies, and other international and regional organizations in Somalia for their
continued hard work in challenging conditions. I also thank the African Union,
AMISOM, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the European Union and
other development partners for their sustained support. Our partnership must endure
and continue to deepen in the quest for lasting peace and stability in Somalia.

16-00036

19/20

S/2016/27

20/20

16-00036
