UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/30*
19 June 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3545th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 June 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 9 June 1995 (S/1995/467) submitted pursuant to its resolution
994 (1995) of 17 May 1995. It is concerned at the situation described
therein, and at the continuing failure of the parties to cooperate
satisfactorily with UNCRO and to comply fully with the demands of the
Council. It condemns in particular the continuation of offensive actions
and the intimidation of UNCRO personnel in violation of its resolution
994 (1995).
The Security Council looks to the parties to cooperate fully and
unconditionally with UNCRO in the performance of its mandate and to ensure
the safety, security and freedom of movement of its personnel. The Council
demands that they fulfil their commitment under the cease-fire agreement of
29 March 1994, in particular in respect of the withdrawal of all forces and
heavy weapons from the zones of separation, and fully implement the
2 December 1994 agreement on economic confidence-building measures. It
calls upon the parties, and in particular the Government of Croatia, to
cease all military action in and around Sector South. It also calls upon
all parties to respect fully the international border between the Republic
of Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to stop any
action which extends the conflict across this border, since this is in
violation of the Council’s resolutions. It reiterates its warning that in
the event of failure to comply with the demand in its resolution 994 (1995)
that the parties refrain from taking any further military measures or
actions that could lead to the escalation of the situation, it will
consider further steps needed to ensure such compliance.

*

Reissued for technical reasons.

95-18310 (E)

190695

/...

S/PRST/1995/30
English
Page 2

The Security Council requests the Committee established under
resolution 724 (1991) of 15 December 1991 to continue to investigate, in
accordance with its mandate, reports of violations of resolution 713 (1991)
of 25 September 1991.
The Security Council welcomes the agreement of the Government of
Croatia to a continued UNCRO presence in the area of Western Slavonia known
as Sector West for the purposes of implementing its mandate, in particular
in respect of human rights, to which it continues to attach great
importance. It endorses the Secretary-General’s view as to the necessity
for reconciliation and confidence-building in that Sector. It stresses the
importance it attaches to full respect for the human rights of the Serb
population there. It encourages the Secretary-General to continue his
coordination with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights as
well as other international organizations and agencies in this regard.
The Security Council notes the Secretary-General’s judgement that
completion of the redeployment of United Nations peace-keeping personnel in
the Republic of Croatia by 30 June 1995 envisaged in its resolution
982 (1995) of 31 March 1995 is no longer possible. It requests the
Secretary-General to proceed as expeditiously as possible with this
redeployment with the aim of fulfilling all UNCRO’s tasks under its
mandate. It demands that the parties cooperate with UNCRO’s efforts to
implement fully its mandate.
The Security Council notes the fact that both parties have stated
their desire that the peace-keeping mission should continue, and are
seeking UNCRO’s assistance. It welcomes the Secretary-General’s intention
to monitor closely their cooperation with UNCRO and their compliance with
the cease-fire agreement of 29 March 1994, and requests him to keep the
Council fully informed. Such cooperation and compliance are essential for
the implementation of UNCRO’s mandate and for progress towards a negotiated
settlement respecting fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Croatia and which guarantees the security and rights of all
communities.
The Security Council could not countenance moves by the local Serb
authorities in the Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to establish a union between them, since this would be
inconsistent with the Council’s commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The Security Council stresses that there can be no military solution
to the conflict and calls upon the parties to reaffirm their commitment to
a peaceful resolution of their differences.

/...

S/PRST/1995/30
English
Page 3

The Security Council notes with distress the loss of life and
casualties which have been suffered by UNCRO and extends its condolences to
the families of the bereaved.
The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

-----
