S/PV.7969

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7969th meeting

Wednesday, 14 June 2017, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Carrión

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Special report of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations on the strategic review of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2017/437)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-16910 (E)
*1716910*

S/PV.7969

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Special report of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations
on the strategic review of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2017/437)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/437, which contains the special report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the
strategic review of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the situation in Darfur. On this tenth anniversary of the
Council’s decision to deploy the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), I
would like to draw the attention of Council members
to the joint recommendations of the Secretary-General
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
on the reconfiguration of the Mission, as submitted
in their joint special report on the strategic review of
UNAMID (S/2017/437).
A decade has elapsed since the Secretary-General,
in his letter dated 5 June 2007 (S/2007/307), proposed the
mandate and the structure of UNAMID to the Security
Council. Since then, significant developments in the
Sudan and the wider region have taken place, and these
2/7

14/06/2017

require that UNAMID adjust to new realities. With this
in mind, the Secretary-General recommended, in his
letter of 28 October 2016 to the President of the Security
Council (S/2016/915), that a joint African Union-United
Nations strategic review of UNAMID be undertaken,
in close consultation with the Government of the
Sudan, in order to provide detailed recommendations to
the Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council on the Mission’s priorities and configuration.
The review took place from 5 to 17 March 2017, and the
joint African Union-United Nations recommendations
were consulted with the Government of Sudan and
interested parties. I would like to briefly introduce the
main elements of the proposed reconfiguration.
The report notes that, over the past three years,
the armed conflict that gave rise to the deployment
of UNAMID has markedly changed, following a
successful military campaign by the Government,
which reduced the rebellion to a small presence of the
Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid in Western Jebel
Marra. The number of intercommunal and security
incidents has also decreased as a result of the efforts
of the Government and community leaders, with the
support of UNAMID. In parallel, with the conclusion
of the national dialogue and the inclusion of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur into the Constitution,
progress has been made on the political front.
Yet, as illustrated by an internally displaced
person population of 2.7 million, a number of crucial
grievances at the origin of the conflict and key issues
related to its aftermath are still to be addressed.
While security in the State capitals has improved,
challenges in other parts of Darfur remain. This is due
mainly to the activities of militia groups, unresolved
intercommunal disputes over land and other resources,
the prevalence of weapons and crime, coupled with the
inadequate capacity and effectiveness of the rule of
law institutions.
At present, UNAMID deals with two sets of
issues that are both related to the root causes of the
conflict: first, the continued instability in the greater
Jebel Marra area and the displacement in the vicinity;
and secondly, intercommunal violence. In view of the
that, the joint report proposes a two-pronged approach
combining peacebuilding and peacekeeping tasks.
Most parts of Darfur require a more peacebuildingoriented approach, while in the Jebel Marra area and its
vicinity the Mission’s efforts would focus on traditional
peacekeeping tasks and on addressing the emergency
17-16910

14/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

attention arising from the insecurity in the area that
prevents internally displaced persons from returning.
This concept — which includes the closure of
11 team sites, the opening of one temporary operating
base in Golo, in the Jebel Marra area, and the withdrawal
of the military from another seven team sites out of a
current total 36 — would enable the Mission to bring
the troop ceiling down to eight battalions, from the
current number of 16 battalions, or to 8,735 troops,
while the police ceiling will be brought down to 2,360,
from a current total of 3,403. This would represent a
reduction of 44 per cent and 30 per cent, respectively,
of the military and police authorized ceilings.
(spoke in French)
The Mission’s priorities still address the main issues
at stake and make it possible to contextualize the tasks
UNAMID should undertake and where it has the most
value added. I would indicate, however, that the report
recommends that its priorities be adjusted slightly. In
terms of the political process, a stronger focus should
be put on the effective implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, which, as I pointed out
earlier, is now incorporated in the Constitution and
contains useful provisions to address the underlying
causes of conflict and to create peace dividends for
the population in Darfur. Activities connected with the
protection of civilians in the greater Jebel Marra area,
in collaboration with the humanitarian country team,
will revolve around physical protection and emergency
relief, whereas in the rest of the Darfur states civilianprotection activities will focus on livelihood issues and
issues related to the police and the capacity to promote
the rule of law capacities.
With regard to intercommunal conflicts, the work
of the Mission should prioritize those intercommunal
conflicts, which have the potential to cause the highest
number of casualties, and derail national political
processes, while a stronger partnership with the
country team is also required to address issues related
to seasonal migration and the extension of rule-of-law
institutions throughout the territory.
I would like to highlight that the developments I
mentioned earlier continue, of course, to be true since
the conclusion of the strategic review. The level of
armed hostilities is significantly lower than in previous
years. The armed movements attempted to reassert their
military presence in North and East Darfur in late May
and early June, but remain unable to conduct sustained

S/PV.7969

military operations in the face of the military of the
Sudanese Government. In response to intercommunal
conflict during the migration season, Government
authorities at both the local and federal levels, as
well as community leaders, supported by UNAMID,
undertook preventive measures and endeavoured to
reduce the impact of the difficulties encountered,
thereby contributing to reduced violence as compared
to recent years.
Finally, I would like to say that the reconfiguration
of UNAMID is an important milestone towards
the completion of its mandate. The successful
implementation of that reconfiguration, however,
requires the full support and cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan and its institutions, including
to ensure that there is no administrative or security
vacuum in the areas that will be vacated by UNAMID.
It is also important to continue to work closely with
the country team on issues related to land, the search
for durable solutions for internally displaced persons,
transitional justice and reconciliation.
I will conclude by pointing that out that it is more
necessary than ever that we continue our joint efforts to
allow for the achievement of peace and security that the
people of Darfur desire so greatly.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Wane
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members that
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, let me thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Wane, for his briefing
on the special report (S/2017/437) of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations on the strategic review
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) .
Uruguay notes the report’s indication that hostilities
between the Government of the Sudan and rebel forces
have decreased considerably in recent months, and that
the regional climate has improved as a result of greater
cooperation with the Central African Republic, Chad
and Uganda. It should be noted, however, that one of the
main sources of violence persisting in Darfur remains
conflicts between communities, which are closely
related to the root causes of the conflict and exacerbated
by armed militias, as well as by the fact that weapons

17-169103/7

S/PV.7969

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

are widespread among the civilian population and that
the institutions of the rule of law do not yet have the
necessary capacity or effectiveness to overcome such
obstacles.
Yesterday, the Security Council convened to
discuss mine action and the mitigation of the threat
of explosive devices (see S/PV.7966). Today, We
are addressing conflict in which former battlefields
remain contaminated by remnants of war explosives,
particularly in Jebel Marra. The Government of the
Sudan and the international community must work
together to remove all artifacts of war and thereby
guarantee the inhabitants the possibility of safe transit
throughout their territory.
We are encouraged by the general improvement
of the security situation and by recent political
developments in the context of the national dialogue.
In that regard, we consider it essential that the
Government of the Sudan and the armed movements
continue to work towards signing and implementing
an agreement on a cessation of hostilities and the
full implementation of the remaining provisions of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. Progress in
those areas would undoubtedly create the conditions
necessary to effectively addressing the root causes of
conflict and contribute to the safe return of more than
2.5 million internally displaced persons from Darfur to
their homes.
With respect to UNAMID, Uruguay takes note of the
strategic review conducted by a joint team of the African
Union and the United Nations, which includes proposals
for adjustments to the Mission, taking into account the
evolution of the situation on the ground and adjusting
the Mission’s mandate to the remaining challenges. In
this regard, we support the recommendations relating
to the Mission’s priority tasks, namely, the protection
of civilians and the facilitation of humanitarian access,
support for the political process, in cooperation with
the African Union, and support for addressing the root
causes of conflict.
In conclusion, let me express Uruguay’s gratitude
to all UNAMID personnel, the United Nations country
team and the humanitarian workers who continue to
work tirelessly, often in difficult conditions, to achieve
sustainable peace in Darfur.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
4/7

14/06/2017

Bolivia thanks the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, for
his briefing on the special report (S/2017/437) of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the
strategic review of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) .
Bolivia welcomes the recommendations contained
in the strategic review. We believe that the proposed
adjustments to UNAMID duly reflect the gradual
evolution of the situation on the ground over the past
year. Moreover, the new focus will allow us to adapt
UNAMID to the current needs of the population
of Darfur. It is worth recalling that the last strategic
review was undertaken in 2013, when the situation was
quite different from what it is today. Operation Decisive
Summer, implemented in 2014, led to a sharp reduction
in the level of hostilies between the Government of the
Sudan and armed rebel forces, who at the time had a
very active presence in the Sudan. With the exception
of the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid, their
capacities have been significantly reduced over the past
few months. We have seen no significant clashes take
place since September 2016.
Such improvements in the security situation will
allow us to refocus the mandate of the Mission not
only on peacekeeping but also on peacebuilding tasks,
as suggested in the report. Focusing on peacebuilding
will allow UNAMID to help strengthen the State’s
institutions, train and develop the police, strengthen the
rule of law and advance the political process through
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, and in particular through support for the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, which is
responsible for the implementation of recommendations
on the Sudan. It will also allow UNAMID to address
the root causes of the conflict, which is a priority in
efforts to achieve stable and lasting peace in the region,
which for years has suffered the grave consequences
of the conflict in Darfur, in which civilians have been
affected most.
On that point, as outlined in the strategic review,
the protection of civilians will revolve around the
action plan of the Jebel Marra task force. Bolivia
naturally believes that it is important to protect the most
vulnerable in armed conflicts. To that end, we look
forward to close coordination with the Government
on that initiative. The composition and mandate of the
17-16910

14/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Jebel Marra task force must take its suggestions and
concerns into account.
However, while we appreciate the aforementioned
improvements, the humanitarian situation of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees remains a source
of concern. According to the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, there are approximately 2.6 million
internally displaced persons, who are exposed to
various forms of violence. Women and children are the
most affected.
In implementing the suggestions arising from the
strategic review, the Government has an opportunity to
demonstrate that it is capable of protecting all civilians
across the entire country. We hope that progress will be
made in the plan for the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons and in the initiative for a volunteer
cessation of hostilities. We trust that the Government,
in line with the progress it has made, will lend the
support necessary to UNAMID to fully comply with
its mandate, granting it the necessary access to do so,
and guarantee support for humanitarian workers so that
they can meet their responsibilities.
To conlude, it is important to highlight the fact that
if the United Nations country team is to fulfil the duties
conferred upon it, the support of the international
community is crucial.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report submitted to the Council (S/2017/437). I would
also like to thank my friend the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Wane, for
his briefing. He knows that we have long worked since
2004 in Aboja to consolidate peace and security in
Darfur.
Allow me to extend my sympathies to the people
and the Government of Nigeria in the light of the
killing of a Nigerian peacekeeper in Darfur. I offer my
condolences to his family.
Many reports of the Secretary-General on
Darfur — notably his most recent report of 18 May on the
strategic review of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), in addition
to reports issued by other United Nations entities

S/PV.7969

concerning the situation in Darfur, have affirmed
and noted the significant progress made in Darfur in
all areas, especially the security and humanitarian
situation following the efforts of the Government of
the Sudan to secure the five states of Darfur. This
has positively affected security and stability. We have
long pursued such positive, encouraging and natural
progress.
On 20 May, the Sudanese Liberation Army/Minni
Minawi from Libya and the Justice and Equality
Movement tried to infiltrate our borders from South
Sudan in a failed attempt to drag us back into war.
Therefore, the cooperation of neighbouring countries,
given the successful joint experience of the Sudan,
Chad and the Central African Republic in protecting
our shared borders and preventing armed groups from
infiltrating, is the only way to end the unrest that has
become part of our painful past. I note that the report
of the Panel of Experts appointed by the Council, which
was reviewed by the Council in February, as well as
the report presented today, reach the same conclusion
that the Justice and Equality Movement and Sudanese
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi have been conducting
mercenary activities, including banditry and human
trafficking, to finance their activities.
On the other hand, all recent reports note the
efforts and role of the Government to counter crime
and banditry in Darfur. We have made significant
progress in that regard. Further efforts are still being
made to promote security and judicial oversight with a
view to limiting the phenomenon and establishing State
authority. The Government of the Sudan has deployed
additional police personnel, with 29,314 officers now
deployed across the municipalities of the states of
Darfur. The Ministry of Justice has also implemented
a plan to appoint district attorneys in each of Darfur’s
municipalities as a way of promoting the rule of law and
justice in urban and rural areas of the state, in addition
to achieving the principle of zero impunity and an
increase in the number of offices providing specialized
and general legal assistance.
Council members are aware that the main reason
for insecurity, criminality and tribal violance in Darfur
is the proliferation of weapons among civilians. The
Government has announced a plan to collect weapons
and limit their use to uniformed troops. Initiatives
to drive weapons-collection and non-proliferation
efforts obviously require large financial resources and
qualified and adequate personnel. We therefore expect

17-169105/7

S/PV.7969

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the donor States and the United Nations specialized
agencies to provide financial and technical assistance
to the Sudan so that sustained peace and security may
be achieved..
My delegation welcomes the recommendations
made by the recent meeting of the joint working group,
which were adopted by the Tripartite Coordination
Mechanism at the leadership-level meeting on 22 May,
which stipulate that UNAMID should withdraw from
14 regions in the state of Darfur. We welcome the
recommendations of the report of the strategic review
working group included in the joint report by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General, which stipulate that UNAMID’s
military component should be drawn down by 44 per
cent, although we had hoped that the recommendations
would stipulate withdrawal from all areas on which
the joint working group has reached a concensus. In
that regard, we hope that the Council will adopt these
recommendations unanimously so that the competent
authorities can start the gradual drawdown and transfer
the tasks that were conducted by UNAMID to the
United Nations the country team in the Sudan.
My delegation wishes to underscore that the
Government of the Sudan is fully ready to continue
cooperating and positively engaging with UNAMID,
the African Union, the United Nations and all other
regional and international partners in order for the
Mission to be able to fully discharge its duties,
complete its departure in a smooth, phased and gradual
manner that could be a model for the drawdown of other
peacekeeping missions, and save financial resources
for preventive diplomacy and sustaining peace and
achieving comprehensive development.
We look forward to starting a new, serious phase,
which makes it incumbent upon us politically and
logistically to reconsider the sanctions that were
imposed on the Sudan 12 years ago, in 2005, pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), in clear recognition of the
situation on the ground in the country today. This is
an inevitable step. We are open to the ideas that the
Security Council and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations could put forward on this matter.
The humanitarian situation in Darfur remains of
interest to the Government of the Sudan, despite the
fact that increasing numbers of internally displaced
persons are voluntarily returning to their villages. Some
internally displaced persons camps are now no longer
6/7

14/06/2017

needed, thanks to the current excellent situation of peace
and security, given that efforts made by peace partners
in Darfur to build villages for voluntary return, where
all basic services for citizens are available. Moreover,
security has been restored in the home villages of the
internally displaced persons.
All this makes it all the more necessary to pursue
domestic and international efforts to encourage voluntary
return. On top of that, the Government of the Sudan has
put forward a plan to address the situation, comprising
three options. The first option consists of internally
displaced persons simply returning voluntarily to
their villages. The second involves integrating camps
for internally displaced persons into nearby cities and
doing the requisite planning to provide them with basic
services. Under the third option, internally displaced
persons will be able to choose an area to relocate that is
not their place of origin. Each of these options requires
financial resources. The assistance of the international
community is therefore needed. We commend the
support that has been provided by the State of Qatar,
which sponsored the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur and has financed many development projects
that have enabled us to achieve security and stability.
Other friendly countries, such as China, Japan and
Turkey, inter alia, have also offered their support within
the framework of the Doha Document.
As noted in the report, the most important priority
for the United Nations is the return of internally
displaced persons and access to the affected enclaves
by the remainder of Abdel Wahid’s troops in some
areas of Western Marah Mountain, since we have
managed to preserve the vision of the Government of
the Sudan arising from provisions contained in the
Doha Document. However, accuracy is essential when
counting the number of internally displaced persons in
Darfur. We have counted some 1.8 million internally
displaced persons, while the figure set by UNAMID
stands at 2.7 million.
With regard to access, we reiterate the assertation
made in the October joint report of the Government
of the Sudan and the United Nations agencies that
there is no problem in access. This jibes with the
assertion in the report before us that there has been
significant improvement in access to the populations
of the affected areas. We recall the statement made
by the Commissioner for Humanitarian Affairs of the
Government of the Sudan’s to the effect that access to
92 per cent of the regions of Darfur is accessible through
17-16910

14/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

simple notification, which means that there is no need
for Government authorization. We maintain our call
for information on internally displaced persons to be
issued by a single body comprised of the Government
of the Sudan, the Office of the Special Representative
of the United Nations and the African Union.
We thank UNAMID for its efforts in all areas and
peacekeepers for their sacrifices of recent years. We
also thank the troop- and police-contributing countries

S/PV.7969

and reiterate our readiness to cooperate with all regional
and international partners in all matters related to
UNAMID until its last contingent leaves the country
and full and sustainable peace has been achieved.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

17-169107/7
