V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

existing gaps in scientific knowledge and technology,
and for further development of the world map of desertification on the basis of the relevant recommendations
of the Conference;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to invite
intergovernmental and non_-governmental organiz_ati?ns
concerned with desertification problems and theu impact on development to participate in the implemell:tation of the Plan of Action with a view to co-ordinatmg
their activities within world-wide and regional programmes;
16. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session
on the implementation of the resolutions adopted by the
Conference, 113 especially resolution 2 of 9 September
1977 on financial and technical assistance to the least
developed countries and resolution 4 of 9 September
1977 on the effect of weapons of mass destruction on
ecosystems.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/173.

Resources of the United Nations Habitat
and Human Settlements Foundation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3327 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation,
Believing that the current level of resources available
to the Foundation is clearly inadequate,
Recognizing that the international community, at
both the global and regional levels, should encourage
and support Governments determined to take effective
action to ameliorate conditions, especially for the least
advantaged, in urban and rural settlements,
Bearing in mind the invitation of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, in its decision 92 (V) of 25 May 1977, 114
to the General Assembly regarding the setting of a
target for total voluntary contributions by Governments
to the Foundation,
1. Appeals to all Governments to contribute generously to the United Nations Habitat and Human
Settlements Foundation as soon as possible in order to
expedite action programmes in the field of human settlements;
2. Notes the proposal of the Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme regarding
the target of $50 million as a minimum for the total
voluntary contributions by Governments for the years
1978-1981 ;115
3. Requests the Secretary-Genera\ to convene, during the thirty-third session of the General Assembly,
a pledging conference on voluntary contributions by
Governments to the Foundation if pledges to meet the
minimum target referred to in paragraph 2 above are
not forthcoming.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
11a Ibid.,

chap. II.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Tkirtysecond Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/32/25), annex I.
1111 See UNEP/GC/93.
114 See

32/174.

107

Resolution adopted by th~ General
Assembly at its 107th plenary meeting

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-Vl) of l May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3 362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation, as well as its resolution 2626
(XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade,
Recalling the resolutions adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its
fourth session,11 6
Recalling the results of various United Nations conferences held during recent years on major topics relating to economic and social development, which pertain
to the establishment of the new international economic
order,
Recalling further its resolution 31 / 178 of 21 December 1976,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 2125 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977,
Noting the report of the Conference on International
Economic Co-operation, 117
Noting the report of the Committee on Review and
Appraisal on its fourth session 118 and the preliminary
proposal of the developing countries contained in the
annex to that report,
Recalling the role of the Economic and Social Council and of other organs, organizations, bodies and conferences of the United Nations system in the establishment of the new international economic order,
Emphasizing the need to oversee and monitor the
implementation of the decisions and agreements reached
in the negotiations in various appropriate forums of
the United Nations system in their respective fields,
and to determine further lines of action and provide
impetus for further negotiations for the solution of
issues remaining unresolved,
Deeply concerned at the deteriorating economic situation of developing countries and at negative trends
in international economic developments,
Deeply concerned also that parts of the developing
world are still subjected to colonialism, neo-colonialism,
racial discrimination, apartheid, foreign aggression and
occupation and alien domination, which constitute
major obstacles to the economic emancipation and
development of the developing countries and peoples,
Recognizing the concern that the negotiations conducted so far on the establishment of the new international economic order have produced only limited
results while the gap between the developed and <level116 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
111 See A/31/478 and Corr.I, annex, and A/31/478/Add.1
and Add.! /Corr. I.
118 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5994 ).

108

General Assemhly-Thirty-seeonrl Se~sion

oping countries is growing, and emphasizing that further
resolute efforts have to be made, particularly by the
developed countries, to reduce the existing imbalance,
1. Affirms that all negotiations of a global nature
relating to the establishment of the new international
economic order should take place within the framework of the United Nations system;
2. Decides to convene a special session of the
General Assembly in 1980, at a high level, in order
to assess the progress made in the various forums of
the United Nations system in the establishment of the
new international economic order and, on the basis of
that assessment, to take ,appropriate action for the
promotion of the development of developing countries
and international economic co-operation, including the
adoption of the new international development strategy
for the 1980s;
3. Decides to establish a committee of the whole, 119
which shall meet, as and when required, during the
intersessional periods until the special session of the
General Assembly in 1980;
4. Decides further that the Committee120 shall assist
the General Assembly by acting as the focal point in:
(a) Overseeing and monitoring the implementation
of decisions and agreements reached in the negotiations
on the establishment of the new international economic
order in the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
system;
(b) Providing impetus for resolving difficulties in
negotiations and for encouraging the continuing work
in these bodies;
(c) Serving, where appropriate, as a forum for
facilitating and expediting agreement on the resolution
of outstanding issues;
( d) Exploring and exchanging views on global economic problems and priorities;
5. Requests the Committee to submit reports on
its work and recommendations to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third and thirty-fourth sessions and at the
special session to be held in 1980;
6. Recommends that representation on the Committee should be at a high level;
7. Decides that the Committee may establish appropriate working arrangements to accomplish its task;
8. Also decides that the election of officers of the
Committee should take place annually;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the Committee receives the necessary documentation
to enable it to accomplish its tasks, as specified in
paragraph 4 above, and authorizes the Committee to
request the Secretary-General to provide specific reports
in this regard in co-operation with the appropriate
organs, organizations, other bodies and conferences of
the United Nations system;
10. Requests in this context the Economic and
Social Council, in discharging its functions under the
Charter of the United Nations, to contribute effectively
to the work of the Committee, bearing in mind the
relationship between the overseeing and monitoring
119 It is understood that the committee of the whole will
be open to all States, this ,term being interpreted in accordance
with the established practice of the General Assembly.
120 Subsequently referred to as the Committee Established
under General Assembly Resolution 32/174.

functions of the Committee and the role of the Council
in the preparation of a new international development
strategy;
11. Affirms that in the negotiations undertaken on
the various issues in the appropriate bodies of the
United Nations system the international community
should, with a sense of urgency, make new and resolute
efforts to secure positive and concrete results within
agreed and specific time-frames.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/175.

EffeC'ts of the world inflationary phenomenon on the development proC'ess

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970 containing the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on
the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 containing
the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 3515 (XXX) of 15 December 197 5 on the Conference on International Economic Co-operation,
Bearing in mind that the States participating in the
Conference on International Economic Co-operation
recognized that inflation disturbs the functioning of
the international economic and monetary order and is
damaging to the economic progress of both developed
and developing countries, 121
Having regard to the fact that the effects of the
present inflationary phenomenon have become universal
in their negative impact and that the control of inflation
is a matter requiring the priority attention of the international community as a whole,
Considering that the rapid spread of inflation indicates that isolated measures taken by States are not
sufficient to control it successfully,
Bearing in mind that the measures within the scope
of the developing countries are not in themselves
capable of controlling internationally transmitted 111flation,
Taking into account the report submitted to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development by the Group of Experts on
inflationary processes in the international economy and
their impact on developing countries, 122
l. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
establish a high-level governmental group of experts,
on a basis of equitable geographical representation:
(a) To prepare a broad and comprehensive study
of the present inflationary phenomenon whose effects
continue to exert a negative influence on the economies
of all countries, particularly the developing countries;
121 See A/31/478/Add.1 and Add.I/Corr.I, p. 138.
1 22 Official Records of the Trade and Development

Board,
Fifteenth Session (first part) Annexes, agenda item 4, document
TD/B/579.
