United Nations

General Assembly

A /ES-11/PV.10
Official Records

Eleventh Emergency Special session

10th plenary meeting

Thursday, 7 April 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)
President:
I intend to conduct the proceedings of this meeting
In the absence of the President, Mr. Gastorn
(United Republic of Tanzania), Vice-President, in accordance with the rules of procedure of the General
took the Chair.
Assembly and the past practices of emergency special
sessions.
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine
to
introduce
draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2014/136)
Draft resolutions (A/ES-11/L.4)
The Acting President: Members will recall that, in
paragraph 14 of resolution ES-11/2, of 24 March 2022,
the General Assembly decided
“to adjourn the eleventh emergency special session
of the General Assembly temporarily and to
authorize the President of the General Assembly
to resume its meetings upon request from Member
States.”
In that regard, I should like to draw the attention of
the delegations to document A/ES-11/6, which contains
the text of a joint later dated 5 April 2022 from the
Permanent Representatives of Antigua and Barbuda,
Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Georgia, Japan,
Liberia, the Republic of Moldova, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom and the United States, as well as the Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, addressed to the President of the General
Assembly, requesting the resumption of the eleventh
emergency special session of the General Assembly.

Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): One early morning of
April 1993, United Nations country representatives
had coffee, kissed their loved ones and went to the
quiet and comfortable United Nations Headquarters
to do business as usual — perhaps as many of us did
this very morning. That same morning in early April
1993, Boutros Boutros-Ghali sent a Special Rapporteur
to report on extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary
executions in Rwanda. He reported that a more robust
United Nations response was needed. Critically, it
found that the abuses could be precursors to genocide.
Unfortunately, that report was largely ignored by
an over-stretched Secretariat.
In early April 1994, in the comfort of the United
Nations Headquarters, the Security Council received
letters in which the Rwandan Patriotic Front reminded
Member States that,
“When the institution of the United Nations was
created after the Second World War, one of its
fundamental objectives was to see to it that what
happened to the Jews in Nazi Germany would never
happen again.”
In 1994, Rwanda itself was a non-permanent
member of the Security Council. That allowed the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-31171 (E)

*2231171*

A/ES-11/PV.10

genocidal regime to influence other members’ view of
the situation, just as Russia’s presence in the Security
Council today allows it to spread lies almost daily. In
April 2006, in New York harbour, by the Hudson River,
an ocean-sized state-of-the-art liner was launched.
That magnificent liner then docked on the shores of
Lake Geneva. Beautiful as it was, it was far from being
an ocean.
We named that liner “Human Rights Council”. The
adoption of resolution 60/251 was a culmination of five
months of consultations and negotiations facilitated
by President of the Assembly Jan Eliasson and
Ambassadors Arias of Panama and Kumalo of South
Africa. Let me remind the Assembly of the words of
Mr. Eliasson, President of the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session, before the adoption of the resolution.
He said:
“But we have now reached a decisive moment,
both for the promotion and protection of human
rights and for effective multilateralism and the
standing of the United Nations as a whole. As our
leaders acknowledged in September 2005, the three
pillars of the United Nations — development, peace
and security and human rights — are interlinked
and mutually reinforcing.” (A/60/PV.72, p. 2)
Now the world has come to a critical juncture. We
witness that our liner is going through treacherous fog
towards deadly icebergs. It might seem that we should
have named it the Titanic instead of the Human Rights
Council. If not, we need to take action today to save the
Human Rights Council from sinking.
The composition of the Human Rights Council is
as diverse as the world map and the General Assembly.
But, unlike the Assembly, the Human Rights Council
was established for a specific purpose — to promote
and protect human rights around the world. We are
in a unique situation now, when, on the territory of
a sovereign State, a member of the Human Rights
Council commits horrific human rights violations and
abuses that are tantamount to war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
Bucha and dozens of other Ukrainian cities and
villages, where thousands of peaceful residents have
been killed, tortured, raped, abducted and robbed by the
Russian army, serve as an example of how dramatically
far the Russian Federation has gone from its initial
declarations in the human rights domain. That is why
2/25

07/04/2022

this case is unique and today’s response is obvious and
self-explanatory. Let me read a quote:
“Our top priority is to guarantee all human
rights and freedoms in their entirety, including
political and civil rights and decent socioeconomic
and environmental living standards;
“I believe that these questions are not an internal
matter of States, but rather their obligations under
the United Nations Charter, international covenants
and conventions. We want to see this approach
become a universal norm.” (S/PV.3046, p. 46)
It is hard to believe that those were the words
of the President of the Russian Federation. It was
another President, however, and different times. It
was said by President Yeltsin in 1992 in his statement
at the Security Council. We can only regret that the
democratic aspirations of the peoples of Russia in the
early 1990s have been incrementally transformed into
the opposite by Putin’s regime. They have now become
aggression, hatred and Soviet-style thinking and
reflection, including in the area of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
Now we hear completely different statements from
the Russian Federation in the United Nations. This
week we heard from the Russian Ambassador that there
is warfare in Ukraine and that civilians are being killed
in war. It was said as a matter of fact on Monday, in cold
blood, and as an absolutely normal course of action,
also known as a “special operation”.
Shall we agree with the description of killings as
something normal? The only healthy answer should
be “no”, if we are to contribute to the maintenance of
the Organization’s health and that of its human rights
mechanism. All of us received the Russian diplomatic
note yesterday in which our collective effort to preserve
the credibility of the Human Rights Council was
considered as an approach to preserve the “domination
and total control in the world” and the “human rights
neo-colonial policy in international affairs”.
We have heard many times the same perverted
logic of the aggressor attempting to present itself as a
victim, while in fact doing exactly what it decries in
its note — killing citizens of a neighbouring country
while trying dominate it, if not colonize it. In response,
when Russia’s membership rights in the Human Rights
Council are suspended, we call on it to return to
responsible behaviour by implementing the decisions of
22-31171

07/04/2022

the Assembly and the Human Rights Council. If Russia
voluntarily expels itself from the Council, that is by its
own choice and there is no need to blame others.
Suspension of the rights of membership of the
Russian Federation in the Human Rights Council is not
an option but a prescribed duty. Let me quote how that
duty is formulated in paragraph 8 of resolution 60/251:
“the General Assembly … may suspend the rights
of membership in the Council of a member of
the Council that commits gross and systematic
violations of human rights”.
We view voting to suspend a State’s rights in the
Human Rights Council as a rare and extraordinary
action. However, Russia’s actions are beyond the pale.
Russia is not only committing human rights violations,
but is also shaking the underpinnings of international
peace and security. The draft resolution on the matter
(A/ES-11/L.4) is a result of the collective efforts by a
cross-regional group of two dozen States that represent
all regions. So far, it has been co-sponsored by more
than 50 Member States. I call upon all responsible
Member States to support the draft resolution.
Let me now once again refer to the commemoration
of the one of the darkest pages in recent history — the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda. On this
day of grievances, and bearing its own tragedy of
thousands of Ukrainians killed by the Russian invaders,
Ukraine stands with Rwanda and reaffirms our pledge
to never forget and to never allow the recurrence
of genocide, which was a result of the international
community’s indifference.
To those who for this or another reason opt today
to continue being a bystander, to abstain, let me quote
Elie Wiesel addressing President Clinton in 1999 when
talking about the perils of indifference.
“Indifference elicits no response. Indifference is
not a response. Indifference is not a beginning; it is
an end. Indifference therefore is always the friend
of the enemy for it benefits the aggressor — never
the victim, whose pain is magnified when he or she
feels forgotten. The political prisoner in his cell, the
hungry children, the homeless refugees — not to
respond to their plight, not to relieve their solitude
by offering them a spark of hope is to exile them
from human memory. And in denying their
humanity, we betray our own.”

A/ES-11/PV.10

The genocide in Rwanda was largely due to the
indifference of the global community, when the United
Nations did not respond to warnings in the Security
Council and the General Assembly a year before the
tragedy that we commemorate exactly on this day,
7 April. In the case of Ukraine today, not even a year
has elapsed — because the tragedy is unfolding right
now before our eyes.
In a couple of minutes, everyone will have a chance
to prove that he or she is not an indifferent bystander.
All that is needed is to press the “yes” button and to
save the Human Rights Council and many lives around
the world and in Ukraine.
On the other hand, pressing “no” means pulling a
trigger. It means a red dot on the screen — red as the
blood of the innocent lives lost. That image of the red
dots of blood on the screen will stay with all of us for as
long as our memory does not fail us. Members should
think about that.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4.
Before giving the floor for to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): This is not the right time or place for being
theatrically pathetic in the manner of the Ukrainian
representative. I will therefore speak to the point.
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4, which is before us
today, has nothing to do with the human rights situation.
I will cite our note verbale to which Ambassador
Kyslytsa referred:
“What we see today is an attempt of the United
States to preserve its position of dominance and
total control and continue its stance towards rights
colonialism in international relations. Some States
have already received a subordinate status. As for
those that pursue an independent foreign policy,
there are attempts to have them relegated to the
periphery of global affairs.”
The human rights architecture took decades of
scrupulous work to evolve, but today we see how a
small group of States made it crack. I recall that the
Secretary-General’s
Spokesperson
characterized

22-311713/25

A/ES-11/PV.10

Russia’s possible suspension from the Human Rights
Council as a dangerous precedent.
As experience shows, Western approaches to
addressing urgent human rights issues in specific
States were unsuccessful. Not a single conflict
was resolved, but was instead exacerbated. That is
largely due to Western States actively using their
favoured toolkit, consisting of coercion, sanctions and
military intervention.
Throughout its membership of the Human Rights
Commission and, formerly, the Human Rights Council,
Russia has consistently upheld the principle of equal and
mutually respectful cooperation among States as the
basic foundation for the functioning of the human rights
architecture. Our priority has always been to strengthen
constructive dialogue and to engage all stakeholders in
the collective drafting and adoption of decisions on the
promotion and protection of human rights.
We reject spurious insinuations against us based on
fabricated materials, staged footage and replicated fakes.
With that in mind, we call for a vote on the draft
resolution. We call on all those present to once again
consider their decision carefully and vote against
the attempt by Western countries and their allies to
undermine the existing human rights architecture.
Mr. Ilyassov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan is closely
following the situation in Ukraine with particular
concern, and it expresses its condolences to the families
of those who were killed and wishes a speedy recovery
to those injured during the hostilities.
We call on all the parties to speedily terminate
hostilities and to seek compromises aimed at
establishing peace. We also adhere to the position that
there is no alternative to a peaceful solution to the issue
based on the principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
The humanitarian situation in Ukraine is dire
and needs constant attention. Kazakhstan has already
provided Ukraine with humanitarian aid, sending three
aeroplanes with more than 50 tons of medicines and
essential goods.
Regarding draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4, on the
suspension of the rights of membership of the Russian
Federation in the Human Rights Council, we would like
to note the following.
4/25

07/04/2022

First of all, in our opinion, the adoption of the draft
resolution will not contribute to the settlement of the
conflict. At the moment, it is extremely important not
to undermine the negotiation process. In the current
situation, it is necessary that we all use diplomatic
efforts in all international forums, including the Human
Rights Council, in order to find ways to resolve the
problem as soon as possible.
Secondly, according to paragraph 8 of draft
resolution 60/251, on the establishment of the Human
Rights Council, membership of the Human Rights
Council can be suspended in case of gross and
systematic violation of human rights. To establish that
case, we also need a transparent, unbiased professional
investigation. In that regard, we believe that the
consideration of today’s draft resolution in the General
Assembly must be preceded by a comprehensive
investigation into human rights violations in Ukraine,
carried out within the framework of the relevant
international mechanisms. We believe that only after
receiving concrete conclusions and reliable information,
the General Assembly may consider this issue.
In the light of that, we will have to vote against the
draft resolution today.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): As a founding Member of the
United Nations, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
is committed to the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of our Organization, as well as the norms
of international law.
We believe that the promotion and protection
of human rights must be approached in a fair
and constructive manner, based on dialogue and
cooperation, in accordance with the principles of
impartiality, objectivity, transparency, non-selectivity,
non-politicization and non-confrontation. Human
rights must not be exploited to attack sovereign States,
as such an approach undermines the very essence of
the universal human rights system, which is meant
to ensure the universality, enjoyment and exercise of
those fundamental rights and freedoms for all, without
distinction or discrimination.
In this Assembly a month ago (see A/ES-11/PV.4),
we emphasized the need for the United Nations to
play a pivotal role in facilitating peaceful solutions to
conflicts through dialogue and political negotiation.
Today we regret that the path of escalating tensions
has been chosen and that divisions between the two
22-31171

07/04/2022

sides have deepened divisions among United Nations
Members. That is the wrong path.
We warn the world of the real and clear danger that
the current situation in the Eastern European region
will be prolonged over time, leading to consequences
that will take generations to overcome. We warn of
the spillover effects around the world, particularly for
the living conditions of the most vulnerable sectors in
each country, where hundreds of millions of people are
now suffering the effects of rising food, electricity and
transport costs, as well as shortages of essential goods,
caused by the disruption of international supply chains.
We also warn of the start of a new arms race, threatening
to divert resources for warfare that should be used for
development and combating poverty. The outlook is
dire, but the world faces an even greater danger. We
are alarmed by forces fomenting a clash of blocs, with
the false delusion of an ultimate one-sided victory, that
will provoke a global conflict between nuclear Powers,
destroying humankind as we know it today. It is our
duty to reduce tensions and explore all options for the
settlement of conflicts and for their peaceful resolution.
Unfortunately, draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4,
before us today, is an example of the politicization of
human rights in order to advance national agendas
and geopolitical interests. The draft resolution seeks
to expel from the human rights system the Russian
Federation, a country that is an indispensable part
of the solution to the crisis in the Eastern European
region. Without the Russian Federation, there can be
no peace agreement in Europe. Peace without Russia is
an ideological mirage, a delusion of those who believe
that the time has come to achieve the ultimate victory
of a one-sided Power. That ideology runs counter to
international peace. If this draft resolution were to be
adopted, it would affect the current negotiations taking
place between the parties and would purposely push us
into a more acute phase of the conflict, which would be
longer and more difficult to resolve.
Another immediate consequence of adopting the
draft resolution would be the historic rupture of the
best instrument created to defend human rights in the
world, namely, the Human Rights Council. Once the
existing balances are lost, its credibility, its role and
its mandate will be affected. We would be creating a
systemic crisis of confidence, which would ultimately
affect the United Nations as a universal Organization
capable of managing regional and international crises
and of working as a true instrument for peace.

A/ES-11/PV.10

For all of reasons mentioned, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela categorically rejects the attempts
to suspend the Russian Federation as an elected member
of the Human Rights Council, and calls on the relevant
members of the international community to vote against
the draft resolution.
Mr. Song Kim (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): My delegation expresses its deep concern
over the current developments in the political situation
in Ukraine. We are also very concerned that some
countries continue to push confrontation and distrust
among Member States instead of giving priority to
easing tensions and seeking a political and peaceful
solution to resolve the current crisis in Ukraine.
We reject any politically motivated initiative and
lack of objectivity, impartiality and transparency.
The initial observation of the atrocities against the
civilian population in Ukraine, including a relevant
reported image of the civilian deaths in Bucha, have
not been verified or proved based on real facts and
objective evidence.
Prior to considering draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4,
which is before us, an independent investigation must
be carried out. For that, substantive time and effort are
required. However, some Member States are acting
and moving very recklessly for their political goals by
submitting such a draft resolution. Such political and
unilateral actions do not help to solve the problem at all.
We take note of the efforts by the Russian Federation
to address the humanitarian situation in and around
Ukraine. The draft resolution is nothing but another
example of the product of political confrontation
aimed at tarnishing one Member State on the United
Nations stage.
For that reason, my delegation will vote against the
draft resolution contained in document A/ES-11/L.4
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
The Islamic Republic of Iran, on a number of occasions,
has expressed its principled position with regard to
the ongoing conflict in Ukraine, including during the
adoption of the two previous resolutions of the eleventh
emergency special session of the General Assembly
(resolutions ES-11/1 and ES-11/2).
My delegation would like to once again underline
the need for the peaceful settlement of disputes in
accordance with international law and for full respect
by all parties for the well-established provisions of

22-311715/25

A/ES-11/PV.10

the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, including international humanitarian law. We
emphasize that the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all States must be fully respected, and the safety and
security of all civilians must be guaranteed.
Iran remains deeply concerned about the continuous
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in and
around Ukraine, which has sparked significant alarm in
the international community. We call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and emphasize the importance of
compliance with international humanitarian law by all
parties. We repeat our call for unimpeded humanitarian
access to all areas of the armed conflict in Ukraine.
The humanitarian needs of the affected population
must be addressed immediately, and the delivery of
food, medicine and other essential services to those in
need must be facilitated.

07/04/2022

For those reasons, my delegation will vote against
the draft resolution contained in document A/ES-11/L.4.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Once again, this important international forum
is witnessing the exploitation of human rights issues
serving the narrow political interests of some countries
and creating a state of polarization and politicization in
order to target the Russian Federation on the pretext of
dealing with humanitarian issues in Ukraine.
My delegation stresses its commitment to ensuring
respect for human rights and the importance of
providing the necessary humanitarian assistance to
all crisis areas. Nevertheless, at the same time, we
reject any politicization of humanitarian issues and
stress the importance of adhering to the principles of
impartiality, objectivity and non-discrimination in
human rights issues.

The international community should encourage
and support continued direct negotiations between
Russia and Ukraine until peace is restored. The Islamic
Republic of Iran once again calls for the de-escalation
of tensions in the current conflict and an urgent and
lasting solution to this crisis through dialogue.

That coordinated Western move to defame the
Russian Federation has no relation to human rights
in Ukraine or anywhere else. Rather, it is an effort by
Western countries to impose their hegemony and control
over the world by besieging Russia and punishing it for
its independent foreign policy.

We consider the text of the draft resolution
before the General Assembly (A/ES-11/L.4) as
politically driven, which undermines the impartiality
of our Organization. My Government attaches great
importance to the promotion and protection of human
rights. However, we are against the exploitation of the
United Nations human rights machinery for political
ends, which contravenes the principles of universality,
non-selectivity and objectivity in addressing human
rights issues.

When the United States of America and its allies
destroyed the Syrian city of Al-Raqqa and killed
thousands of innocent people there, we did not see
such international media and political mobilization to
uncover the perpetrators of human rights violations.

We have always maintained that human rights
should not be undermined by short-sighted political
considerations. We stress that the work of the
Human Rights Council should be performed in a
non-confrontational and non-politicized manner and
that membership of that body should not be politicized.
We would like to reiterate our position on the
centrality of the principles of objectivity, dialogue and
cooperation towards the protection and promotion of all
human rights, based on a non-selective and non-politized
approach. We are of the view that the exploitation of
paragraph 8 of resolution 60/251 deepens confrontation
and attenuates constructive dialogue between countries.
6/25

Resolution 60/251, by which the General Assembly
established the Human Rights Council, stressed that all
human rights are universal, indivisible, interlinked and
intertwined and that all persons should be treated in a
just and equitable manner, on the same footing and with
the same degree of concern.
However, the practices that we have seen since
the Council’s establishment proves the adoption by
certain Western countries of policies of politicization,
selectivity and double standards in dealing with human
rights issues. They focus on the situations of certain
countries in a manner that serves their own political
purposes. At the same time, they disregard other
situations in which systemic and grave human rights
violations have been perpetrated in full view of the
world. What the Palestinian people have been exposed
to for decades at the hands of the Israeli occupying
forces is the clearest proof of that.
22-31171

07/04/2022

Another example of the hypocrisy of those States
is their disregard for the rights, security and safety of
civilians, including women and children, in Donbas,
who were subjected to a systematic hostile campaign
and continuous shelling for many years. Why did we
not see such a western move to protect them and defend
their rights?
The pretext for that move in paragraph 8 of the
resolution establishing the Human Rights Council is a
major source of concern, since we have not seen any
evidence on which to base the perpetration of such grave
and systematic violations of human rights. What is the
credibility of the sources of such information? What are
the impartial international mechanisms that confirmed
those violations and identified their perpetrators?
The levelling of accusations by certain States, their
dissemination through misleading media, photographs
and videos whose sources and places are unknown and
their spreading through open sources cannot be a solid
basis for adopting a General Assembly resolution on
the issue.
As in the Syrian situation, the Security Council
and General Assembly meetings must always be
preceded by theatrical provocations such as what we
are witnessing now in Ukraine to justify the decisions
taken by Western and hostile countries in the name of
their alleged international legitimacy.
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4, before us today,
involves a serious case of hostility and a clear example
of the adoption of an exclusion policy, which my
country has always warned about. We have warned that
suspension of the membership of the Russian Federation
in the Human Rights Council will have an adverse
effect on the Council’s balance and universality and the
effectiveness of its role. Such suspension will enhance
the hegemony of a group of Western States with respect
to that important organ. They will impose their vision
and their criteria for human rights, which will be used
as a tool of political pressure and for the targeting of
certain countries. To be more frank and transparent,
we believe that such practices represent a threat to the
existence of the United Nations system itself.
Therefore, proceeding from our firm and
established position in rejecting all attempts to politicize
and manipulate human rights, my delegation will vote
against draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4. We urge other
delegations to beware of the dangers of embracing such
efforts leading to confrontation, isolation and hostility.

A/ES-11/PV.10

We call for the rejection of double standards and for
keeping human rights issues separate from all political
considerations. If our States want the United Nations
to continue and survive, we should all say no to such
draft resolutions.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba has always advocated for and worked towards
a Human Rights Council capable of overcoming the
challenges faced by the international community in
that area, of which no country is exempt. We defend
the need for objectivity, impartiality and transparency
in the work of that body and believe that its procedures
and mechanisms should work on the basis of proven,
accurate information.
The use of the clause on the suspension of
membership in the Council will not promote the
reaching of a peaceful, lasting and negotiated solution
to the conflict in Ukraine. It will not promote the
climate of cooperation, dialogue and understanding that
should be prevalent in addressing human rights issues.
In addition, it is disrespectful that only a few days
after concluding a regular session of the Human Rights
Council, that body was not even given the opportunity
to state its position.
From the start of the negotiating process on the
building of the new Council that would follow the
Human Rights Commission, Cuba opposed the clause
on the suspension of membership, given the serious risk
of its being used by specific countries that apply policies
of double standards, selectivity and politicization to
human rights issues.
That clause can be activated with the support of
only two thirds of those present and voting; therefore,
abstentions do not count, and there is not even a
minimum established number of votes required for the
suspension to be approved.
To be elected a member of the Human Rights
Council, a country needs to obtain, as a minimum in
a secret ballot, the endorsement of the majority of the
States Members of the United Nations, that is to say,
at least 97 votes. Thus the rights of a member of the
Council can be suspended by the will of fewer States
than granted it those rights.
The Russian Federation, which was elected as a
member of the Human Rights Council in 2020 by 158
votes, could today be suspended by a lower number
of votes. That suspension mechanism, which has no

22-311717/25

A/ES-11/PV.10

parallel in any other body of the United Nations, could be
easily used in a selective manner. Today it is Russia, but
tomorrow it could be any of our countries, particularly
nations of the South that do not bow to the interests of
domination and staunchly defend their independence.
It was no coincidence that in negotiations on the
new Human Rights Council, the most enthusiastic
promoters of the suspension clause were developed
nations with a proven tendency to level accusations
against countries of the South that do not follow their
alleged models of democracy, while remaining silently
complicit in the face of flagrant violations of human
rights in Western countries.
Of course, not everyone in this Hall shares our
concerns about the suspension mechanism, as they
know that the victims of its selective use will always
be others.
Could the Assembly one day adopt a resolution
suspending the membership of the United States in
the Human Rights Council, just to give one example?
We are all aware that this has not happened nor will
it ever, despite that country’s flagrant and massive
violations of human rights as a result of invasions
and wars of plunder against sovereign States based on
its geopolitical interests. It has caused the deaths of
hundreds of thousands of civilians, whom they term
“collateral damage”, millions of displaced persons and
destruction throughout our planet, but the Assembly
has never suspended any of its rights.
We all know also that the suspension clause will
not be used against the State that has for more than
60 years imposed against Cuba a criminal economic,
commercial and financial blockade that without a doubt
constitutes the most protracted, flagrant, massive and
systematic violation of the human rights of an entire
people and a genuine example of genocide against an
entire country.
It is ironic to see that the country that opposed
the establishment of the Human Rights Council
and requested, in this same Hall, a vote against the
resolution establishing it is the same one that has
conveniently now activated, as it did in 2011, one of the
most controversial clauses.
Cuba will remain consistent with its reservations
concerning the membership-suspension mechanism
in the context of the adoption in 2006 of resolutions
60/251, which established the Human Rights Council,
8/25

07/04/2022

and 65/265, of 2011, on the suspension of the rights
of Libya. The adoption of draft resolution ES-11/L.4,
which we are considering today, would set a dangerous
additional precedent, especially for the South.
It is not sufficient for them to impose countryspecific resolutions and selective mandates; now they
want to take a new step towards legitimizing selectivity
and establishing a Human Rights Council that is
increasingly at the service of certain countries, as was
the case with the now-defunct, discredited Commission
on Human Rights.
For the aforementioned reasons, the Cuban
delegation will vote against the draft resolution
contained in document ES-11/L.4.
Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): Like the
rest of the international community, Senegal remains
deeply concerned about the heavy toll of the war in
Ukraine, which has already led to many deaths as well
as millions of refugees and displaced persons.
Added to that bleak picture are allegations of grave
human rights violations. At all times and in all places,
war represents a failure for humankind. Senegal is for
peace in Ukraine in the name of a humankind without
borders. Senegal is also for peace in Ukraine because
our countries are collateral victims of this global crisis
owing to its particularly serious consequences for our
economies and our peoples.
Senegal is for de-escalation, an immediate cessation
of hostilities in Ukraine and continued negotiations
aimed at reaching a peaceful and lasting solution to the
crisis. That is stated in the press release published on
24 February by His Excellency President Macky Sall,
in his capacity as Chairperson of the African Union,
together with the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and calling on all parties to
“imperatively respect international law and the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine”.
That is also the basis for Senegal’s support for
resolution ES-11/2, of the special session of the General
Assembly of 24 March 2022, on the humanitarian
consequences of the war in Ukraine. That is also the
basis for our vote in favour of Human Rights Council
resolution A/HRC/49/1, of 4 March 2022, on the
situation of human rights in Ukraine and covering
in particular the establishment of an international
commission of inquiry on allegations of violations of
human rights in the country as a result of the war.
22-31171

07/04/2022

We believe that it is the publication of that
commission’s conclusions that will give us a
comprehensive view of the nature and extent of the
alleged violations. Such a complete view will therefore
provide us with the exact scope of the sanctions to
be considered.
However, draft resolution ES-11/L.4 decides on
sanctions measures before the commission of inquiry
that we have put in place has drawn its conclusions,
thus anticipating the work expected from it.
Taking all those considerations into account,
Senegal will abstain in the voting on the draft resolution
so as to remain consistent with the Human Rights
Council resolution of 4 March 2022 establishing an
international commission of inquiry into allegations of
human rights violations in Ukraine.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): South Africa
is deeply concerned about the continuing conflict
in Ukraine, the loss of life and the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. We reiterate our view that as a
matter of urgency there must be a cessation of hostilities,
which would be the first step in a comprehensive
response to the humanitarian crisis.
South Africa stresses once again that dialogue,
mediation and diplomacy is the only path to ending the
current conflict. Wars end when dialogues begin, and
wars endure when there is no dialogue.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts by Ukraine
and Russia to hold talks without preconditions. South
Africa expresses the hope that both parties will use
diplomacy to de-escalate the situation in Ukraine,
leading to a durable political and security situation.
We maintain that all parties have much to gain from a
negotiated outcome and much to lose from unnecessary
and violent conflict.
The General Assembly must therefore encourage
mediation and dialogue and adopt constructive
outcomes leading to that end.
South Africa is deeply concerned at the reports
of civilian casualties in Ukraine. As the international
community, we cannot be indifferent to the killing and
suffering of civilians. The humanitarian crisis that has
resulted from the ongoing military operations must
be addressed, and there must be an urgent opening of
humanitarian corridors and the provision of aid to the
civilian population, which, as usual, bears the brunt of
the suffering when violent confrontation breaks out.

A/ES-11/PV.10

All parties to the conflict must comply with
international human rights and humanitarian law,
including the Geneva Conventions, and must respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all Member
States, in keeping with the Charter of the United Nations.
On 4 March 2022, the Human Rights Council
adopted resolution A/HRC/49/1, authorizing the
establishment of an international commission of
inquiry to investigate all alleged violations and abuses
of human rights and violations of international law, and
related crimes in Ukraine. The Commission has not
yet commenced its work, and we await its findings on
the allegations of gross violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law.
South Africa is of the firm belief that the submission
of draft resolution ES-11/L.4, which we will consider
today, is premature and prejudges the outcomes of the
commission of inquiry. We must allow the commission
to urgently undertake its mandate and report to the
Human Rights Council and the General Assembly on
its outcomes.
It is also imperative that all parties to the conflict
allow the commission to perform its duties without any
hindrance or interference.
We recall that resolution 60/251, which is the basis
of the draft resolution before us and which established
the Human Rights Council, also recognizes, inter alia,
“the importance of ensuring universality,
objectivity and non-selectivity in the consideration
of human rights issues, and the elimination of
double standards and politicization”.
Unfortunately, the draft resolution that we are
considering today will further divide and polarize
States — and the General Assembly itself — on this
matter, without following due process. South Africa
maintains that in considering the suspension of a
member of the Human Rights Council, we must be
consistent and not selective, as this would undermine
the credibility of the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council. For these reasons, South Africa will
abstain on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Egypt does not view the draft resolution before us
(A/ES-11/L.4) as related to the crisis in Ukraine, the
principle of non-use of military force among nations
or infringing on the sovereignty of States. Instead,
we consider it related to politicizing United Nations

22-311719/25

A/ES-11/PV.10

organs and specialized agencies. The principled and
steadfast Egyptian position rejects that approach, as it
undermines the purposes for which the Organization, its
agencies and organs were established, and undermines
its credibility and that of international multilateralism.
Egypt considers that what we are doing today in
taking up draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4 puts the United
Nations at one of the most serious crossroads it has ever
encountered. Respect for the United Nations Charter,
rules of procedure and methods of work have led the
international community to rely on the Organization in
consolidating a functioning international system based
on rules and mechanisms for good management of
multilateral relations and for maintaining international
peace and security. This system is currently at risk.
The draft resolution before us undermines the
United Nations processes and systems that have long
enjoyed the international community’s trust. It threatens
to undermine the credibility of the Organization and its
mechanisms, leading to further negative repercussions
for its ability to shoulder its responsibility pursuant to
the Charter and 75 years of work.
Egypt is deeply uncomfortable with continued
double standards that are tantamount to measuring with
more than one yardstick. Many times before and not
so long ago, less decisive and more lenient resolutions
pertaining to human rights violations were adopted.
Egypt stresses its total rejection of any serious violations
of human rights or breaches of the legal obligations of
States in this regard. We believe in the need to face
such grave breaches in a decisive manner pursuant
to international mechanisms that ensure addressing
unacceptable actions and taking the adequate decisions
to deal with them.
Based on the foregoing, Egypt does not see any
merit in putting forward the draft resolution A/ES11/L.4 and warns of its consequences.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): We are deeply concerned
about allegations of gross violations of human rights
and humanitarian law in Ukraine, including recent
reports coming from the region of Bucha. The images
of extreme violence committed against civilians and
the high number of deaths, many of them with signs of
torture and ill treatment, are profoundly disturbing. Our
deep sympathy goes to all victims and their families.
Last month, the Human Rights Council created a
commission of inquiry with a mandate to establish the
10/25

07/04/2022

facts and circumstances that may amount to violations
and abuses of human rights and humanitarian law
in Ukraine. We call on all parties to cooperate with
this commission so that it can fulfil its mandate and
provide us with unbiased and precise information on
the situation on the ground.
Brazil has decided to abstain in the voting on
draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4 today, as it believes the
commission of inquiry should be allowed to complete
its independent investigation so that responsibilities can
be ascertained. Only then would the General Assembly
be in a position to better assess the situation and take
a responsible and informed decision on the status of
Russia in the Human Rights Council.
We must at all costs avoid repeating the mistakes
of the old Commission on Human Rights, particularly
concerning politicization, double standards and
selectivity, which had been the main flaw of the previous
human rights system and the object of well-founded
criticism of its work. The Human Rights Council should
be guided by the imperative of inclusive dialogue as the
main instrument for cooperation, sustainable solutions
and peace.
Brazil is fully committed to finding ways
to achieve an immediate cessation of hostilities,
promoting a real dialogue conducive to a peaceful and
sustainable solution, ensuring respect for human rights
and humanitarian law, protecting civilians and calling
for peace. These are objectives that should unite rather
than divide us. There is no alternative to a negotiated
solution and a constructive and balanced approach
aimed at preserving spaces of dialogue.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
the Ukraine issue, China has always believed that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries,
including Ukraine, should be respected, that the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
should be upheld, that the legitimate security concerns
of all countries should be taken seriously and that
all efforts conducive to a peaceful settlement of the
crisis should be supported. Putting an early end to the
fighting is the urgent expectation of the international
community. It is also what China is striving for.
China supports all initiatives and measures that
will help ease the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. We
call on the parties concerned to respect international
humanitarian law, take concrete actions to ensure the
safety of civilians and protect the basic rights and
22-31171

07/04/2022

A/ES-11/PV.10

humanitarian needs of women, children and other
vulnerable groups.

forth in General Assembly resolution 60/251, which
created the Human Rights Council.

The reports and images of civilian deaths in Bucha
are disturbing. The relevant circumstances and specific
causes of the incidents must be verified and established.
Any accusations should be based on facts. Before a full
picture is made clear, all sides should exercise restraint
and avoid unfounded accusations.

The draft resolution before us today (A/ES-11/L.4)
will deprive a country of its legitimate membership in
the Human Rights Council. Such an important matter
must be handled with utmost delicacy, calmness,
objectivity and reason, based on facts and truth.
Nevertheless, this draft resolution was not drafted
in an open and transparent manner, nor did it follow
the tradition of holding consultations with the entire
membership to heed the broadest range of opinions.
Under such circumstances, this hasty move by the
General Assembly, which forces countries to choose
sides, will aggravate the division among Member States
and intensify the confrontation between the parties
concerned. It is like adding fuel to the fire, which is
not conducive to the de-escalation of conflicts and even
less to advancing peace talks.

Dialogue and negotiation are the only way out
of the Ukraine crisis. China has always believed that
the international community should remain rational,
strengthen unity and do more to facilitate dialogue and
negotiation and a political settlement. It should not set
up obstacles or increase resistance, let alone add fuel to
the fire to aggravate confrontations.
We regret to see that the conflict has caused
civilian casualties and massive displacements and that
the all-dimensional indiscriminate sanctions without
a bottom line have brought serious negative impacts
on the post-pandemic recovery, creating new and
complex problems, reversing hard-won development
gains and making the realization of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development even more difficult.
People around the world, especially those in developing
countries, have to bear the burden of soaring oil and
food prices. Life amid the pandemic has become even
more difficult, especially for women and children,
whose rights have become increasingly hard to protect.
Developing countries are not parties to the conflict,
yet they are forced to get involved in this geopolitical
competition and great rivalry between Powers, which
is unfair.
Some individual countries, while talking
loudly about peace, are obsessed with creating bloc
confrontations, including provoking tensions in the
Asia-Pacific region. This self-destructive yet selfserving practice is very dangerous and worrying, and it
should be resolutely rejected.
China has always called for promoting human
rights through constructive dialogue and cooperation
on the basis of equality and mutual respect. At the
same time, we firmly oppose the politicization or
instrumentalization of human rights issues, reject
selective and confrontational approaches and double
standards in relation to human rights issues, and oppose
exerting pressure on other countries in the name of
human rights. These are also important principles set

Dealing with the membership of the Human
Rights Council in this manner will set new dangerous
precedent, further intensify confrontation in the field
of human rights, have greater negative impact on the
United Nations governance system and produce serious
consequences. China is therefore obligated to vote
against draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4.
China calls on all parties to pull together in the
same direction so as to create opportunities for peace
and openings for negotiation. China will continue to
maintain an objective and impartial position and play
its responsible and constructive role in this regard.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico has been clear and forceful in
condemning Russia’s invasion of Ukraine as a violation
of international law, the United Nations Charter and
the constitutional principles of its foreign policy. We
have also condemned the attacks against the civilian
population and its infrastructure. We have pushed
for everything that facilitates access to humanitarian
assistance and joined the voices calling for an immediate
cessation of hostilities.
Recent reports on the situation in Ukraine
have revealed to us that we are facing the probable
commission of serious violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law. Mexico
has therefore unequivocally supported the SecretaryGeneral’s call for impartial investigations to identify
those responsible and for effective accountability.

22-3117111/25

A/ES-11/PV.10

My country also supported the adoption of
resolution 49/1 of the Human Rights Council to establish
an independent commission of inquiry to investigate
all alleged abuses and violations of human rights and
everything that might infringe upon international
humanitarian law as a result of Russia’s aggression in
Ukraine. Similarly, Mexico is closely following the
investigation process of the International Criminal
Court for alleged international crimes committed in
Ukraine and strongly supports the work being carried
out by the Prosecutor of the Court to try to clarify
the facts. We are also paying close attention to the
development of the case before the International Court
of Justice and reiterate that Court’s call to comply with
its recent provisional order for an immediate cessation
of hostilities. While these are judicial and quasi-judicial
processes that are under way, they have not yet legally
ruled upon the situations under consideration. We must
be consistent and support them until they reach their
final determinations, and we must rigorously examine
their conclusions.
Russia’s membership or non-membership in the
Human Rights Council is not a factor that imposes
or exempts it from obligations under international
law. The focus should be on bringing to justice those
who are responsible — not on suspending a State
from membership in a subsidiary body of the General
Assembly, to which all Member States without exception
are accountable under the same rules and according to
the same criteria.
Mexico is in favour of regular accountability
throughout the United Nations system. We need more
transparency, yes, but for that we also need more
cooperation, more dialogue and better practices.
Multilateral structures are strengthened through
inclusion, not exclusion. Exclusion or suspension is
not the solution. Multilateralism will be strengthened
to the extent that it is able to maintain its vocation
for inclusiveness.
Previous resolutions of the General Assembly that
we have signed onto with full conviction condemn the
Russian invasion, call for an unequivocal cessation of
hostilities, urge unrestricted access for humanitarian
assistance and advocate a diplomatic solution to the
conflict (resolutions ES-11/1 and ES-11/2). Since the
beginning of the conflict, Mexico has explicitly stated
its position on Russia’s military aggression against
Ukraine through its statements in the Security Council
12/25

07/04/2022

and the General Assembly, as well as in its votes in
both bodies.
In the light of the foregoing, Mexico will abstain
from supporting draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4, which
seeks to suspend Russia from its rights as a member
of the Human Rights Council. Mexico is convinced
that even while war remains ongoing, all channels of
dialogue with the authorities of the Russian Federation
should be maintained, not only so that they will
cooperate with the set of mechanisms that comprise the
universal system for the protection of human rights, but
also to insist on the urgent need to find a diplomatic
solution through dialogue that will restore peace
in Ukraine.
Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to start by paying tribute to the victims of the
brutal war that is taking place in Ukraine caused by an
invasion that has violated norms of international law,
international humanitarian law and the Charter of the
United Nations. We were moved by the tragic images
from Bucha that we saw in our homes this past weekend.
Chile once again condemns the invasion of Ukraine.
The decision we will take today is one that my
country wishes it never had to take. My country, a
resolved proponent of multilateralism, believes that
disputes between States should be resolved within
the competent bodies and in accordance with existing
norms. The multilateral system is a home for everyone.
However, being a member of the Human Rights Council
involves certain requirements, namely, the commitment
to conduct consistent with the promotion and protection
of human rights everywhere and at all times. That was
the decision of Member States through their adoption
of resolution 60/251, which, in paragraph 9, states that
members of the Human Rights Council must uphold
the highest standards in the promotion and protection
of human rights. The same resolution, in paragraph 8,
entrusts the General Assembly with the responsibility
of suspending the rights of membership in the Council
of a member of the Council that does not comply with
those strict standards of protecting and promoting
human rights.
Our responsibility is to human rights, not to a
particular country — not to Russia or Ukraine. In
the case we are talking about today, concerning the
suspension of the membership of the Russian Federation
in the Human Rights Council, we are talking about a
State that is violating human rights on the sovereign
22-31171

07/04/2022

A/ES-11/PV.10

territory of a third State — Ukraine — and that is the
result of unacceptable aggression and occupation that
violates international law. Our delegation therefore
will vote in favour of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4,
which suspends Russia’s membership in the Human
Rights Council.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.

Chile reiterates its call on all parties to continue
negotiations and urges an immediate and peaceful
resolution of the conflict between Russian and
Ukraine through political dialogue, negotiations,
mediation and other peaceful means in conformity with
international law.

Pursuant to resolution 60/251, of 15 March 2006,
the General Assembly, by a two-thirds majority of the
members present and voting, may suspend the rights
of membership in the Council of a member of the
Council that commits gross and systematic violations
of human rights.

Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus
is categorically opposed to draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4,
which is under consideration.

For members’ information the draft resolution has
closed for e-sponsorship.

The introduction of this draft resolution is
motivated by narrow political interests aimed at
demonizing the Russian Federation and attempting to
isolate it from international organizations. Such ideas
lead to upsetting the equilibrium of the entire system
of international cooperation, which is based on the
Charter of the United Nations, and could have long-term
negative consequences and even lead to the collapse of
the United Nations.
In essence, today’s proposal to exclude Russia is
a direct contribution to destroying the Human Rights
Council itself and consolidating the breakdown of the
human rights system under the auspices of the United
Nations, which was already reflected in the colossal
rise in recent weeks of racist attitudes, xenophobia
and other forms of discrimination based on language,
culture, religion or other characteristics, which we are
seeing in Western countries. It is important not to focus
on short-term emotionally driven tasks, but rather to
think about the long-term prospects for resolving
conflicts and the post-conflict world order.
The draft resolution being proposed, similar to
other attempts to restrict Russia’s participation in
international organizations, will not only not contribute
to resolving the situation in Ukraine, but rather will
increase the risks for potential peaceful negotiations,
which I would like to note were initiated a month ago by
the Republic of Belarus and personally by its President,
Aleksandr Lukashenko.
We call on the Assembly to reflect on that and to
a vote against the draft resolution under consideration.

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.4, entitled “Suspension of the
rights of membership of the Russian Federation in the
Human Rights Council”.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4: Costa Rica,
Guatemala, Myanmar, San Marino and Tonga.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,

22-3117113/25

A/ES-11/PV.10

Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay
Against:
Algeria, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Burundi, Central African Republic, China, Congo,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Viet
Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eswatini, Gambia, Ghana, GuineaBissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Yemen
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4 was adopted
by 93 votes to 24, with 58 abstentions
(resolution ES-11/3).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): India abstained in the
voting on resolution ES-11/3, adopted in the General
Assembly today. We did so for reasons of both substance
and process.
Since the inception of the Ukrainian conflict,
India has stood for peace, dialogue and diplomacy.
We believe that no solution can be arrived at by the
shedding of blood and at the cost of innocent lives. If
India has chosen any side, it is the side of peace and an
immediate end to violence.
14/25

07/04/2022

We continue to remain deeply concerned about
the worsening situation and reiterate our call for an
end to all hostilities. When innocent human lives are
at stake, diplomacy must prevail as the only viable
option. Recent reports of civilian killings in Bucha are
deeply disturbing. We have unequivocally condemned
those killings and support the call for an independent
investigation. The impact of the crisis has also been
felt beyond the region, with increasing food and energy
costs, especially for many developing countries. It is
in our collective interests to work constructively, both
inside the United Nations and outside, to seek an early
resolution to the conflict.
India has been at the forefront of protecting
human rights, right from the drafting of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. We firmly believe that
all decisions should be taken while fully respecting due
process, as all our democratic policies and structures
enjoin us to do so. That also applies to international
organizations, particularly the United Nations.
Mr. Nunes (Timor-Leste): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening today’s meeting.
The position we took today to vote in favour of
resolution ES-11/3 before all of us is a manifestation
of our strong solidarity with the people of Ukraine,
especially the victims of this war, who have been
forced to seek shelter and have fled across the country’s
borders, as well as those who have lost their homes,
their livelihoods and family members and those who
have lost their lives. Our thoughts and prayers go out to
all of them and to their families and friends.
Our vote today shows our clear position to uphold
human rights values in all circumstances and in all cases,
as the dark period of our own history taught us enough
about the high cost of being victims of war. We call for
an effective ceasefire in Ukraine and urge the parties to
the conflict to continue the dialogue and negotiations to
stop the war and avoid further potentially catastrophic
escalation. We commend the efforts of those who
have facilitated peace talks between the parties to the
conflict and call for more diplomatic initiatives to help
find a peaceful solution for all.
All parties must ensure the safety and protection
of all civilians. It is our hope that peace will be
re-established immediately, and that the important
work for a healthy, prosperous and sustainable future
will be resumed for all.
22-31171

07/04/2022

Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): My
country’s delegation abstained in the voting on
resolution ES-11/3, which was adopted at today’s
meeting of the emergency special session. I would like
to make the following statement to explain the position
of the State of Qatar.
The State of Qatar has expressed its position
on the situation in Ukraine, which is based on its
firm commitment to the established principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
including the inadmissibility of the use or threat of use
of force in international relations, settling international
conflicts peacefully, refraining from interfering in
the internal affairs of other States and upholding the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of States.
The State of Qatar has repeatedly asserted that
ensuring the safety of civilians must be a top priority.
We also stress the need for upholding international
humanitarian law, protecting civilian facilities and
infrastructure and protecting civilians working in
the medical and humanitarian domains, as well as
journalists. We also uphold facilitating the evacuation
of civilians and the rapid and safe access of those in
need to humanitarian aid, according to the international
principles of humanitarian aid delivery.
The State of Qatar commends the tireless efforts
of the United Nations and humanitarian organizations
in responding to emergency humanitarian needs. We
also commend the efforts made by the host countries.
The State of Qatar continues to communicate with
international partners to assess the humanitarian
situation and deliver the necessary aid to the
Ukrainian people.
We reiterate the call by the Secretary-General to
return to the path of dialogue and negotiations and
establish an immediate ceasefire for humanitarian
purposes. We also reiterate the State of Qatar’s call
for all parties to the conflict to demonstrate selfrestraint and resolve disagreements through dialogue
and diplomatic means, while settling international
disputes peacefully and avoiding further escalation.
The State of Qatar will continue to make diplomatic
efforts to help reach a solution to the crisis pursuant to
the United Nations Charter and international law. The
State of Qatar welcomes the mediation by the Republic
of Turkey between Russia and Ukraine. We hope that

A/ES-11/PV.10

negotiations will lead to a comprehensive and lasting
peace agreement between both countries.
Mr. Vongnorkeo (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): The Lao People’s Democratic Republic again
reiterates its call for a peaceful, political and diplomatic
solution to the conflict and supports all ongoing efforts
and peace negotiations between the parties concerned.
Likewise, we urge the international community to
refrain from any action that could fuel the escalation
of tensions.
As party to seven of the nine core human rights
treaties, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic opposes
all gross and systematic violations and abuses of human
rights. We are gravely concerned about recent reports
and accusations of human rights and international
human rights law violations and abuses. We are of the
view that such serious allegations must not be taken
lightly. They must be backed up by solid evidence and
verified by an independent investigation mechanism of
the United Nations, such as a Human Rights Council
independent international commission of inquiry.
My delegation voted against resolution ES-11/3
because we believe that the reports of violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law must be verified by a credible, neutral,
impartial and independent assessment mechanism
before any action is taken. The Lao People’s Democratic
Republic is concerned about the notion that any Member
State of the Human Rights Council can be subject to
suspension and other punitive measures without due
process of investigation or verification. As this issue
is of paramount importance to all United Nations
Members, we also believe that all General Assembly
draft resolutions should be adopted by consensus,
thereby reflecting the spirit of equality and solidarity
among the States Members of the United Nations.
In conclusion, my delegation believes there is a dire
need for more clarification, through an independent
mechanism that should be accepted and supported by
all Member States, before drawing conclusions and
passing judgment. We remain hopeful that the most
urgent task now is to create an environment conducive
to a peaceful resolution to the conflict and an immediate
ceasefire agreement that will eventually lead to the
total cessation of hostilities.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): It is distressing to see the
hostilities in Ukraine persist and the number of civilian
casualties continue to rise. We share the international

22-3117115/25

A/ES-11/PV.10

community’s deep concerns regarding the devastating
human rights and humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
We do not take lightly reports of gross and systematic
violations and abuses of human rights, including the
recent reports from Bucha.
For those reasons, we believe the Human Rights
Council must remain seized of the matter, and we
support the Secretary-General’s call for a thorough
and independent investigation. We also fully support
the establishment of an independent international
commission of inquiry by the Human Rights Council.
There is no question that those responsible for
violations and abuses of human rights in Ukraine
must be held accountable and brought to justice. The
commission of inquiry must therefore receive full
support and the access needed to effectively carry
out its mandate. In the meantime, we must give the
commission the chance to work in an objective and
transparent manner and to present its findings and
reports. We must allow due diligence and must not
prejudge the work of the commission.
The General Assembly must also be prudent. It is
important to receive all the facts before taking action
that revokes the legitimate rights of its members.
Moreover, the General Assembly’s action must not
create a negative precedent, which can undermine the
credibility of this organ.
It is for those reasons that we abstained in the
voting on resolution ES-11/3.
Indonesia remains steadfast in its commitment to
respecting and protecting human rights for all. Our
priority now must be to save lives and protect civilians
in Ukraine. We reaffirm our call to all parties to stop
the hostilities and to spare no effort to achieve peace
through dialogue and diplomacy. That is the only way
in which we can end the suffering and senseless loss
of lives in Ukraine and prevent the increasing negative
impact of the war beyond the region. We must therefore
stop the war. I repeat: we must stop the war now;
otherwise, we will all suffer.
Ms. Concepción Jaramillo (Panama) (spoke in
Spanish): Panama decided to vote in favour of resolution
ES-11/3, on the suspension of the Russian Federation’s
membership in the Human Rights Council, due to its
support for the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the human rights pillar and,
in particular, because Member States should fulfil
16/25

07/04/2022

their commitments in the area of human rights in being
elected to that major United Nations body.
Panama, true to its commitment to multilateralism
and its defence of human rights, supports the
participation of Member States in international bodies.
In general, we therefore do not support the separation of a
Member State from membership in multilateral forums.
Such a decision is taken in a context of evident
gravity. Given the clear gross and systematic human
rights violations of civilians in Ukraine, and concerned
by the serious situation, Panama feels that it is essential
to support this initiative, which has led the General
Assembly to consider the temporary suspension of a
Member State from this leading human rights body.
We already experienced such a situation in 2011,
when a State, Libya, was suspended from the Human
Rights Council for a period of eight months. At the
time, Panama supported that temporary initiative, and
we later co-sponsored the subsequent resolution that
allowed Libya’s readmission (resolution 66/11).
Panama cast its vote today in the hope that the
decision will be of a temporary nature, placing priority
on the fact that Member States maintain their adherence
to the principles of respect for the highest human
rights standards.
We therefore highlight the need to ensure
universality in the consideration of human rights issues,
including the application of paragraph 8 of resolution
60/251, in order to avoid sending contradictory signals
in assessing cases of human rights violations.
I would like to conclude my country’s statement
by again urging a call for dialogue and diplomacy
for a peaceful resolution to the conflict. We are
fully convinced that it will be through dialogue and
understanding that this devastating conflict will come
to an end, and we will return to the path of peace
and cooperation.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): Thailand abstained
in the voting on resolution ES-11/3 because of the
overriding importance that we attach to a transparent,
impartial and inclusive approach in the multilateral
regime. A decision to suspend the membership of a
Member State in any United Nations body cannot be
taken lightly. The process must be done through careful
consultations, based on principles and verified facts
and taking into account constructive opinions as well
as foreseeable consequences.
22-31171

07/04/2022

We express our deepest condolences to the people
of Ukraine and the bereaved families who lost loved
ones due to the ongoing war in Ukraine.
We are deeply concerned about the escalation
of conflicts and humanitarian crises in Ukraine.
While believing that prompt action must be taken in
response to all alleged human rights atrocities against
civilians, including in Bucha, we are of the view that
any action taken should be impartial, transparent
and comprehensive.
To objectively consider the situation, it would
require well-rounded established facts and additional
concrete evidence, proved by reliable sources, including
those presented to international courts. We therefore
support the Secretary-General’s call for an independent
investigation to ensure accountability, and we hope that
the independent international commission of inquiry
established by the Human Rights Council will be able
to commence its work at the soonest time to investigate
the serious allegations in an impartial, transparent and
comprehensive manner.
We strongly urge all parties to fully comply with
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and to protect civilians and civilian
objects, as well as ensure the unhindered provision
of humanitarian assistance without discrimination.
Another life lost is another life too many.
For its part, Thailand continues to provide
humanitarian assistance to support those suffering
from the conflict in Ukraine. In line with the Human
Rights Council’s principles of non-selectivity and
constructive dialogue, we reiterate our strong support
for the continuation of political dialogue, as the only
way to end a humanitarian crisis is to end the dispute.
Thailand therefore once again calls for the utmost
efforts by all parties and the international community
to cease and desist the aggravation of fighting and
continue our maximum endeavour to end the conflict.
Thailand reiterates its call for the continuation of
political dialogue between the parties concerned to find
peaceful and sustainable solutions.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam has maintained a
principled and steadfast position in support of resolving
conflicts by peaceful means and with respect for the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
including the principles of sovereign equality, respect

A/ES-11/PV.10

for the independence and territorial integrity of States
and refraining from the threat or use of force.
We have closely followed with great concern the
situation in Ukraine, with severe consequences for the
people. It is with extreme concern that we learn of recent
reports of great loss of life among innocent civilians.
Viet Nam opposes and condemns all forms of
attacks against civilians in violation of international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Recent information in that regard should be examined
based on objective and transparent verification, with
the cooperation of the parties concerned.
We have time and again reiterated that it is
imperative to immediately cease the use of force to avoid
further civilian casualties and losses, as well as damage
to civilian infrastructure. If not resolved peacefully
and expeditiously, the ongoing conflict in Ukraine will
continue to affect the entire world, given the spillover
effects now seen across regions. We are therefore
convinced that the only way forward is to de-escalate
tension and resume dialogue and negotiation through all
channels, with a view to achieving long-term solutions
that take into consideration the interests and concerns
of all parties, in accordance with international law.
There is no viable alternative.
International efforts should be carried out in a
prudent manner in order to be conducive to reaching a
final solution. Discussion and decisions undertaken by
international organizations and agencies should follow
their established procedures and working methods.
In this vein, we are of the view that deliberation and
decisions taken by the General Assembly should be
based on impartial information and broad consultations
with Member States. Dialogue and negotiations among
relevant parties is the most feasible way forward to a
peaceful, comprehensive solution. It is our hope that the
United Nations and Member States will work together
towards this end.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): I take the floor today to
explain our vote after the vote on resolution ES-11/3,
on the suspension of the rights of membership of the
Russian Federation in the Human Rights Council.
The spectre of isolation of a State Member of the
United Nations through the suspension of its rights in a
United Nations body will not help resolve the conflict,
but only trigger further consequences and intensify the

22-3117117/25

A/ES-11/PV.10

07/04/2022

situation. At a fragile time for world peace, security
and stability, the engagement among the Member States
in all relevant United Nations bodies, including the
Human Rights Council, is very important. Resolving
the conflict in Ukraine based on the United Nations
Charter and international law through creating an
environment conducive to diplomatic engagement and
negotiation by the concerned parties should be the right
path forward towards achieving a peaceful solution
in the Ukraine and ending the tremendous human
suffering there.

independent investigations to guarantee effective
accountability. Malaysia is therefore of the view that
a critical decision, such as the suspension of a member
of the Human Rights Council, must not be made in
haste and should not prejudge the outcome of such
investigations. A decision on such an important matter
must be accorded the same equal treatment and due
process as in the past in accordance with the full spirit
and letter of resolution 60/251. Taking into account all the
aforementioned considerations, Malaysia has decided
to abstain in the voting on resolution ES-11/3 today.

At this critical juncture, we must strive to work in
solidarity to address the conflict in Ukraine and avoid
creating a trust deficit among the membership. Building
trust and confidence is absolutely crucial to dealing
with the current situation. Accordingly, Cambodia
abstained in the voting on the resolution.

Malaysia strongly urges all concerned parties to
immediately take steps to de-escalate and continue
to progress towards dialogue and negotiations, so
as to prevent further devastation and loss of life. We
reiterate the need to respect and protect civilian life and
infrastructure. We also reiterate the call on all parties to
fully comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): Uzbekistan adheres
to a balanced neutral position on the current situation in
Ukraine and hopes that the parties will find a mutually
acceptable way to resolve the situation pursuant to a
solely political and diplomatic path based on universally
recognized principles and international law. At the
same time, the delegation of Uzbekistan voted against
resolution ES-11/3 on the suspension of the rights to
membership of the Russian Federation in the Human
Rights Council, given our strong conviction that any
decision based on paragraph 8 of the resolution 60/251
authorizing the General Assembly, by a two-thirds
majority of the members present and voting,
“[to] suspend the rights of membership in the
Council of a member of the Council that commits
gross and systematic violations of human rights”
should be based on the outcomes of thorough
investigation of the alleged violations.
Mr. Abd Aziz (Malaysia): Malaysia remains deeply
concerned at the worsening situation in Ukraine and
continues to closely monitor developments, including
the humanitarian situation on the ground. We are
greatly disturbed at reports of alleged human rights
abuses and violations.
We firmly believe that those who commit gross
violations of human rights must be held accountable.
We also firmly believe that it is imperative that such
atrocities be verified in an impartial, transparent and
credible manner. In this regard, we support the call
by the Secretary-General to immediately commence
18/25

Ms. Tang (Singapore): Singapore abstained in the
voting on the resolution that has just been adopted
(resolution ES-11/3).
Singapore condemns in the strongest possible
terms the Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine and
continuing attacks on Ukrainian cities, civilians and
civilian infrastructure. We reiterate our full support for
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. Singapore’s position on this has
been clear and consistent from the beginning of this
war, which is why we co-sponsored and voted in favour
of resolutions ES-11/1 and ES-11/2 and co-sponsored
Human Rights Council resolution 49/1.
Singapore is gravely concerned and distressed by
the latest reports and images of high civilian casualties
and destruction of civilian infrastructure from Bucha
and other Ukrainian towns. We strongly condemn
any violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. In this regard, we urge the full and
urgent implementation of resolutions ES-11/1, ES11/2 and Human Rights Council resolution 49/1. In
particular, we note the establishment of an Independent
International Commission of Inquiry to investigate all
alleged violations of abuses of human rights in Ukraine
and await the completion of its work and its findings.
There must be accountability for any gross and
systematic human rights violations that have taken
place in the conflict in Ukraine. We urge all parties
to cooperate with the Commission and allow full
22-31171

07/04/2022

and unhindered access for the Commission to gather
evidence and conduct its work.
We must spare no effort to protect the civilian
population in Ukraine, and to ensure safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to all those in need.
We continue to call on the Russian Federation to cease
its offensive military operations immediately, remain
engaged in meaningful negotiations with Ukraine and
work towards a peaceful settlement in accordance with
the United Nations Charter and international law.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): Brunei
Darussalam expresses concern over the escalation of
tensions and military actions in Ukraine and continues
to closely monitor developments in the country. Brunei
Darussalam condemns any violation of the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of any country
and reiterates the importance of upholding the
principles of a rules-based framework and respect for
international law.
Brunei Darussalam strongly believes that
constructive dialogue and engagement among all parties
concerned is essential to seeking a peaceful solution.
We further believe that the suspension of Member
States is counterproductive in addressing any concern
and may further aggravate the already dire situation.
Brunei Darussalam reiterates the importance of
diplomacy and calls on all parties directly involved
to de-escalate tensions and settle all differences by
peaceful means, without resorting to the threat or
use of force, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, in the interest of
maintaining international peace and stability.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): The State
of Kuwait abstained in the voting on resolution ES-11/3,
which has just been adopted at this emergency special
session of the General Assembly. Our vote is based on
being committed to promoting and protecting human
rights and preserving the international organs that have
been established to that end.
We are against politicization, selectivity and double
standards, and we encourage dialogue and objectivity
when dealing with human rights issues. While we
condemn all violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, we have followed with deep concern all the
reports and horrific images provided by the media in
recent days. They have revealed the extent of the serious

A/ES-11/PV.10

violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law against unarmed civilians in Ukraine. We
support the call of the Secretary-General to conduct
an independent, neutral and transparent international
investigation into those crimes to determine the
perpetrators and make them accountable.
We reiterate our appeal to all parties to the conflict
to respect their commitments under international
humanitarian law, including the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and the Additional Protocols thereto, as
well as international refugee law for the protection
of civilians and civilian sites, and to respect and
protect humanitarian and medical personnel as well
as humanitarian convoys to ensure the unhindered
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need.
We commend the efforts made by United Nations and
its specialized agencies to alleviate human suffering
as a result of continued hostilities and to prevent
their escalation.
Ever since the start of the war and military
operations in Ukraine, Kuwait has reaffirmed its
principled and steadfast position of committing to
United Nations principles, which call for respecting
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of States as well as non-interference in their internal
affairs, in addition to the non-use of force or the threat
of force, but to resolve conflicts by peaceful means.
We reiterate our appeal to immediately end the
hostilities and continue negotiations among the parties
concerned in order to reach a peaceful settlement
and spare the region and the world their negative
consequences at the economic and humanitarian levels.
Mrs. Kasymalieva (Kyrgyzstan): According to
paragraph 8 of resolution 60/251, entitled “Human
Rights Council”, the General Assembly may suspend
the rights of membership in the Human Rights Council
of a member of the Council that commits gross and
systematic violations of human rights.
That paragraph requires that there should be
confirmed facts of gross and systematic violations of
human rights. Our position at the moment is that we
should wait for the results of impartial investigations
into all possible gross and systematic violations of
human rights in Ukraine, including the results of
the investigation of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry established by Human Rights
Council resolution 49/1.

22-3117119/25

A/ES-11/PV.10

We are following the situation in Ukraine with great
concern. It is especially alarming that fraternal peoples
are involved in that conflict and that human casualties
cannot be avoided. We express our grave concern over
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Ukraine. In
that regard, it is important to ensure the full protection
of civilians, primarily women and children, as well as
of medical and humanitarian personnel.
What is happening today is a real tragedy, the
occurrence of which, unfortunately, was allowed by
the entire world community. Kyrgyzstan holds the
view that the text of the resolution adopted today
(ES-11/3), on the suspension of the membership of the
Russian Federation from the Human Rights Council, is
characterized as politically driven. We are in favour of
conducting an independent investigation and examining
the results and facts provided by both sides.
Our position is clear: any conflict must be resolved
exclusively by political and diplomatic means, including
through the creation of new formats and mechanisms.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): Algeria
reiterates its firm commitment to the fundamental
rules and principles of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, in particular the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and various
international treaties for the protection and promotion
of human rights. We express our strong condemnation
of any proven violation of international obligations in
that regard.
There is no doubt that the images we have seen
about certain cities of Ukraine are horrific and strongly
condemned. The alleged crimes related to them are
extremely serious. However, it is imperative to allow
existing United Nations mechanisms to investigate
the facts on the ground in an impartial manner so that
justice is done for all innocent victims.
Ensuring that the competent United Nations
mechanisms discharge their mandates and tasks in
accordance with the norms of international law and
relevant United Nations resolutions, free from any
interference or prejudgment, constitutes for Algeria
a sine qua non to establish the facts about the gross
and systematic violations of human rights that have
been committed.
In that regard, Algeria calls for respecting
the principles of universality, objectivity and
non-selectivity, on which the Human Rights Council
20/25

07/04/2022

is founded, and for preserving it from any political
dispute that might affect the mandate or role of that
pivotal international body as well as its impartiality
concerning human rights issues, in order to foster
constructive dialogue and cooperation.
My delegation believes that international
multilateral efforts require the strengthening of dialogue
and cooperation, without any exclusion, regardless of
the ongoing disagreements. Any attempt to suspend
any State elected by the international community from
any United Nations body is not conducive to promoting
the virtues of multilateralism.
While reaffirming its support for direct negotiations
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine in order
to put an end to the military operations and ensure an
urgent response to the humanitarian crisis, Algeria
reiterates its call for the intensification of international
diplomatic efforts aimed at resolving the current
crisis and preventing the erosion of diplomatic norms
and reaching, as soon as possible, a political solution
that ensures the sovereignty of States, their territorial
integrity and legitimate and vital interests.
My country, which has engaged in good faith in a
good-offices effort through an Arab contact group that
recently met with the parties concerned, calls on the
international community to refrain from any action
likely to hamper the ongoing negotiations and prolong
the crisis and its global multidimensional consequences,
which negatively affect all countries in the world.
In the light of all those reasons and considerations,
the delegation of Algeria voted against this
draft resolution.
Mr. Rodríguez Cuadros (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru voted in favour of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.4
in consideration of the victims and based on the
understanding that the adopted text is based on the
general powers of the General Assembly, as set out
in Article X of the Charter of the United Nations and,
specifically, in paragraph 8 of resolution 60/251, which
empowers the Assembly, with a two-thirds majority,
to suspend the membership of a Member State of the
Human Rights Council if said State has committed
gross and systematic violations of human rights. The
act of aggression and the use of force against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State, in itself,
implies a pattern of violation of the human rights of the
affected population. The Government of Peru is of the
view that this procedure, applied for the second time
22-31171

07/04/2022

in the history of the Human Rights Council, should
be exercised without any selectivity or discrimination
of any kind. The suspension should be invoked in any
situation similar to the present case of the use of force,
violations of the territorial integrity of another State
and human rights violation.
In the context of this text, adopted within the scope
of the responsibilities and mandate of the General
Assembly, the Peruvian Government considers that
it is not prejudging the monitoring actions that are
being carried out or may be carried out by the various
mechanisms of the Human Rights Council. Those
investigations must be carried out without any political
interference, with independence, neutrality and with the
sole focus on the rights of the victims, their protection
and the fight against impunity.
In particular, the Peruvian delegation considers
that the adopted resolution should not prejudge or
politically predetermine the work of the international,
independent commission of inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council with the mandate to investigate
alleged violations of human rights and humanitarian
law occurring in the context of the armed conflict
in Ukraine. These investigations must be conducted
independently of the parties responsible for the
violations and under the internationally recognized
principles of independence, promptness, objectivity
and non-discrimination. That is particularly urgent and
imperative for the investigation of the massacres in the
village of Bucha.
Mr. Alateek (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): Saudi
Arabia abstained in the voting on resolution ES-11/4,
entitled “Suspension of the rights of membership of
the Russian Federation in the Human Rights Council”,
because this measure, in our view, constitutes a serious
precedent that threatens multilateral work, runs counter
to the principles of international law and affects the
conduct of international organizations.
We follow with grave concern the deterioration
of the situation in the Ukraine, especially on the
humanitarian front. We condemn all violations of
international humanitarian law, in all forms and
manifestations, whenever they occur. We believe in
the importance of protecting civilians and civilian
sites in conflict areas. However, my country believes
that moving to suspend Russia’s membership in the
Human Rights Council is an escalatory step that would
exacerbate the already tense situation and that this

A/ES-11/PV.10

step not only politicizes the work of the Council, but
it is also a unilateral action that gives certain countries
more rights than others.
My country stresses the right of all States elected to
the Human Rights Council to exercise their full powers,
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 60/251,
entitled “Human Rights Council,” which affirms
the principles of universality and non-selectivity
and stresses the elimination of double standards and
politicization when considering human rights issues.
My country’s abstention in the voting is based on
our strong belief that aggravating this situation will
adversely affect the ongoing dialogue between the
parties, with a view to reaching a peaceful settlement that
spares the region and the world further negative effects
in the political, economic and humanitarian spheres.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates once again reiterates our
forceful condemnation of all violations of international
humanitarian law committed in Ukraine. Civilians
are bearing the brunt of this conflict, which must end.
Victims must be spared, and parties must comply with
their obligations under international law.
Determining the facts on the ground is important
for justice to be rendered to victims, but also, in the
longer term, in order to allow communities to heal,
reconcile and build sustainable peace. As a member
of the Human Rights Council, we voted in favour of
Council resolution 49/1, urgently establishing an
international, independent commission of inquiry to
investigate all alleged violations and abuses of human
rights and international humanitarian law in Ukraine.
The members of the commission were appointed
on 30 March, and their investigations have only
just begun. Due process demands that investigative
mechanisms be able to conclude their work. Today
we decided to abstain in the voting on this resolution
because we need to ensure that any decision we take in
the General Assembly is based on due process, in line
with resolution 60/251.
The United Nations is based on the premise of
dialogue and constructive engagement with each
other — even with those who hold opposing views to us.
The organizations that make up our international system
were not established to be a club for the like-minded.
We need to preserve spaces in the multilateral arena to
talk to each other and not just at each other. That idea

22-3117121/25

A/ES-11/PV.10

07/04/2022

is in the foundational DNA of this Organization. Our
collective strength lies in our inclusivity.

65/265) shows that it is not entirely wrong to agree to a
suspension decision at this time.

Now is the time to double down on diplomatic
outreach in order to reach an immediate cessation of
hostilities throughout Ukraine. We support the ongoing
negotiations between Ukraine and Russia and offer our
full support to all mediation efforts. Now it is time to
find a way through this conflict towards peace.

Once again, we join all of humankind in calling
on the parties concerned to lay down their arms and
come together and become part of one happy global
human family.

Mr. Tito (Kiribati): I thank the President for
re-convening this emergency session to deliberate on
adopted resolution ES-11/4, which has the effect of
suspending a member of the Human Rights Council,
in line with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions that allow the Assembly to suspend the
rights of a member to sit and participate in the Human
Rights Council if that member has committed gross
violations of human rights.
Having listened intently to the reasoning advanced
from the two sides of this issue, Kiribati decided to vote
in favour of resolution ES-11/3 on the following grounds.
First, the images of hundreds or thousands of innocent
human beings killed in Ukraine in the course of the
past 42 days is a heart-and-soul-breaking nightmare
for all normal, conscientious and peace-loving human
beings, and we join all peace-loving people of the
world in their prayers and calls for a speedy ending to
the conflict through friendly and diplomatic dialogue
between the parties.
Further, as a long-standing member of the
Commonwealth of Nations, we believe that it is a wise
and civilized practice to encourage all its members
to be loyal and faithful to the codes of conduct of
the Commonwealth, which require all its members to
respect the rule of law, good governance and the rights
and freedoms of human persons. We also believe that it
is wise and civilized to deter violations of such codes of
conduct through suspension of any defaulting member,
while allowing time and space for a suspended member
to reform its conduct and get back to the agreed code of
human conduct.
This practice has worked very well in the
Commonwealth for decades, and we believe it can also
work well for the United Nations with respect to any
member seen by an overwhelming majority of members
to have seriously digressed from the codes of conduct for
United Nations membership. The suspension of Libya
in the Human Rights Council in the past (resolution
22/25

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanations of vote after the voting.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
resolution ES-11/3.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation considers the
resolution adopted by the General Assembly on the
suspension of the membership of the Russian Federation
in the Human Rights Council (resolution ES-11/3) as an
illegitimate and politically motivated step with the aim
of demonstratively punishing a sovereign State Member
of the United Nations conducting an independent
domestic and foreign policy.
I am authorized to make the following statement.
On 7 April of this year, the Russian Federation
made a decision to end of suspend its membership in
the Human Rights Council before the end of its term.
Russia has always considered the Human Rights
Council to be an important component of the universal
system of promoting and protecting human rights,
whose main role is to contribute to the development of a
constructive and maximally depoliticized international,
intergovernmental dialogue on key issues on the human
rights agenda. Unfortunately, in today’s conditions, the
Council has in fact been monopolized by a group of
States that are using it for their own short-term aims.
Those States, which now claim that they set the
standard in the human rights field, have for many
years been directly involved in blatant and massive
violations of human rights or abetted those violations.
Notwithstanding their membership in the Council, they
are not ready to sacrifice their short-term political and
economic interests in favour of truly contributing to the
stabilization of the human rights situation in certain
countries. Such actions violate the mandate entrusted
to the Human Rights Council by the international
community and, overall, undermine trust in this body.
The sincere commitment of Russia to promoting and
22-31171

07/04/2022

protecting human rights does not make it possible for us
to remain a member of an international mechanism that
has become an enabler of the will of the aforementioned
group of countries, which, in order to push through
their aims and achieve the necessary number of votes to
adopt such decisions, have resorted to open blackmail
of sovereign States.
Our decision to stop our membership in the Human
Rights Council before the end of our term does not
mean that we are not going to continue to fulfil our
international obligations in the human rights field. The
Russian Federation will continue to make its significant
contribution in strengthening constructive dialogue on
human rights and involving all interested sides in the
process of the collective development and adoption of
decisions that meet the interests of all groups of States.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): I thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening us in this
emergency special session.
I have the privilege to address the General
Assembly on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iceland and Norway,
as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Georgia,
Andorra, Monaco and San Marino align themselves
with this statement.
The scale and gravity of Russia’s violations of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, as well as its violations of the
United Nations Charter and the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of another State, Ukraine, called for a strong
united international response. Russia is responsible for
a horrific number of casualties, human suffering and
forced displacements. Russian armed forces have been
relentlessly shelling cities, schools and hospitals for
well over a month now.
The Russian authorities are responsible for the
crimes committed while they have effective control
of many areas inside Ukraine. They are subject to the
international law of occupation. The European Union
supports all measures to ensure accountability for
human rights violations and violations of international
humanitarian law in Ukraine in which Russian armed
forces, the perpetrators of war crimes and other serious

A/ES-11/PV.10

violations, as well as the responsible Government
officials and military leaders, will be held accountable.
Today, the Assembly has decided that for now
the Russian Federation is suspended from the Human
Rights Council. Membership in that Council is and
shall remain open to all States Members of the United
Nations, but those Members commit to upholding the
highest standards in the promotion and protection of
human rights. Through its activities in Ukraine, Russia
has violated those criteria.
The decision to suspend the Russian Federation,
which the EU and its member States supported today
(resolution ES-11/3) implements the 2006 General
Assembly resolution establishing the Human Rights
Council (resolution 60/251), which foresees suspension
of members that commit gross and systematic violations
of human rights. Suspension is necessary to uphold the
integrity of the Human Rights Council, the authority of
the General Assembly and the credibility of the United
Nations human rights system. The rare decision the
General Assembly has taken today sends a strong signal
of accountability and hopefully will help to prevent and
discourage more violations of human rights.
For the third time in a month, the General Assembly
has adopted a resolution on Ukraine by a clear majority.
Once again, the international community stands in
solidarity with the people of Ukraine and all other
people affected by the war of Russian aggression.
Once again, the international community strongly
calls on Russia to cease the destruction of innocent lives
across Ukraine and immediately and unconditionally
withdraw all its troops. While the Security Council
remains unable to take action because of the Russian use
of the veto, the General Assembly has demonstrated the
strength of international support towards addressing
the Russian aggression against Ukraine.
Ms. Brandt (Netherlands): I deliver this statement
on behalf of the Benelux countries — Belgium,
Luxembourg and my own country, the Netherlands. The
Benelux countries align themselves with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union (EU).
The Benelux countries remain unwavering in
their support for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders and its democratic freedom. We
condemn in the strongest terms the unprovoked war of
aggression by the Russian Federation against Ukraine.

22-3117123/25

A/ES-11/PV.10

07/04/2022

This is the third time that we are meeting at this
emergency session in just over a month. Today, like
before, the exceptional circumstances caused by the
war in Ukraine leave us no other choice. We are meeting
because we are horrified by the reports of the atrocities
committed by the Russian armed forces in Ukraine,
the images from places like Bucha, Staryi Bykiv,
Mariupol and Hostomel that show a complete disregard
for human rights and the lives of civilians, and the
personal testimonies of rapes and sexual violence that
are emerging.

My final point concerns accountability. I am
repeating the call by the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
that all efforts be made to ensure an independent and
effective investigation into what happened in Bucha
and other places. We therefore fully support the work
of the commission of inquiry that was established by
the Human Rights Council, as well as the essential
role of the International Criminal Court when it comes
to investigating possible war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide.

Clearly, those actions are unacceptable for any
United Nations State Member, but even more so for a
member of the Human Rights Council. It is therefore
important that the General Assembly just voted to take
the exceptional step to suspend the membership of
the Russian Federation of the Human Rights Council.
It is important because membership of the Council
comes with responsibilities and duties. Paragraph 9
of resolution 60/251, which established the Council,
clearly states that Council members shall “uphold the
highest standards in the promotion and protection of
human rights”.

Those efforts complement the investigations
undertaken by the Prosecutor General of Ukraine,
which the EU stands ready to support. Let us be clear:
The perpetrators of those crimes are being watched,
and evidence is being compiled with a view to their
prosecution. We owe it to the victims and their families
to find the truth and provide justice and accountability.

Holding a seat on the Human Rights Council is
not a free ride. The Benelux countries, as recent and
current members of the Human Rights Council, are
strong supporters of its mandate. And we note that
members sign up to a heightened level of public scrutiny
and commit to engage with the Council in a spirit of
dialogue, cooperation and self-reflection grounded
in a desire to use their membership to strengthen the
enjoyment of human rights at home and abroad. It is
clear that, with its actions in Ukraine, the Russian
Federation is failing its responsibilities as a member of
the Human Rights Council.
However, this is not just about the Human Rights
Council. What is at stake is the credibility of the United
Nations as a whole. In his statement before the Security
Council on Tuesday (see S/PV.9011), the SecretaryGeneral clearly stated that the war in Ukraine is one of
the greatest challenges ever to the international order
and the global peace architecture, which was founded
upon the Charter of the United Nations. That is what is
at stake if we allow the Russian Federation to commit
such crimes without consequences. In resolution
ES-11/1, of 2 March, the General Assembly called on
the Russian Federation to abide by the principles set
forth in the Charter. Yet we are confronted with the
opposite — further violations of the same Charter.
24/25

There is, of course, a solution to stop the atrocities.
The Russian Federation chose to start this war of
aggression against Ukraine. It can also choose to stop
it, immediately cease hostilities, withdraw its troops
and fully respect international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom on a point
of order.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): We are very sorry
to take the floor and interrupt the flow of statements,
but we would like to seek an urgent clarification from
the Russian delegation as to what precisely they said in
their statement.
The General Assembly voted just a few moments
ago to suspend them from the Human Rights Council,
and that is now done. However, it seems to us that they
were suggesting that they were also withdrawing from
the Human Rights Council, which has a different effect.
Setting aside the fact that that sounds like someone
who has just been fired and has tendered their
resignation, may we just ask the Russian delegation
to be precise on this point? Will they send a note
verbale to Member States and the relevant authorities
indicating their full and formal withdrawal from the
Human Rights Council for the remainder of their term?
We think that that has a different effect in terms of the
next actions that need to be taken and their status.
22-31171

07/04/2022

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation, should they
wish to clarify.
Mr. Vorobiev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to explain that the question
that was just asked does not refer to a point of order but,
in fact, refers to the substance of part of our statement
after the adoption of resolution ES-11/3. I believe that
it was very clear.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of France on a point of order.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French): My
intervention is not related to a point of order per se,

A/ES-11/PV.10

but perhaps the interpreters could clarify things. We
think that there was a divergence between the French
and English interpretations and the Russian, as we
were also wondering about the actual content of the
statement after the adoption of resolution ES-11/3 by
the representative of the Russian Federation.
The Acting President: We have heard the
last speaker in statements after the adoption of
resolution ES-11/3.
We shall hear the remaining speakers here in the
Hall this afternoon at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

22-3117125/25
