United Nations

A/RES/64/1

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 October 2009

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 114

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 October 2009
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/64/L.1 and Add.1)]
64/1.

High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation
The General Assembly,

Reaffirming its resolution 33/134 of 19 December 1978, in which it endorsed
the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical
Cooperation among Developing Countries, 1
0F

Recalling its resolution 62/209 of 19 December 2007, in which it decided to
convene a High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation on
the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Buenos Aires Plan of
Action, no later than the first half of 2009, and its resolution 63/233 of 19 December
2008,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the President of the High-level
Committee on South-South Cooperation submitted pursuant to resolution63/233, 2
1F

Reaffirming its previous resolutions relevant to South-South cooperation,
Taking note of the growing importance of South-South cooperation, and
recognizing the increased role undertaken by the United Nations to support
economic cooperation activities among developing countries,
Stressing that South-South cooperation, as an important element of
international cooperation for development, offers viable opportunities for
developing countries in their individual and collective pursuit of sustained economic
growth and sustainable development,
Stressing also that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a
complement to, North-South cooperation,
Recalling the United Nations resolutions relevant to South-South cooperation
and the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields, including the Doha Declaration on Financing for

_______________
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,
Buenos Aires, 30 August–12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.II.A.11 and
corrigendum), chap. I.
2
A/63/741, annex.

09-46189

*0946189*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/1

Development, 3 and acknowledging the Havana Programme of Action adopted at the
first South Summit, 4 the Marrakesh Framework for the Implementation of SouthSouth Cooperation 5 and the Doha Plan of Action adopted at the Second South
Summit, 6
2F

3F

4F

5F

Welcoming with appreciation the generous offer of the Government of Kenya
to host the High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation,
1.
Decides that the High-level United Nations Conference on South-South
Cooperation:
(a)

Will be held in Nairobi from 1 to 3 December 2009;

(b)

Will be held at the highest possible level;

(c) Will have as its overarching theme “Promotion of South-South
cooperation for development”;
(d) Will consist of plenary meetings and interactive multi-stakeholder round
tables on the following sub-themes:
(i) Strengthening the role of the United Nations system in supporting SouthSouth and triangular cooperation;
(ii) South-South
and
triangular
cooperation
for
complementarities, specificities, challenges and opportunities;
(e)

Will result in an intergovernmentally agreed outcome;

(f)

Will also result in summaries by the Chairperson;

development:

2.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive report,
consistent with the overarching theme of the Conference, reviewing the trends in
South-South cooperation, including triangular cooperation, reviewing also the
progress made by the international community, in particular the United Nations, in
supporting and promoting such cooperation and identifying new opportunities, as
well as challenges and constraints and measures to overcome them;
Reaffirms the role of the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation
3.
within the United Nations Development Programme as a separate entity and a focal
point for South-South cooperation within the United Nations system, and requests
the Unit to continue to provide the necessary substantive and technical support to
the preparatory process for the Conference;
Encourages
Member
States
and
their
partners,
including
4.
non-governmental organizations, to consider preparing reports on South-South and
triangular cooperation for the purpose of the Conference, on a voluntary basis,
taking into account the themes of the Conference and the outcomes of regional,
subregional or sectoral United Nations meetings prior to the Conference;
Requests the President of the General Assembly to initiate informal
5.
consultations with all Member States, in an open, inclusive and transparent manner,

_______________
3

Resolution 63/239, annex.
A/55/74, annex II.
5
A/58/683, annex II.
6
A/60/111, annex II.
4

2

A/RES/64/1

commencing at an appropriate date to enable sufficient discussion, with a view to
producing a draft outcome prior to the Conference, by the end of November 2009;
6.
Invites United Nations organizations, including the specialized agencies,
regional commissions and funds and programmes, to provide input to the
preparations for the Conference;
Invites international and regional organizations, international financial
7.
institutions, non-governmental organizations and business sector entities to
participate in the Conference, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the
General Assembly;
Invites intergovernmental organizations and entities that have observer
8.
status with the General Assembly to participate in the Conference;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance to the
preparatory process and the Conference;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to proceed with the organizational
arrangements for the Conference in cooperation with the Government of Kenya, and
further requests the Secretary-General to provide a note on the organizational
aspects of the Conference;
11. Encourages all Member States and other relevant stakeholders that are in
a position to do so to consider supporting the participation of developing countries,
in particular the least developed countries, including by making voluntary
contributions through the United Nations Fund for South-South Cooperation, in
order to ensure the broadest possible participation;
12. Decides to postpone the sixteenth session of the High-level Committee
on South-South Cooperation, which was to be held from 2 to 5 June 2009, to one
convenient day in January 2010.
15th plenary meeting
6 October 2009

3
