United Nations

S/PV.5736

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5736th meeting
Wednesday, 29 August 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gayama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Congo)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Christian
Mrs. Adiwoso Asmady
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Chávez
Mr. Al-Qahtani
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Burian
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-49245 (E)

*0749245*

S/PV.5736

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam and Yemen in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
24 August 2007 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2007/514, and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
on Wednesday, 29 August 2007, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Michael
Williams, Special Coordinator for the Peace Process in
the Middle East and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Williams to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Michael Williams. As this is the last
appearance of Mr. Williams in his capacity as Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, I
wish, on behalf of the members, to take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Williams for his contributions
to the work of the Council at this time of change on the
ground and important developments in the Middle East
peace process. The knowledge and insight shared by
Mr. Williams have been much appreciated by the
Council members, who wish him well in his new
assignment. I now give the floor to Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams: I have just completed my last visit
to the region as Special Coordinator, and I return
guardedly optimistic but conscious of many challenges
ahead. The substantive dialogue developing between
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) chairman
Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Olmert and the
reform efforts of Palestinian Prime Minister Fayyad
have created growing expectations. The anticipated
engagement of Tony Blair, the Quartet’s representative,
more active regional diplomacy and the preparations
for a series of high-profile international gatherings —
above all the November meeting called for by
President Bush — reinforce those efforts. In the period
ahead, the diplomatic process will need to be carefully
monitored and supported and must be buttressed by
urgent and meaningful efforts and steps on the ground,

07-49245

S/PV.5736

if the many factors that could derail efforts are to be
overcome.
I wish to turn first to the bilateral process
between President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert,
who met again yesterday for three hours. That meeting
followed closely on their meeting on 6 August at
Jericho, which marked the first visit by an Israeli
leader to a Palestinian town in seven years. These
meetings will continue, with the next one anticipated to
be held on 10 September, before a mission to the
region by United States Secretary of State Rice. Both
sides have reported to me substantive discussions and
exchanges of ideas on permanent status issues, as well
as on confidence-building steps. There also appears to
be a welcome common desire to reach an agreement or
understanding that could be presented to the
international meeting in November.
Inevitably, differences of emphasis are noticeable
regarding the precise content and scope of what needs
to be achieved. For expectations to be met, I believe
that the talks will need to shift gear to achieve concrete
agreements on permanent status issues and
implementation steps. Given the sensitivity of those
issues, the shortness of time and the amount of work to
be done, that will not be easy. But, with political will
and supporting action on the ground, it is my
assessment that that can be achieved.
Turning to the situation in the West Bank, the
Palestinian Authority, under Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad, has begun to implement reforms and a serious
security programme. The Palestinian Authority
Government has initiated measures to remove
redundant employees and end superfluous hiring at
ministries. It is preparing an emergency plan for
immediate public expenditures, while initiating wideranging consultations for the production of a mediumterm expenditure framework for the period 2008-2010.
On security, Israel’s agreement not to pursue a
number of wanted militants provided — they turn in
their weapons and report to Palestinian Authority
offices — has provided an important first example of
security cooperation. I would also like to commend the
work of the Palestinian Authority security forces in
Jenin, who recently rescued a soldier of the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) from a mob after he had
mistakenly entered the city.
It is incumbent upon both parties to respect the
agreements that have been reached and to move to

07-49245

further cooperation that results in an early end to
Israeli incursions and the deployment of credible
Palestinian Authority security personnel on the streets
of cities such as Nablus. Further releases of prisoners
would also build upon the important and positive first
step already taken by Prime Minister Olmert in that
regard.
The easing of closures is another urgent
requirement. While Israel has its legitimate concerns,
the 532 obstacles in the West Bank continue to restrict
the movement of Palestinians and to prevent normal
economic activity. Freedom of movement is essential
in any economy. In the context of genuine security
cooperation and political empowerment, it is vital for
Israel to ease closures in the West Bank. I am also
concerned about reports by United Nations agencies
about increasing difficulties for staff access.
Let me turn now to Gaza. I remain deeply
concerned about the political, institutional and socioeconomic consequences of the continued split between
Gaza and the West Bank. President Abbas and Prime
Minister Fayyad confirmed to me that they remained
committed to reintegrating Gaza under the legitimate
authority of the Palestinian Authority. I welcome that
clear position. For its part, Hamas continues to call for
dialogue. However, in the absence of steps that indicate
acceptance by Hamas of President Abbas’s dismissal of
Mr. Haniya as Prime Minister on 15 June, or its
readiness to reverse its actions, progress will remain
elusive.
While some order has been brought to the streets
of Gaza, the actions of Hamas are taking place outside
the framework of the rule of law and the institutions of
the Palestinian Authority, generating concern regarding
respect for human rights and the future development of
Gaza. Hamas is recruiting volunteers and using
charities in efforts to provide certain services, since the
majority of Palestinian Authority employees are not
reporting to work owing to the dispute over whom they
should report to.
Hamas continues to assert its military control
over the Gaza Strip, including through the
establishment of new security body, a coastal force, a
female police force and an interior security force.
There are reports of increasing arrests and clashes with
other political factions. Palestinian civil society groups
have documented allegations of the harassment of

3

S/PV.5736

journalists, arbitrary arrests and torture and other
human rights abuses by Hamas militants.

violence. I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to three aspects of that violence.

The Palestinian Authority is continuing to pay
public sector salaries in Gaza. Due to efforts by the
Palestinian Authority, Israel and the United Nations,
food and medical supplies are entering through two
border crossings, namely, Sufa and Karem Shalom, as
well as through a conveyor belt at the Karni crossing.
Yesterday, for the first time in two months, potatoes
were exported through Karem Shalom. Despite a
temporary interruption of support earlier this month,
owing to concerns about a diversion of resources, the
European Commission has resumed payments to enable
fuel shipments to Gaza for local electricity generation.

First, 83 rockets and 89 mortars were fired by
Palestinian militants, including Hamas, from Gaza into
Israel. A school and a day care centre in Sederot were
hit, and an infant was among those injured. There have
also been several attacks with those weapons on the
crossings between Israel and the Gaza Strip. I condemn
those attacks on civilians and on crossing points used
by civilians as well as aid workers seeking to help the
people of Gaza. Reports of the continued smuggling of
weapons and materiel into the Gaza strip from Egypt
are another cause for concern. On 25 August, two
Palestinian militants scaled the wall between Israel and
Gaza and opened fire on IDF positions before being
killed by IDF fire.

However, those measures are not enough to
prevent a worrying social and economic deterioration
in Gaza. The shortage of some essential commodities,
unstable prices, the accumulation of garbage owing to
municipal strikes and, above all, the mass closure of
industry are sources of acute concern. The main
commercial crossing of Karni has now been closed for
more that two months, ever since the Hamas takeover
led to the removal of trained Palestinian Authority
security personnel on the Palestinian side. Neither the
import of raw materials nor the export of commercial
goods through Karni has been possible. As a result,
85 per cent of manufacturing businesses have been
closed and 95 per cent of private construction projects
have been halted — at a loss of $160 million, as well
as $213 million in United Nations projects.
Approximately 70,000 workers have lost their jobs.
The United Nations and others continue efforts
to find a formula that could lead to the early
reopening of Karni. United Nations policy in that
regard is guided by three concerns: first, that the
people of Gaza should not be subject to collective
punishment; secondly, that further damage to the socioeconomic fabric of Gaza will only increase dependency
on aid and fuel extremism; and, thirdly, that all steps
taken should be consistent with the goal of reunifying
the occupied Palestinian territory under the Palestinian
Authority. I call for the cooperation of all parties to
work to reopen the Karni crossing.
Israeli-Palestinian violence has continued this
month, claiming the lives of 51 Palestinians, injuring
145 others and injuring 13 Israelis. A further
18 Palestinians were killed and 88 injured in internal

4

Secondly, Palestinian casualties of IDF
operations in the West Bank and Gaza include, in the
latest period, five children killed and 23 injured. A
Palestinian woman also died of a heart attack while
waiting at a West Bank checkpoint to be taken to a
hospital. I remind Israel of its obligations to protect
civilians under international humanitarian law and of
the need for more credible accountability measures, as
called for by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights.
Thirdly, I wish to underscore my concern at the
lawless action of some Israeli settlers, who injured
eight Palestinians, including a United Nations staff
member, in violent incidents in the past month. In
Hebron, there have been confrontations between
Jewish settlers and Israeli security personnel. Eighteen
Israeli security personnel and 12 settlers were injured
during the evacuation of a building in the market of the
Old City after settlers had refused to obey the orders of
the Israeli Government. Three settlers were also
injured by Palestinians throwing rocks. I note also the
continued lack of progress in securing the release of
the captured Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, and I call on
all parties to work with Egypt as it seeks to resolve that
issue and the fate of a number of Palestinian prisoners.
I am also deeply concerned that Israeli settlement
activity continues throughout the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. I regret to say that there are no credible
efforts or actions to remove any of the more than 100
outposts or halt settlement expansion. Israeli steps to
meet its Road Map obligations in this regard are crucial
to the credibility of the renewed diplomatic process.

07-49245

S/PV.5736

Settlement activity undermines hope for a contiguous
Palestinian State. Settlements and their supporting
infrastructure are also a key cause of significant
hardship for the Palestinian people, as the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs details in a
forthcoming report.
I have described the bilateral process and the
considerable challenges on the ground. I wish to turn
now to regional and international diplomatic efforts.
In the aftermath of the visit to Israel in late July
of the Foreign Ministers of Egypt and Jordan, as
envoys of the committee of the League of Arab States
on the Arab Peace Initiative, Arab Foreign Ministers
met in Cairo on 30 July and called for the November
international meeting to be comprehensive in nature.
The Secretary-General recently exchanged views with
the Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia, His Royal
Highness Prince Saud Al-Faisal, on these matters. The
Secretary-General believes that the widest possible
attendance from the Arab world at the international
meeting should be encouraged, and he will be working
towards that end.
I note too, in this context, the continued Syrian
commitment to the Arab Peace Initiative. I also
welcome assurances from both the Israeli and the
Syrian leaderships that they have no desire to initiate
conflict, despite reports of military exercises and buildups on both sides, and media speculation about
heightened tensions.
The Secretary-General will host his Quartet
partners for a meeting here at United Nations
Headquarters on 23 September, after which he and
other Quartet members will host an iftar dinner for
members of the Arab League’s follow-up committee on
the Arab Peace Initiative. This will be an important
moment to take stock of the bilateral efforts under way
and to make preparations for the November
international meeting.
On the following day, 24 September, the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee will meet at the ministerial level
here at the United Nations. We hope that that meeting
will reconfirm the international community’s strong
support for the Palestinian Authority Government’s
programme. The meeting will also be a key stepping
stone towards a donor pledging conference planned for
December.

The Quartet representative, Tony Blair, will
participate in both the Quartet and Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee meetings, which will be an opportunity to
share with international partners his agenda for the
period ahead to support Palestinian reform and
economic rejuvenation. Mr. Blair’s core team and
office are being established in Jerusalem, and he is
expected to arrive there on 4 September for his second
visit. Several United Nations offices and departments
are collaborating to finalize arrangements for the
provision of financial management and security
support for Mr. Blair’s mission.
In Lebanon, the political deadlock that has
gripped the country since November of last year
continues. International initiatives to facilitate a
Lebanese dialogue and to address the causes behind the
stalemate also continue, but there has been little
tangible shift in the positions of the parties. In this
respect, I pay tribute to the recent efforts of France in
particular.
Attention is now turning towards presidential
elections. The Speaker of Parliament has begun
constitutional consultations, signalling the advent of
the official process through which the Lebanese will
select their next president. The Secretary-General
hopes that the Lebanese will find their way to
consensus on this critical issue. He supports the clear
desire of the Lebanese to hold presidential elections as
stipulated in their Constitution — an outcome that
would help to achieve a breakthrough in the country’s
political impasse.
We also note that on 5 August, parliamentary byelections were held in a tense but orderly atmosphere
for the seats rendered vacant by the tragic
assassinations of Pierre Gemayel and Walid Eido.
In northern Lebanon, the Lebanese Armed Forces
have entered their fifteenth week of confrontation with
fighters from Fatah al-Islam in the Palestinian refugee
camp of Nahr el-Bared. According to official figures,
141 soldiers have been killed and hundreds wounded
since fighting erupted in May. The exact extent of
civilian casualties has not been established. Fatah alIslam fighters have continued to reject calls by the
army to surrender. Last week, the army ensured the
evacuation of the remaining family members of Fatah
al-Islam fighters.
The United Nations has worked closely with the
Lebanese authorities in fashioning a strategy to support

07-49245

5

S/PV.5736

the Government’s post-conflict reconstruction of the
Nahr el-Bared camp and its assistance to the
approximately 30,000 Palestinian refugees who have
been displaced by the fighting. Responsive and
concerted action on the part of the Lebanese authorities
and donors will continue to be required in order to
deliver effective assistance.
In the south, the situation has remained generally
calm. There has been a modest decrease in the number
of Israeli air violations of the Blue Line, with
170 overflights recorded since my last briefing to the
Council. However, the fact that the overflights
continue represents a continuing violation.
Despite a welcome reduction in the number of
mine and unexploded-ordnance incidents in recent
months, tragedies continue. On 23 August, a nongovernmental organization worker was killed while
clearing a cluster-bomb site. Four civilian deminers
were injured in that incident, and one supervisor was
injured in another. To date, 22 Lebanese civilians have
been killed as a result of the unexploded ordnance
contaminating large tracts of southern Lebanon.
While the United Nations continues its demining
efforts on the ground, the provision of the necessary
cluster-munitions strike data would greatly facilitate
the rate of clearance operations and reduce the present
threat to civilians. Further to the adoption of resolution
1773 (2007) last week, the Secretary-General reiterates
his call for Israel to provide that strike data.
Let me conclude by saying that we cannot afford
a new failure in the efforts to revive the Arab-Israeli
peace process. There is a hope now which has been
absent for almost seven years. A setback at this stage
could have serious consequences. Nor can we allow
progress in Lebanon in the past year to be stalled by
internal political deadlock or by opponents of Lebanese
sovereignty and unity. In both arenas, the international
community’s engagement must be robust and
purposeful in order to advance the implementation of
the resolutions of this Council.
I will miss the opportunity to contribute to those
goals as United Nations Special Coordinator and as
Special Adviser on the Middle East, a role I have
undertaken since last summer’s war in Lebanon. I wish
to thank the Secretary-General and his predecessor for
giving me this opportunity, and to pay tribute to the
professionalism and dedication of my colleagues in the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for

6

the Middle East Peace Process and here in New York. I
wish them well and look forward to working closely
with the United Nations in the region in my new role.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Williams for his briefing. In accordance with the
understanding reached among Council Members, I
wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements to
no more than five minutes, in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the text in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
begin by joining you in commending the outstanding
work of Michael Williams. He has exemplified the
finest traditions of an international civil servant,
working on behalf of the Secretariat and through it on
behalf of the international community, demonstrating
again, as he did today, thoroughness and
professionalism in the way he has dealt with this very
complex issue in offering us balanced and constructive
advice that actually helps facilitate our responsibility in
ensuring the promotion of peace and security. We will
miss him and we wish him all the best in his future
endeavours.
On 16 July, President Bush called for an
international meeting this autumn of nations that
support a two-State solution, reject violence, recognize
Israel’s right to exist and commit to all previous
agreements among the parties. This meeting on a twoState solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will
aim to support discussions and negotiations between
the parties and achieve meaningful progress on the
path to peace, Palestinian statehood and an end to the
conflict. We believe the Government of President
Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad can be a partner for
peace. The international community has recognized
that and is responding by re-establishing diplomatic
and economic ties with the Palestinian Authority
Government. As President Bush has said, the
international community must work with the
Palestinian Authority to develop a solid institutional
and economic foundation for a future Palestinian State.
In that vein, Secretary Rice and Palestinian Prime
Minister Salaam Fayyad signed an $80 million
assistance package aimed at supporting efforts to
reform and professionalize the Palestinian security
forces. The framework agreement formalizes the

07-49245

S/PV.5736

intention of the United States to provide assistance to
the Palestinian Authority to promote law and order by
strengthening and reforming the Palestinian security
sector. We believe the ability to provide security for the
population is a core responsibility of any functioning
government. The rule of law and security must be the
foundation of any successful Palestinian Government.
We believe that the assistance package will help
improve the Palestinian Authority’s capacity to deliver
security for the Palestinian people and to fight
terrorism, to build confidence between the parties and
will ultimately help to meet the security needs of
Palestinians and Israelis alike.
The United States and the Palestinian Authority
have worked together closely to design the programme
and will continue to cooperate in its implementation.
The security assistance package is in addition to more
than $190 million in United States assistance to the
Abbas-Fayyad Government this year. We encourage
others, particularly regional parties to step forward
with additional support at this critical time.
We continue to call on all Palestinians to reject
terror and on the Palestinian Authority Government to
arrest terrorists, confiscate illegal weapons and
confront corruption. We remain deeply concerned by
the continued intransigence and illegal occupation of
Gaza by Hamas, including recent moves to crack down
on freedom of speech there.
We are very concerned about Hamas’ provision of
safe haven to fellow terrorist organizations operating in
Gaza and strongly condemn the continuing acts of
terror, such as recurring indiscriminate rocket attacks
being conducted from Gaza against civilians in Israel.
We welcome the 6 August and 28 August
meetings between Prime Minister Olmert and President
Abbas, the second and third such meetings since late
June. We strongly support direct dialogue between the
parties. The United States remains committed to
working with Israel and the Palestinians on day-to-day
issues that affect the lives of Israelis and Palestinians,
as well as a political horizon for Palestinian statehood.
We have always said that bilateral dialogue between
the parties is the key to realizing the two-State vision.
We will continue to work with the parties and the
international community to that end.
The development of a viable Palestinian economy
and institutions remains crucial to the success and

07-49245

prosperity of a future Palestinian State. The United
States looks forward to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
meeting in New York next month and to the Quartet
meeting, where we expect to hear about Quartet
Representative Tony Blair’s travel to the region and his
recommendations on the economic and institutional
agenda. We look forward to continued coordination and
cooperation with the Palestinians, the international
community and Quartet Representative Tony Blair to
lay the foundation for President Bush’s vision of two
States, Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace
and security.
On the situation in Lebanon, let me briefly note
that we welcome the unanimous decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for one
year. We remain committed to a sovereign, democratic
and prosperous Lebanon and continue to call for the
full implementation of all Council resolutions
pertaining to Lebanon, including resolutions 1559
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). While we
commend the work of UNIFIL in South Lebanon, we
remain deeply concerned by persistent reports of
breaches of the arms embargo along the Syria-Lebanon
border and call on all States, particularly Syria and
Iran, to abide by their commitments under resolution
1701 (2006).
We also decry the continuing failure of militias to
disarm. Those issues, along with the fate of the two
abducted Israeli soldiers, must be addressed if efforts
to achieve peace are to succeed.
We applaud the peaceful and transparent
parliamentary by-elections in Lebanon this month and
congratulate the winners and the Lebanese people on
the process. We look forward to similarly free and fair
and peaceful presidential elections this fall that are
held in accordance with Lebanon’s constitution and are
free of foreign intervention.
Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
extending
my
delegation’s
appreciation
to
Mr. Williams for his comprehensive briefing on the
issue before us. Indonesia regards the situation in the
Middle East as one of the most important unresolved
issues of peace and security in the world today.
Conflicts in human history have their beginnings
and their ends. The war that led to the birth of the
Westphalian system of States concluded in thirty years.
The First World War ended in four years and the

7

S/PV.5736

Second World War in six years. Most conflicts in other
regions, such as in the Balkans, Africa, Asia and Latin
America, also have their endings.
Conflict in the Middle East, however, has
continued since the second half of the 1940s without
clear signs of its final conclusion. Developments on the
ground have made the conflict one of the most volatile
and protracted ever. The Middle East conflict will
remain unresolved, if all parties concerned do not go
beyond the ordinary in their efforts to find a viable
solution to the conflict. There is no better time than
now to act to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict and
broker a peace.
The current surge in diplomacy at different levels
to jump-start the peace process is a welcome
development. A series of Quartet meetings has paved
the way for a more substantial role. In our view, all
parties concerned need to engage in a meaningful and
inclusive political process that will bring forth a
consensus by the parties.
The resumption of bilateral meetings between
President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert on
6 August is also encouraging. My delegation, however,
believes that the meeting will be meaningful only if
Israel has genuine commitment to the discussion and
commitment to the four core issues, namely, the fate of
the Palestinian refugees who fled or were forced to flee
their homes; the status of Jerusalem; the borders of a
Palestinian State and the dismantling of Israeli
settlements in the West Bank.
The active role of the Arab League can be very
useful in many ways, including by providing
legitimacy and regional perspective to the effort. We
have observed such success in establishing legitimacy
in other regions. Regional arrangements can serve as a
strong complement to the activities of the United
Nations itself and should be encouraged.
The 2002 Arab Peace Initiative that the League
advocates is a homegrown peace process that deserves
our support. This initiative has the benefit of
representing a common Arab position and a
commitment to cooperating for peace and stability in
the region. We encourage the establishment of a special
committee composed of concerned Member States and
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, as
suggested in the Arab Peace Initiative document. We
support the initiative’s efforts to gain cooperation from

8

the Security Council, as well as from the Quartet, and
from other interested parties.
Peace in Palestine remains far from reality.
Sustainable peace in the country can be achieved only
when Palestinians are united. Internal division and
splintering threatens to undermine the concept of one
sovereign and independent Palestine and to weaken
concerted efforts to achieve that idea. We therefore
believe that a dialogue between Hamas and Fatah is
critical to moving forward and should be assigned
paramount importance.
Support and assistance provided for Palestine by
the international community should not broaden the
political and de facto division among Palestinians, but
should rather promote unity among them. Any efforts
to assist one faction at the expense of other factions
will only create more difficulties for the Palestinians
and to the idea of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State.
My delegation shares the view that holds that the
people of Gaza should not be punished for the Hamas
takeover. Palestinians in Gaza are part of one
Palestinian nation aspiring to the creation of one
democratic and peaceful State. We also believe that the
engagements by the international community for
Palestine must be based not simply on the humanitarian
costs, but also on the principles that promote peace and
unity.
The end of the conflict between Hamas and Fatah
in Gaza is heartening. Yet, Indonesia remains deeply
concerned over the growing humanitarian situation in
Gaza. The region has increasingly become
economically and politically isolated and Israel’s
blockade has brought trade to an abrupt halt. As it has
been reported that more than 90 per cent of Gaza’s
factories have been closed and 70,000 people have lost
their jobs because shipments of raw materials have not
been getting in.
These are ingredients which, in our view, could
devolve into violence and conflict and we should not
let this situation continue to deteriorate. The
inhabitants depend on the continued support of the
United Nations and we should continue to provide it
while at the same time working with the parties to the
conflict to find a more satisfactory political solution as
soon as possible.

07-49245

S/PV.5736

The burden that Palestinians are bearing now has
been made heavier by the continuing incursions by the
Israeli occupying forces into Palestinian towns and
neighbourhoods across the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Indonesia strongly deplores those inhumane and illegal
actions which constitute a grave breach of international
humanitarian and human rights laws.
Regarding Lebanon, unity is a key aspect of the
achievement of sustainable peace in the country.
Accordingly, Indonesia fully supports the initiative of
France in hosting a Lebanese dialogue and its followup. We encourage the Government of Lebanon and all
parties concerned in the country to redouble their
efforts in promoting political dialogue and national
reconciliation. In our view, a blend of sincerity on the
part of the international community to help Lebanon
and a strong commitment by all factions in the country
to inclusive political dialogue and rational
reconciliation are essential to the achievement of
peace, stability, and unity in the country.
Israel’s invasion into Lebanon a year ago had
brought about not only physical damages and civilian
casualties among Lebanese, but also a menace to the
security and stability in the southern part of Lebanon
and beyond. The Security Council has been decisive in
responding to this incursion by strengthening the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)and
expanding its mandate, through the adoption of
resolution 1701 (2006). My delegation observes that
after one year of its deployment, UNIFIL has not only
provided the Lebanese with the opportunity to rebuild
and restore their daily life, but has also helped to
establish a new strategic military and security
environment in southern Lebanon.
UNIFIL is the vanguard of resolution 1701
(2006). We believe that only UNIFIL has the authority
to monitor on the ground compliance by all parties
concerned with resolution 1701 (2006). We also
believe that UNIFIL must have the capacity to deter
and respond to challenges that could undermine
resolution 1701 (2006), including the daily violations
of Lebanese airspace by the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF), which blatantly contravene the spirit and letter
of resolution 1701 (2006). We remain deeply
concerned over the continued presence of unexploded
ordnance in southern Lebanon used by Israel in last
summer’s war. In this regard, Indonesia would like to
join the call of the Secretary-General to urge the
Government of Israel to provide the strike data of the

07-49245

unexploded ordnance to the United Nations as soon as
possible. The permanent ceasefire as envisaged by
resolution 1701 (2006) is still far off. The role of
UNIFIL in monitoring the cessation of hostilities and
in achieving a permanent ceasefire remains critical.
The Middle East conflict has been very
prolonged. The need to find a peaceful, just, lasting,
and comprehensive settlement to the conflict is dire.
The Government of Indonesia is committed to helping
achieve an end to this protracted and bitter conflict that
has been a source of suffering for the parties for far too
long.
We hope that multilateral efforts, including the
Security Council and those of the Quartet and the Arab
League, could maximize their potential in contributing
to the achievement of a just, comprehensive, and
lasting peace in the Middle East, based on the relevant
resolutions of the Council, including resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), and 1515 (2003), the Madrid terms
of reference, the principle of Land for Peace, and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you for convening the
monthly briefing this morning to discuss the item on
the situation in the Middle East, and to thank
Mr. Michael Williams, Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing to the Council. We
wish him Godspeed in his endeavours.
The question of the Middle East remains one of
the oldest and most important issues with which the
Council has been dealing, on a constant and regular
basis. However, the poor progress made so far in the
peace process has been an inherent component of this
question. Violence, on the other hand, continues
unabated and unhappy news flows constantly from that
region.
Last month, Israel, the occupying Power,
continued its illegal and inhuman practice in the
occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank, killing many
civilians and defenceless children, in flagrant violation
of international law. That specifically constitutes a
clear and unambiguous violation of the relevant
provisions of the Geneva Conventions. The right of
Israel to defend its citizens does not warrant resorting
to such excessive, illegal and inhumane practices. In
fact, such practices could only undermine the chances
of continuing the peace process and could contribute to

9

S/PV.5736

increasing tensions in the Arab and Muslim worlds,
thus creating an environment conducive to the spread
of violence.
For several months now, the Israeli Government
has been violating the sanctity of Al-Aqsa Mosque in
East Jerusalem and allowing excavations and
demolition along the western wall of the compound.
Despite the flimsy justifications given by the Israeli
Government for undertaking such excavations, those
excavations are considered part of a pattern of actions
by Israel aimed at changing the legal status,
demographic composition and religious and historical
landmarks of the occupied city of Jerusalem. Those
measures and actions are illegal and void, as repeatedly
stressed by the Security Council and the General
Assembly and as clearly stated in resolution 465
(1980).
The latest disagreements between the brethren in
Palestine are unfortunate. We are confident that this
state of affairs will not continue. Having said that, we
stress that achieving Palestinian national accord is in
everybody’s interest. On the other hand, it is
unacceptable that Israel exploits events in Gaza as a
pretext to impose an unjust siege and an economic
embargo on the Gaza Strip that adversely affect all its
innocent population. Gaza has become a big prison
where the civilian population is suffering from a
shortage of basic needs and significant restrictions on
movement.
That
environment
causes
further
deterioration in the already poor humanitarian
conditions of the civilian population. The Gaza Strip is
on the verge of economic collapse and has become
entirely dependent on international aid, as recently
noted by the United Nations Secretary-General.
In those tragic circumstances, the need to
accelerate efforts to reach a comprehensive and lasting
peaceful settlement of this crisis could not be felt more
deeply. The international community, particularly the
Quartet, should take action aiming first and foremost to
establish stability and Palestinian national unity among
the various factions. It should refrain from any action
that could lead to the exacerbation of differences
between brethren, in view of the negative impact that
internal differences have on peace and security in that
region.
In the light of the deadlock in the peace
process — despite some limited progress, such as the
recent meeting between the Palestinian President and

10

the Israeli Prime Minister — the involvement of
international actors is indispensable to move the peace
process forward. Therefore, we believe that the
intention expressed by the Quartet to meet next
September as part of its efforts to provide diplomatic
support for the talks is a positive and useful
development. In that regard, we hope that the
appointment of Mr. Blair as the Quartet’s new envoy
will constitute a step towards the revitalization of the
group’s role, and we wish him success in his work.
We also hope that the United States initiative to
hold a peace conference for the Middle East next fall
will yield concrete results and will not have a fate
similar to that of previous initiatives. To achieve
success in that endeavour, all parties need to strive for
peace in a genuine spirit. They also need to
acknowledge that violence cannot be a solution in the
Middle East. The solution must in fact be based on the
establishment of two States, in accordance with the
international terms of reference, relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Quartet road map.
With regard to the Lebanese issue, we share with
all parties the concern that the political situation in the
country has so far been marred by instability. One year
after the adoption of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006) the situation on the borders remains calm, but
Israel must cease its continuous violation of the
Lebanese airspace and cooperate in the implementation
of the resolution, as well as other Council resolutions
relevant to Lebanon, as a prerequisite for long-term
stability. All Lebanese need to unite in the face of
threats to the stability, security and national unity of
Lebanon. All Lebanese political forces need to return
to the table of dialogue and place national interest
above all other considerations.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Mr. Williams
for his comprehensive and detailed briefing. I wish to
thank him for his past efforts and also wish him well in
his new endeavours.
Over the last month, the situation in the Middle
East has witnessed encouraging developments. We
have noted that a group of Palestinian prisoners has
been released and Israel has returned some tax
revenues to the Palestinian Authority. These are
positive steps that should be acknowledged.
We welcome in particular the two meetings held
earlier this month between Chairman Abbas and Prime

07-49245

S/PV.5736

Minister Olmert, including the one concluded only
yesterday in Jerusalem. We appreciate the two leaders’
will to maintain the momentum of the meetings and we
look forward to efforts by both sides to reach
understanding, mutual trust and cooperation, and to lay
a necessary and solid foundation for the revival of the
Palestinian-Israeli peace process.
Notwithstanding these developments, the Middle
East situation remains a source of concern. Hostilities
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides and civilian
casualties continue. There is no guarantee of freedom
of movement for Palestinians in their own land. The
humanitarian situation is rapidly deteriorating. The
supply of electricity and food and the sanitation
situation are worrisome.
We appeal to the international community to
continue to provide assistance to the Palestinian
people. At the same time, we urge all parties concerned
to observe international humanitarian law and take all
necessary measures, including the opening of border
crossings, to improve the humanitarian situation in
Gaza.
At the same time, we hope that all political
parties in Palestine will fulfil the expectations of their
people and the international community, put the overall
situation and their long-term interests above everything
else and strengthen their unity and cooperation for a
joint future.
China has always believed that the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State that lives in peace,
side by side with Israel, on the basis of relevant United
Nations resolutions and the principle of land for peace
is the only way to solve the Palestinian-Israeli dispute
in a comprehensive, sustainable and fair manner.
Chairman Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert are taking
a very important first step in that direction.
If history is any guide, the achievement of peace
in the Middle East calls for arduous efforts by all sides
and will be a long process. China believes that the
international community should shoulder the
responsibilities expected of it and create a favourable
environment and provide necessary support for the
resumption of talks between Palestine and Israel.
We welcome the upcoming high-level meeting of
the Quartet next month in New York. We expect the
Quartet to come up with new initiatives to push for a
resumption of the talks between the two sides. At the

07-49245

same time, the Security Council should play an active
role in the Middle East question. We hope that the
United Nations, the Quartet, the countries in the region
and the Arab League will strengthen their contacts and
coordinate their efforts in a joint bid to advance the
Middle East peace process. The question of Lebanon
and Israel is a major part of the question of the Middle
East peace process. Comprehensive peace in the
Middle East will not be possible without an appropriate
solution of the dispute between Lebanon and Israel.
China
again
appeals
for
a
comprehensive
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006) and an early achievement of a permanent
ceasefire and a sustainable solution to the dispute.
China is also closely following developments in
the Lebanese situation. We hope that the Lebanese
people will stay united, solve their internal differences
in a peaceful manner and maintain the unity,
independence and territorial integrity of their country.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish to express my
delegation’s appreciation to the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Michael Williams,
for his useful briefing, and I commend his efforts,
including his visit to the Middle East last week aimed
at reinvigorating the peace process.
My delegation welcomes the meeting between
Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas in
Jerusalem on Tuesday, 28 August, which we hope will
contribute to the restoration of trust and the
establishment of an atmosphere conducive to moving
the peace process towards the ultimate goal of a twoState solution.
Ghana also welcomes the renewed engagement
and the recent activities of the Middle East Quartet,
including arrangements by the Secretary-General to
open an office in Jerusalem for Quartet Representative
Tony Blair, who is mandated to help galvanize
international support and resources for rebuilding
Palestinian institutions of governance, promote the rule
of law and help rehabilitate the economy in the
occupied territories.
It is our expectation that the Quartet
Representative can count on the goodwill and full
support of all factions in Palestine and the parties in
the region, whose cooperation will be instrumental in
ensuring the success of his endeavours in the coming
months.

11

S/PV.5736

The recently relaunched Arab Peace Initiative,
including the resumption of consultations between
Israel and its Arab neighbours, are steps in the right
direction. We call on all the regional States to continue
to play positive and constructive roles to facilitate the
search for peace in the Middle East.
My delegation is concerned about the
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories,
especially the worsening socio-economic conditions in
Gaza, and calls for the speedy implementation of the
Agreement on Movement and Access in order to
alleviate the plight of innocent civilians, including
women and children.
In Lebanon, Ghana commends the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for its sacrifices
and welcomes the adoption of resolution 1773 (2007)
extending the mandate of UNIFIL, which, together
with the Lebanese Armed Forces, has helped to create
what has been aptly described as a new strategic
environment in Southern Lebanon. We urge the parties
to remain committed to the tripartite mechanisms in
order to address outstanding issues. As a troopcontributing country, Ghana also welcomes the
mitigation measures being taken by the SecretaryGeneral to ensure the safety of UNIFIL personnel.
The troubling situation in Northern Lebanon,
where the siege at the Palestinian refugee camp of
Nahr el-Bared has lasted for more than three months
with no end in sight, gives cause for serious concern.
We call on the Fatah al-Islam militias to recognize the
sovereignty of the Lebanese Government and give up
their arms in the interest of peace.
We are equally concerned about the lack of
progress in the inter-Lebanese national dialogue and
reconciliation, and call on the various political parties
to endeavour to reconvene parliament in order to make
the necessary preparations for the holding of
presidential elections, as President Emile Lahoud’s
term approaches its end.
We are pleased with reports of progress that has
been made by the cartographer with regard to the
geographical definition of the Shab’a farms and appeal
to all parties to continue to cooperate with the
cartographer, who is due to visit the region again in the
coming days.
To ensure a durable peace in Lebanon, we call on
all the relevant parties in the region to comply fully

12

with the terms of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1701 (2006)
and other relevant resolutions, including the need to
respect the sovereignty of Lebanon and the legitimacy
of its democratically elected Government and
institutions.
The political, security and humanitarian situation
in the Middle East remains volatile and still constitutes
a clear danger to international peace and security.
Nothing short of concerted action underpinned by the
necessary political will on the part of the relevant
actors in the region and the international community
will suffice if we are to contain, stabilize and resolve
this situation. It is our hope that the forthcoming
regional conferences to be convened by the Quartet and
the United States-sponsored international conferences
on the Middle East expected to take place in the next
few months will contribute to the quest for a just,
durable and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking Mr. Williams for his
excellent briefing on the situation in the region. We
thank him for his outstanding work and wish him every
success in his new position.
Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement that
will be delivered shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union, and since we also share the evaluation of the
situation and observations of Mr. Williams, I wish to
limit my statement to the following remarks.
As we heard in the briefing, in the past few
months we have witnessed several key diplomatic
moves, important initiatives and developments
concerning the Israeli-Palestinian dispute that we hope
will significantly contribute to fostering the peace
process in the region and overcoming previous
impasses.
I wish to start with welcoming last month’s
Quartet statement, which accurately reflects the
complex situation on the ground and provides, in our
opinion, vital ideas on how to proceed further and
enhance the prospects for peace in the region. We are
convinced that the Quartet represents the most
appropriate mechanism for advancing the peace
process and we are looking forward to its next meeting
here in New York next month and its continuing full
engagement.

07-49245

S/PV.5736

We also welcome and support the appointment of
Mr. Tony Blair as the Quartet Representative. We see
this nomination as yet another practical step in
enhancing the ongoing peace efforts in the region. The
results of his latest visit on 24 and 25 July and the visit
of United States Secretary of State Rice on 1 August to
the region, which involved meetings held with Israeli
and Palestinian representatives, are encouraging. We
are looking forward to their expected follow-up.
I would like to use this opportunity to reaffirm
our full support to a settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict that is just, comprehensive and
lasting and based on all relevant Security Council
resolutions, Road Map goals and principles, and
negotiations between the two sides. We believe that the
international community must mobilize and intensify
its efforts to help the parties to achieve this kind of
solution as soon as possible in the interest of regional
and global peace and security.
In this regard, we welcome and support President
Bush’s call for an international meeting this autumn in
order to move forward the peace process in the Middle
East. We also believe that the Arab Peace Initiative
retains its importance as a major element for success in
resolving the Middle East dispute. We hope that the
engagement between the Arab League countries and
Israel, as represented, among others, by the recent
historic visit of the ministers for foreign affairs of
Egypt and Jordan to Israel on 25 July, will bring
concrete positive results towards this end.
In addition to the previously mentioned
multilateral efforts and diplomatic initiatives, we also
stress the need to continue in direct and meaningful
political dialogue and meetings between Israeli Prime
Minister Olmert and Palestinian President Abbas,
which are, in our view, key to further progress in
achieving the two-State solution, Israel and Palestine
living side-by-side in peace. We welcome their meeting
yesterday in Jerusalem and hope that such contacts will
now become regular and that both leaders will seize
and further enhance this positive momentum through
concrete and immediate action, including confidencebuilding measures.
Israel’s initial release of a group of Palestinian
prisoners and detainees and the partial transfer of
withheld Palestinian tax and custom revenues are
concrete examples of such actions and are welcome
vital steps forward. However, we also reiterate our call

07-49245

on Israel to complete the release of the remaining and
future Palestinian funds, to release the Palestinian
legislators in its custody and to continue to meet its
further Road Map commitments, which will support
progress in the peace process.
As for the Palestinian side, we reiterate our
support for President Mahmoud Abbas and the
measures he has undertaken aimed at bringing the
situation in the Palestinian territories under control and
restoring law and order. We also support the
Palestinian Government under the premiership of
Mr. Salam Fayyad. Our support was personally
reaffirmed by my Foreign Minister, Mr. Ján Kubiš,
during his visit to Israel and the Palestinian territories
at the beginning of July.
As far as the situation on the ground is
concerned, it is of the utmost importance not to forget
the continuing critical humanitarian situation, which
first and foremost affects the people of Gaza. We must
not abandon them. It is imperative to work to find ways
to open border crossings in order to allow humanitarian
and commercial flows in and out of Gaza. In that
regard, we also call upon Hamas to end its illegal
actions in Gaza, which are outside the rule of law and
the framework of the Palestinian Authority, which we
consider the sole representative of the Palestinian
people.
At the same time we strongly condemn the rocket
attacks launched from Gaza against Israeli civilian
targets and populations. We reiterate our call for an
immediate end to violence by Palestinian factions and
to attacks on Israel, as well as for the release of the
abducted Israeli soldier, Corporal Shalit.
As for Israel, we believe it has the right of selfdefence against terrorism and its perpetrators. Although
we understand its anxiety over the safety and wellbeing of its citizens, we stress that Israel’s measures
and responses must always be proportionate and
respectful of international law, including as regards the
protection of civilians.
Briefly turning to Lebanon now, we remain
deeply concerned about the continuing instability and
political deadlock, which have paralysed the country
and are hampering the process of reconciliation and
reconstruction. We call upon all parties in Lebanon to
resume the national dialogue and to assume their
responsibility for bringing about lasting peace in the

13

S/PV.5736

country, in the interest of the entire Lebanese
population.
We consider the forthcoming presidential
elections to be a key moment in the process of
normalization and stabilization of the political situation
in Lebanon. It is important to ensure that the elections
are conducted in a calm and constitutional manner that
leads to the election of a President and to the
consolidation of the democratic institutions in the
country.
We support the democratically and legitimately
elected Government of Lebanon. We believe that its
legitimacy must not be challenged. The mandate it
received from the Lebanese people to lead the country
in the 2005 democratic elections must be fully
respected by all.
We urge all actors inside and outside the country
to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Lebanon, as well as to stop
foreign interference without delay. In that regard, we
believe that the international community must do
everything possible to assist Lebanon to achieve a
comprehensive and sustainable solution through the
full implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1701 (2006). Those resolutions must be respected and
fully implemented by all the relevant actors in the
region and inside the country.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me start by
thanking Mr. Michael Williams, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his statement.
We too wish him well in his next endeavour, which we
hope will be less turbulent than the one he has just
completed.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later today by the Permanent
Representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
In the past several weeks, there has been
encouraging movement towards re-igniting the search
for peace in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The
meetings between Palestinian President Abbas and
Israeli Prime Minister Olmert have been a positive
development, as was the historic visit to Israel
undertaken by two Arab foreign ministers representing
the League of Arab States to promote the Arab Peace
Initiative. The call by United States President Bush for
the holding of an international conference on Palestine

14

in the coming months to bring the parties together in
order to reinvigorate the peace process has also raised
hopes in the Middle East, and indeed beyond the
region.
However, those encouraging developments have
yet to be translated into progress on the ground in
Palestine. The reality is that Palestinians continue to
live under occupation, which they have endured for
decades. They face daily hardships, compounded by
the 550 checkpoints that restrict their movement and
access. The violent incursions by the Israeli army into
Palestinian areas continue unabated, while Israeli
settlements and the separation wall expand, despite
international condemnation. Additionally, thousands of
Palestinian political prisoners continue to languish in
Israeli jails.
On a daily basis, Palestinians in the occupied
territories continue to face an Israeli policy that
violates the basic principles of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Those actions undermine positive movements towards
peace. In particular, the situation in Gaza deserves our
special attention.
A year ago yesterday, 28 August 2006,
Mr. Arnold Vercken, Country Director of the World
Food Programme in the occupied Palestinian Territory,
said the following about Gaza:
“The economy is really reaching rock
bottom. Industries which were once the backbone
of Gaza’s economy and food system, such as the
agriculture and fishing industries, are suffocated
by the current situation and risk losing all
viability.” (United Nations News Centre, webpage, 28 August 2006)
Mr. Vercken went on to report that the destruction
of nearly 400 hectares of agricultural land, including
irrigation pipes and greenhouses, had left farmers
destitute with no support to re-cultivate their land. He
went on to say that Gaza’s infrastructure lay crippled,
affecting the lives of the 1.4 million population on a
daily basis. He also said that power and water supplies
remain low and unreliable.
In an attempt to reconcile the hopeful signs with
the continuing tragic situation on the ground,
Ambassador Riyad Mansour, the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations, wrote in his letter of

07-49245

S/PV.5736

26 July 2007 addressed to the Secretary-General and
the President of the Security Council that
“These opportunities must be seized and built
upon and the illegal actions of Israel, which move
us all in the opposite direction, must be rejected,
and Israel must be compelled to cease its
violations of international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, to abide by
resolutions of international legitimacy and to
seriously pursue peace in good faith.”
(S/2007/459, fifth paragraph)
The
international
community
bears
the
responsibility to ensure that political progress in
Palestine is coupled with a change for the better in the
lives of ordinary Palestinians. The Council, with its
Charter-mandated responsibility for international peace
and security, cannot afford to ignore the suffering of
the Palestinian people. Inaction on the part of the
Council will always be misunderstood as condoning
the suffering on the ground.

French Republic has called the hopeless feeling that
peace is not moving forward and even moving
backward in minds and hearts.
A first decisive element will be the capacity to
rebuild a strong Palestinian Authority and to reinforce
its authority. France will spare no effort in that regard
at the national level and within the framework of the
European Union. In particular, we will lend our full
support to the efforts of the new Quartet
Representative, Mr. Tony Blair.
But it is primarily through their own actions that
the two parties will create the conditions for a
solidification of the Palestinian Authority. The phased
Israeli measures to strengthen the Palestinian
Authority, taken at Sharm el-Sheikh on 25 June and
during the meetings in Jerusalem on 16 July and in
Jericho on 6 August, are thus in the right direction, and
France welcomes them. To meet the current challenges,
however, they must be broader.

Once again, my delegation wishes to reiterate that
the way forward to peace must include the
establishment of an independent State of Palestinian,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side
with Israel, with both States enjoying secure and
internationally recognized borders. That vision of a
two-State solution has already been enshrined in
resolution 1397 (2002). We cannot allow that vision to
fade.

Thus, at this juncture it is essential to remedy the
insecurity of the humanitarian situation in the
Palestinian territories, particularly in Gaza, where it
continues to deteriorate and where the economy is
close to collapse. It is urgent that concrete measures be
taken to make it possible to reopen the Karni terminal
and other crossing points to Gaza and the West Bank.
We also call once again on all actors on the ground to
respect international humanitarian law and to shoulder
their responsibility for the protection of civilians.

Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to thank the Secretariat, and particularly
Mr. Michael Williams, for the briefing on the situation
in the Middle East. And I should like to take this
opportunity, at a time when he is leaving his post, to
thank Mr. Williams for his remarkable work over the
past few years and to wish him every success in his
new responsibilities.

More generally speaking, more substantial
measures would establish the benchmarks for a
settlement by reinforcing the Palestinian Authority. In
particular, I am thinking of the release of a larger
number of prisoners, a lifting of the restrictions on
movement in the West Bank and even the dismantling
of unauthorized settlements and the halting of
settlement expansion.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the representative of Portugal on
behalf of the European Union.

For its part, the Palestinian Authority must show
that it is fully exercising its authority by mercilessly
combating terrorism and stepping up its efforts to
obtain the immediate release of Gilad Shalit. To that
end, France is counting on the efforts of President
Abbas, to whom we reaffirm our full support. The
appointment of Mr. Salam Fayyad to the post of Prime
Minister has opened a new chapter. Eventually, the
resumption of the inter-Palestinian dialogue will be
necessary to avoid a lasting rupture between Gaza and
the West Bank. France remains attached to Palestinian

The Secretariat’s briefing once again enables us
to assess the scope of the difficulties on the ground and
to see the absolute need to make immediate progress
towards a settlement.
Some reasons for hope have recently appeared.
However, in each of these cases, we must go much
further so that we can get past what the President of the

07-49245

15

S/PV.5736

unity and to the preservation of the institutions of the
Palestinian Authority.
Over and above that, it is crucial to immediately
re-launch a genuine momentum for peace leading to
the establishment of a Palestinian State. Indeed, it is
essential to give the peoples a political perspective.
Thus, France notes with interest the resumption of the
Israeli-Palestinian dialogue. We also consider the
holding of an international conference in the autumn to
be a positive element.
We must do everything possible to strengthen the
momentum that seems to be developing. The Quartet
must thus play its full role by supporting a solution
whose broad outlines we know: the establishment of an
independent, sovereign, democratic and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security. The Quartet meeting planned for
September will be an important opportunity to make
progress in that regard with the countries of the region,
particularly Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates, which have leading roles to play in
promoting peace in the Middle East.
Finally, France believes that if we make progress
towards an agreement, the international community,
and particularly the Security Council, must be prepared
to provide guarantees enabling both parties to have the
confidence necessary to implement a possible
agreement. Thus, France, convinced that peace will be
negotiated first between Israelis and Palestinians, is
resolved to take or support any useful initiative.
Mr. Chávez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
meeting, as we do every month, to consider the
situation in the Middle East. First of all, we must note
with concern the persistence of the intra-Palestinian
conflict, which continues to claim victims in the
Palestinian population itself.
In addition to the human losses, this conflict, it
must be said, has other consequences at the
humanitarian and economic levels that obstruct the
peace process. Economic activity in the occupied
territory, including the Gaza Strip, is being greatly
affected by the closure of businesses and the loss of
tens of thousands of jobs. Under those conditions, the
risk of a permanent collapse exists and must be
avoided.
Therefore, the international community must, in a
constructive spirit, ensure the provision of

16

humanitarian aid to the Palestinian people and continue
its efforts to raise their standard of living, which
continues to deteriorate dramatically. In addition, the
Israeli authorities, without compromising their
security, must guarantee the flows needed for the
movement of persons and goods and must not reduce
the activities of the people of this region to dependence
on humanitarian assistance.
The other main task continues to be ensuring
effective administration throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory. That is essential in order to
prevent deterioration in the quality of daily life, to
control attacks against Israeli civilian targets and to
prevent internal arms trafficking. In that context, we
highlight the appointment of Mr. Tony Blair, former
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. We are
convinced that his leadership, in fulfilment of his
mandate, will contribute to the strengthening of
Palestinian institutions, particularly in key areas for the
population such as education, health and security.
Moreover, we believe that Israel must also take
steps on the ground, particularly by suspending the
establishment of new settlements in the occupied
territories and by beginning to dismantle and halt the
construction of the separation wall, whose presence
and significance are contrary to the agreements and the
spirit of coexistence and peace. As has been said, the
obstacles to the movement of Palestinians hamper
efforts to reduce tension and cause severe economic
and social deterioration.
On the diplomatic front we recognize the positive
dialogue between President Abbas and Prime Minister
Olmert and we encourage its continuation, particularly
taking into account the initiative of the United States
President George Bush to hold an international meeting
this autumn to re-launch the Palestinian-Israeli peace
process and move towards the objective of establishing
a viable and independent Palestinian State. Peru’s wish
is that the initiative will draw in all those actively
involved in the process and that the agreements
reached will be binding on all those involved, so that
the peace process may be implemented in an effective
and comprehensive manner.
It is also necessary to bear in mind that the
question of the occupation of the Syrian Golan remains
pending and that the door to negotiations between the
parties must remain open in order to reach a solution.

07-49245

S/PV.5736

On the subject of Lebanon, we are concerned by
the continuing political crisis in the country that issues
primarily from the actions of armed groups acting
outside State authority. The Lebanese political forces
must resume national dialogue leading to an agreement
and to the restoration of the sovereignty of the State
throughout its territory.
Peru welcomes the recent unanimous renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon and we reiterate our tribute to the troops who
perished in the line of duty. We condemn the armed
groups that attacked the United Nations Blue Helmets.
We also reiterate our call to fully respect the Blue Line
and to cease all acts that violate sovereignty on both
sides of the Line and constitute a threat to security.
My delegation hopes that the recommendations of
the Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team can
be implemented soon and calls on the Government of
Lebanon to continue its endeavours.
On the subject of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, we welcome the recent decision by the
Netherlands Government to host its headquarters.
As is apparent, the overall situation is precarious
and its signals are contradictory. My delegation hopes
that the combination of efforts of the various political
actors committed to seeking a solution, particularly
within the Middle East, will make it possible to resume
dialogue on all necessary fronts — which is the only
way to reach just, comprehensive and permanent
solutions to the long-suffering region.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Let me start by thanking
the Special Coordinator, Mr. Williams, for his briefing,
as well as for his endeavours in the pursuit of a
solution to the Middle East crisis.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement that the
European Union presidency is to deliver later on.
The most significant development in the Middle
East peace process is the intensification of direct talks
between Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas,
particularly their meetings of 6 and 28 August. We
hope that the parties will continue their efforts with a
forward-looking spirit. In that respect, we particularly
appreciate the initiative launched by President Bush to
convene an international conference this autumn with
the double objective of verifying the process of
rebuilding the institutions and supporting the bilateral
political negotiation process. Although we hope to

07-49245

learn more about its contents and format, the initiative
represents a clear signal of the United States’
commitment to foster a final settlement in the
framework of the efforts underway at the multilateral
level. The conference opens up the unprecedented
possibility of linking direct progress between the
parties to the need for regional stability disclosed in the
Arab League’s important peace initiative.
On the inter-Palestinian side, while the apparently
implacable conflict between Fatah and Hamas persists,
the international community should lend its efforts to
fostering national reconciliation as soon as the
conditions exist. We should aim to support President
Abbas, so as to enhance his role as a credible and
legitimate interlocutor with Israel. The President of the
Palestinian Authority needs to be in a position to offer
Palestinian public opinion visible results, especially in
terms of improving the conditions of everyday life.
My delegation does not believe in any new
proposal that envisions a solution between two peoples
and three States. The Palestinian people must remain
unified in the shared objective of establishing an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State
that exists in peace and security with Israel and its
other neighbours.
Italy supports the efforts of President Abbas and
the legitimate government of Prime Minister Fayyad.
We hope that the current de facto division of the
Palestinian Territories can be overcome, and we remain
willing to dialogue with all the Palestinian political
parties whose programmes and actions reflect the
principles enunciated by the Quartet. The Palestinian
Territories remain divided, and in the Gaza Strip there
has been a sharp deterioration in the humanitarian
situation. These are matters of deep concern to Italy.
We must continue to ensure that emergency relief
supplies reach those who are in need, and we are
confident that all the parties will work in good faith to
keep a humanitarian corridor open.
It is now time to be ambitious, if we wish to seize
the window of opportunity created by the renewed
dialogue of the parties. Obviously, to move toward the
two-State perspective in which we all believe, we need
to promote the building of mutual trust between the
parties, with measures aimed, on one hand, at
improving the overall conditions of the Palestinian
people, and on the other, at establishing the prospect of
an independent Palestinian State on sound institutional,

17

S/PV.5736

economic and security foundations. In that regard, we
are confident that the work of the Quartet’s Special
Representative in the area of capacity-building will
make a decisive contribution.
We believe, nevertheless, that being ambitious
requires the courage from both parties to start to
address, at least in general terms, the core issues for
the final status: Jerusalem, the territorial borders and
refugees, mindful of the significant progress made on
all three issues in the previous negotiations in Camp
David and Taba. We have to ensure that the announced
conference will play a fundamental role in the
advancement of the peace process, also through an
enlarged regional dimension.
From that perspective, Italy strongly supports
more resolute action on the part of the Quartet to
revive the diplomatic process and to offer a definitive
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, in compliance with
Security Council resolutions and the objectives of the
Road Map.
On the subject of Lebanon; with regard to the
Lebanese domestic situation, we wish to express the
hope that with the approach of the presidential
elections the general situation in the country will not
deteriorate further. The news that we are hearing from
Beirut give reason for concern: the forces acting
against the stability of Lebanon are, unfortunately, still
a real threat. It is imperative for the international
community to maintain its support for the Government
of Prime Minister Siniora.
Among the many problems that need to be solved
in Lebanon, probably the most crucial right now is the
election of the President of the Republic, which we
hope will take place on schedule after a free and fair
electoral process leading to the election of a candidate
who is accepted by all of the Lebanese.
While it is true that Lebanese political forces
should make every effort to resume talks and overcome
the impasse afflicting the country, it is also
indispensable that all the countries of the region,
particularly Syria, help to promote a political solution
to the Lebanese crisis. For our part, we have never
ceased to underline this and have repeatedly invited the
Syrian authorities to play a positive and effective role
in the stability of Lebanon and the entire Middle
Eastern area.

We believe it is essential, for the sake of a
progressive normalization of the situation on the
Lebanese-Israeli border, that the question of the two
Israeli soldiers kidnapped by Hizbollah be addressed
quickly and settled in a positive manner, also in the
framework of a comprehensive exchange of prisoners.
The failure to find a solution to the Shab’a
farmlands question is also a cause for concern, since
the issue represents a dangerous hotbed of tensions on
the border with Israel and fuels the claims of armed
groups. We appreciate the work conducted in recent
months by the United Nations cartographers and hope
that a proposal can soon be outlined as a basis for
starting the necessary consultations between the
concerned parties, so that the farmlands area can be
rapidly placed under United Nations control while
awaiting an agreement on the borders between Syria
and Lebanon.
Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Williams for his
briefing and his significant work on the Middle East
and we wish him success in his future endeavours. The
news he gave us of progress made in the discussions
between President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert is
very positive, but the general situation remains serious.
We are concerned that particular stances taken by some
members of the international community may
represent, what Mr. Williams calls, “factors that may
derail long-term endeavours and efforts”.
Regarding the Palestine-Israel peace process, the
international community, in our view, has two paths
before it. The first is to seek new Palestinian unity and
support a two-State solution involving the entire
Palestinian population. The second course, which
would appear to have already been selected by some
stakeholders in the process, consists of a two-pronged
policy of supporting the Government of President
Abbas in the West Bank and isolating Hamas in Gaza.
Our delegation expresses its disagreement with
any policy that exacerbates the division of the
Palestinian Authority. This Council has called for unity
and national reconciliation through inclusive dialogue
and, likewise, we encourage the main protagonists in
the peace process to promote national unity in
Palestine through all diplomatic channels available
including opening channels of dialogue with Hamas.
Hamas represents a considerable proportion of
the Palestinian population, and this representation

18

07-49245

S/PV.5736

cannot be excluded from the Palestinian Government.
However, Hamas must be a responsible actor in the
process that would lead to the eventual creation of a
viable Palestinian State. As long as it fails to accept
that the solution to the Palestine question is one of two
States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in
peace, Hamas will remain an obstacle to national unity
and, as such, will not be able to participate in the peace
process.
Israel, too, can and should do much to carry the
process forward. It should put an end to the illegal
construction of the Wall and the settlements in the West
Bank. In addition, it should permit a better flow of
essential goods into the Gaza Strip and prevent its
impending economic collapse. The creation of a viable
Palestinian State presupposes a stable Gaza Strip.
Actions demonstrating Israel’s good will would help
tremendously in this regard.
On the subject of Lebanon, we await the
presidential elections of next month. It is extremely
important that these elections be carried out with
transparency and in line with the constitution, in an
atmosphere of peace. Equally important is that the
results under these conditions be accepted by all
Lebanese parties and the international community. The
solution to the situation in Lebanon and lasting peace
in the region resides in the establishment of a
government of Lebanese unity that will bring an end to
the political stagnation that has kept the country down
for almost an entire year.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too thank Mr. Williams for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East peace process. We
would like to join with colleagues in expressing high
praise for the active and professional activities of
Mr. Williams in his important post. We wish
Mr. Williams every success in his new appointment,
one that is also directly linked to settlement of the
Middle East situation.
The situation in the Middle East continues to be
complex and contradictory. Alongside the profound and
ongoing crisis within the Palestinian National
Authority, after the events in June, there has been some
encouraging progress in Palestinian-Israeli relations. A
positive factor, of course, is the current absence of
large-scale violence. Although, unfortunately, there are
still victims. But it is important to increase the tempo

07-49245

and to enhance the effectiveness of efforts for a
comprehensive settlement in the region, in all aspects.
A source of a certain degree of optimism is the
fact that contacts between Mr. Abbas and Mr. Olmert,
the latest of which was held on 28 August in Jerusalem,
are becoming regular. Their agenda is becoming more
substantive. However, at present, their stress is still on
day to day, although still important, issues whereas the
main problem relates to the development of political
contours and the issue of a final independent status.
This, in our view, requires accelerated work by
involved parties, along with collective and constructive
international assistance, including from the Quartet and
international mediators.
A de facto dual authority continues to exist in the
Palestinian territories. The rift between Fatah and
Hamas is not only destabilizing the situation, it is also
having a negative impact on the prospect for progress
towards a long-term settlement with Israel. Russia has
consistently supported the Palestinian Constitutional
structure and the head of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Abbas and this was particularly reinforced during
Mr. Abbas’ recent visit to Moscow. At the same time,
we believe that there is no alternative to intraPalestinian unity and harmony. This is extremely
important, if durable and lasting peace is to be
achieved in the Middle East. It is clear that any
possible agreements with Israel will need to enjoy the
broadest possible support among Palestinians.
The socio-economic situation in the territories of
the Palestinian National Authority, and particularly in
Gaza, are a source of profound concern. At this time,
Russian humanitarian assistance is being sent there. We
expect Israel to take additional steps in order to meet
the humanitarian needs of the Palestinians. All parties
need to observe all previously assumed obligations and
above all, as far as the Palestinian side is concerned,
they need to combat terrorism. At the same time, we
note the inadmissibility of the Israeli practice of
targeted eliminations, the construction of settlements
and the continuation of the Wall.
In these present conditions, the search for collective
achievements towards Arab-Israeli reconciliation remains
fundamentally important and, in this connection, we
have supported the idea of convening an international
meeting this autumn on a Middle East settlement. We
hope that at the ministerial meeting of the Quartet,
which is planned for 23 September in New York,

19

S/PV.5736

agreement will be reached on format, modalities,
agenda and international legal basis.
At previous conferences of the Quartet, an
agreement was reached on the active participation of
the Quartet in the proposed activities of the meeting.
Our position is that the forthcoming meeting may
promote progress towards a comprehensive peace and,
in this context, may assist with preparations for a
representative international conference on the Middle
East. We see the role of such a full-format conference
as to be a relaunching of the peace process in all of its
aspects. Participation by Syria and Lebanon, in our
opinion, will assist in making the forum productive and
will contribute to the task of reaching a comprehensive
Middle East solution and settlement. A strategic
benchmark in this respect is that any settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict must be based on an
internationally recognized legal platform, such as the
resolutions of the Security Council, the Madrid
Principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We remain profoundly concerned about the
continuing political crisis in Lebanon. We call on the
Lebanese parties and groups to search assiduously for
compromise solutions through national dialogue and to
consider seriously the proposed initiatives which will
make it possible to avoid more fighting this year.
Above all, one matter that is extremely important to
life in Lebanon is the presidential election. We need to
give the Lebanese constructive external support and to
expand the political and social basis of intra-Lebanese
agreement. The United Nations still has an important
role to play in this process, including through the
stabilizing role of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL), the mandate of which the Security
Council recently extended for a year.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Let me
begin by thanking the Special Coordinator for his
detailed and characteristically well-judged briefing to
the Council. As this is his last appearance before us, I
would like to express the United Kingdom’s
appreciation for all he has done for the United Nations
over the last few years, both in his present appointment
and in previous ones. His work on the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006), and on the Middle East
peace process generally, speaks for itself. We will all
miss you in New York, Michael, and we offer our best
wishes to you in your next role.

20

As this is my first Security Council debate on the
situation in the Middle East, I should like to take the
opportunity to reiterate the basic elements that
underpin my Government’s approach to the peace
process. These are: first, support for the two-State
solution; second, working with all those in the region
committed to peace; and, third, improving the lives of
Palestinians in the West Bank and in Gaza.
It is clear from the interventions of colleagues
that there is much common ground. There are reasons
for cautious optimism. There is the continued dialogue
between Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas,
which we hope will include meaningful discussion of
permanent status issues. There is a new focus, in the
appointment of Tony Blair, for the Quartet’s and the
wider international community’s efforts to reinvigorate
the peace process, in particular by building the
institutions of a future Palestinian state, and by
developing the Palestinian economy. There are
intensifying international efforts, proposals for a donor
conference and, in particular, the international meeting
on the Middle East convened by the United States
president. There are discussions on the Arab Peace
Initiative, which we hope will build on the historic
visit to Israel by Arab League representatives last
month.
These developments provide us with a clear
agenda for progress, which we should not allow to be
derailed by events. Of course, we must not
underestimate the huge challenges we face. One of the
most urgent priorities for the international community
is to alleviate the humanitarian situation in Gaza. We
all need to continue to show strong political and
practical support for President Abbas and Prime
Minister Fayyad’s Government. We welcome the
transfer by Israel this month of $160 million of
Palestinian clearance revenues. It is important that
these transfers continue. And we look to the
Government of Israel to take further steps to improve
the daily lives of the Palestinian people.
I would like to say a few words about Lebanon.
The parliamentary elections to select a new president
next month will be an important milestone on the path
to restoring stability in Lebanon. The United Kingdom
welcomes the efforts of international partners, in
particular, France and the Arab League, to secure a way
through the current political impasse.

07-49245

S/PV.5736

We also welcome this Council’s decision to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for another year. UNIFIL has
made a vital contribution to maintaining stability and
security in southern Lebanon since the conflict last
year.

regional peace. We know that a high-level international
meeting on the Middle East is also scheduled for this
autumn and it is important that this meeting should
genuinely be viewed as an opportunity not to be missed
by any of the parties involved, directly or indirectly, in
the process.

There is a wider need for concerted action to
implement fully resolution 1701 (2006). Action to put
an end to arms smuggling across the Syria/Lebanon
border will be particularly important. That will require
robust follow-up to the mission of the Lebanon
Independent Border Assessment Team to ensure that its
recommendations are taken forward.

Belgium appeals to the parties to undertake
specific actions to improve the situation of the
population. The deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip is a cause for concern.
Reopening the Karni Terminal for both imports and
exports is of critical importance to avoid the total
collapse of the economy in the Gaza Strip, with the all
too predictable humanitarian consequences.

The United Kingdom believes this work should
take place in tandem with efforts to reduce Israeli
overflights and to work towards a resolution of the
Sheba’a farms dispute.
Finally, the United Kingdom looks forward to the
Secretary-General’s 90-day progress report on the
establishment of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. We
remain determined to support the Lebanese people and
Government in their efforts to bring to justice those
responsible for the murder of Rafik Hariri and that of
others.
I also associate myself with the statement to be
made later by the Permanent Representative of
Portugal on behalf of the European Union.
Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): Like
my other European colleagues, in my following
comments, I align myself with the statement to be
made by Portugal on behalf of the European Union
later today.
Belgium
welcomes
the
direct
contacts
particularly in Jericho between the Israeli Prime
Minister, Mr. Olmert, and the Palestinian President,
Mr. Abbas. This dialogue constitutes a major step
forward in the quest for a durable solution to the
conflict between Israel and Palestine. We must
encourage them to continue along this course.
The Quartet has met several times over the last
few months. Its renewed vitality is reflected in part in
the appointment of Mr. Blair as its representative. We
await his first report at the next meeting of the Quartet
here in New York on 23 September.

In Lebanon, all political forces should focus on
seeking a solution to the current political impasse. That
is all the more important given the prospect of the
upcoming presidential elections. Belgium is pleased to
note that all parties in Lebanon state that they are ready
to work on the matter. Now is the time for words to be
translated into deeds, and for specific measures to be
taken to ensure that the elections really do take place in
due time and with respect for democratic rules. I call
on all sides to act with a sense of urgency and
responsibility.
The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) is a way for the
international community to show its firm determination
to continue to support Lebanon on its journey towards
total recovery of its sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence.
The attack last June which targeted UNIFIL and
cost the lives of six Blue Helmets reminds us of the
need to step up our efforts to ensure the security of
troops, but it has certainly not shaken the
determination of the international community, nor of
Belgium specifically, to continue to fulfil this mission.
I would like to end by thanking both personally
and on behalf of my Government Mr. Michael
Williams for his outstanding work, imbued with a great
sense of responsibility, that he performed for the
United Nations and for its Member States during the
past year. Belgium believes that he will continue in his
new capacity to contribute to the quest for a durable
peace for the Middle East.

Regional initiatives also are very topical. For
Belgium, the Arab Peace Initiative remains key to

07-49245

21

S/PV.5736

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Republic of the Congo.
I thank Mr. Williams, the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Process and the Secretary-General’s
Personal Representative to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, for his very
informative statement, the content of which has been
duly noted by the Congolese delegation.
In a precarious and volatile environment, we note
positive signs that are important milestones along the
path to the relaunching of the peace process in the
region. As we all know, a solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict cannot be found through arms.
Thus there is a need for the international community to
firmly support the initiatives and efforts being
undertaken at various levels in order to achieve the
two-State solution, Israel and Palestine living side-byside in peace and security in accordance with the Road
Map and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
Certainly, the security situation on the ground
continues to be a source of concern, and my delegation
strongly condemns all acts of violence and
provocation, whatever their source.
We also remain extremely concerned by the
continuing deterioration in the living conditions of the
Palestinian people, particularly in Gaza. The organized
shortages and restrictions on movement of the
population of the occupied territories and of
humanitarian personnel are intolerable, because they
aggravate a situation that is already disastrous and are
making this territory a veritable open-air prison. The
international community, in particular the principle
donors, must contribute effectively to easing the
difficulties of the daily life of the Palestinian people —
all of the Palestinian people.
My delegation deplores once again the violent
nature of inter-Palestinian clashes, which unfortunately
have led to a de facto split between Gaza and the West
Bank, thus compromising the idea of a democratic and
viable Palestinian State. We urge the Palestinian people
to draw on their patriotic resources and regain their
unity with the assistance of the States of the region, in
particular in the spirit of the agreement reached in
Mecca, Saudi Arabia on 8 February 2007.
The Middle East Quartet, for its part, must
redouble its efforts in accordance with its mission,
which is to restore peace in the region by putting an

22

end to the Arab-Israeli conflict and by creating the
conditions necessary for the establishment of the
Palestinian State. My delegation notes and welcomes
the latest initiatives of the Quartet, particularly the
declaration made at Lisbon on 19 July 2007 regarding
the convening of an international meeting on the
initiative of the President of the United States of
America, mentioned in his statement of 16 July 2007.
We also welcome the recent arrangements by the
Secretary-General to implement the conclusions of the
Quartet, measures that were in fact endorsed by our
Council on 24 August with regard to the mandate of
Mr. Tony Blair, the Quartet representative, and the
establishment and the functioning of his office in
Jerusalem.
The Congo expects the international meeting on
the Middle East to be able to help protagonists in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict to achieve substantial
progress in the forthcoming negotiations. In the
meantime, we call on both parties to avoid any
unilateral actions or measures which might undermine
confidence. In this respect, we welcome the release by
Israel of 250 Palestinian prisoners and the restoration
to the Palestinian Authority of previously frozen
financial assets. We also welcome the resumption of
bilateral talks between the Prime Minister of Israel,
Ehud Olmert, and the President of the Palestinian
Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, talks that we feel should
go beyond security and humanitarian arrangements in
order to focus on substantive issues and move on to
new stages.
As regards Lebanon, my delegation welcomes
efforts being made at various levels to prevent that
country, which we cherish, from sinking once again
into violence. We note the tireless efforts of certain
countries that are friends of Lebanon. These efforts
should be supported by the entire international
community.
We would like to reaffirm the position expressed
by the Council on 3 August 2007 through the
presidential statement issued following the discussion
on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/PRST/2007/29). We also welcome the adoption by
the Council on 24 August 2007 of resolution 1773
(2007), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon for another year.
One year after the war of summer 2006, Lebanon
is still faced with major challenges as regards its

07-49245

S/PV.5736

political independence, its sovereignty, its unity and its
territorial integrity. We remain convinced that only a
responsible national dialogue will make it possible to
find solutions to the many questions that remain
unresolved relating to constitutional issues, electoral
perspectives and legal disputes.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your country, the Republic of the Congo, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. We have full confidence that the work of
the Council will be successful under your able and
wise stewardship. I express our profound appreciation
as well to the Permanent Representative of China for
his adept leadership of the Council during the month of
July.
At this time, I would also like to thank the
Special Coordinator, Mr. Michael Williams, for his
briefing to the Council today on the current situation in
our region and to thank him on behalf of Palestine for
the role he played during his short tenure. We wish him
every success in his new post in London, which will
allow him to remain in contact with us and the question
of Palestine.
When addressing the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, we
cannot but refer to the reality of what is actually
happening on the ground. I repeat, we cannot but refer
to the reality of what is actually happening on the
ground. As depressing, negative and frustrating as
these facts may be — and as repetitive as it may
sound — this is the tragic reality of the Palestinian
people living under Israel’s occupation. It is our duty
as the representatives of the Palestinian people here at
the United Nations to continuously bring this situation
to the attention of the Security Council until Israel, the
occupying Power, ceases — or is compelled to
cease — its illegal policies and practices.
Israel’s unlawful policies and incessant violations
of international law continue to cause severe hardships
for the Palestinian civilian population, to compound
the difficult situation on the ground and to undermine
any peace efforts. Indeed, the cessation of such illegal

07-49245

policies and practices is a prerequisite for making
peace, a delicate process that requires good will and a
stable environment conducive to truly reviving and
advancing peace negotiations.
Regrettably, in the months that have passed since
I addressed the Council in April, Israel, the occupying
Power, continued to commit violations and grave
breaches of international law in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The
Israeli occupying forces continue to carry out repeated
military raids, assaults and incursions throughout the
occupied territory, terrifying, killing and injuring more
Palestinian civilians, including many children. They
continue to use excessive, indiscriminate and lethal
force against the defenceless Palestinians in addition to
extrajudicial killings. At the same time, Israeli
occupation forces persist in their attacks, spreading
havoc in the property of Palestinian civilians, including
their homes and cultivated land, as well as destroying
their infrastructure and aiming at the unlawful
confiscation of Palestinian lands.
Despite the fact that over 200 Palestinian
prisoners have been released, Israel continues
arbitrarily to detain and imprison thousands of
Palestinians. That includes 112 women and at least 300
children. This is in addition to other violent house-tohouse detention campaigns that are carried out daily.
Such illegal and destructive acts by Israel, the
occupying Power, exacerbate the suffering of the
Palestinian people at all levels. They also cause further
deterioration of the situation, fuelling violence and
tension.
At the same time, Israel is continuing to pursue
its unlawful colonization campaign in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The
occupying Power is continuing to construct and expand
its illegal settlements in the West Bank, particularly in
and around the area of occupied East Jerusalem. It is
also continuing to transfer Israeli settlers to the
occupied territory on a daily basis — at a rate of
approximately 1.5 busloads of settlers per day,
according to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
In addition, Israel is continuing to unlawfully
construct the wall in occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. In doing so it is confiscating
more Palestinian land, demolishing more property of
Palestinian civilians and causing more damage to the

23

S/PV.5736

environment and further fragmenting the Palestinian
territory in pursuit of this illegal and destructive plan.
All of that is being done in grave breach of
international law, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention, in serious violation of United Nations
resolutions, in total disrespect for the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) and in
disregard of the provisions of the Quartet’s road map.
Both the settlements and the wall are destroying the
territorial contiguity and integrity of the Palestinian
territory and must be dismantled — I repeat, they must
be dismantled. Their continued presence seriously
undermines the viability of the two-State solution, and
thus the prospects for peace.
While further fragmenting the Palestinian
territory and separating Palestinian population centres
into isolated and barely viable cantons, Israel is also
maintaining a discriminatory road network and permit
system, with more than 550 checkpoints and
roadblocks throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Prolonged closures
and severe restrictions on the movement of Palestinian
persons and goods are arbitrarily and routinely
imposed by the occupying Power. Such practices
amount to collective punishment of the Palestinian
people, in violation of international humanitarian law.
Moreover, those measures violate the freedom of
movement of our citizens, as well as their other basic
human rights. They also continue to cause great
damage to the already frail economy, to hinder
development and to worsen the humanitarian crisis.
In that regard, while the wall and checkpoints
have been more damaging to socio-economic life in the
West Bank, the Gaza Strip has been more affected by
the continuing closure of the crossings into and out of
the territory. Only limited human and material traffic is
permitted to pass through the checkpoints when they
are infrequently opened for short periods of time. The
closures, in addition to Gaza’s continued separation
from the West Bank due to the lack of territorial link
between the two areas of the territory — both in
violation of the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access — have exacerbated humanitarian conditions in
Gaza and further impoverished its population.
That in brief is the prevailing situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as a result of Israel’s continued imposition
of illegal policies and measures on the Palestinian

24

people under its occupation. Not only are such actions
not conducive to peace negotiations, they are actually
in total contradiction of the spirit of peacemaking.
What is needed now, as I mentioned earlier, is a
complete cessation of all of those unlawful Israeli
policies and a demonstration of the good faith and
confidence-building measures needed to advance the
peace process towards our shared vision of two-States,
Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and
security.
Of course, any assessment of the situation on the
ground today in the occupied Palestinian territory must
also take into account the regrettable events that
occurred on the Palestinian side in the Gaza Strip in
June. Reflecting on those events saddens us. It is with
great pain that we refer to those developments, which
are alien to the democratic, pluralistic and humane
Palestinian tradition. The coup d’état carried out by
outlawed militias against the Palestinian Authority in
the Gaza Strip is a serious matter, for it threatens the
unity of our land — whose integrity and unity has
already been gravely undermined by the occupying
Power — as well as the unity of our people and our
national movement. The situation on the ground in
Gaza today must be restored to that which existed prior
to the events of June 2007, to allow for the
maintenance of the unity of our people and land.
In that connection, we reaffirm the statement
made by President Abbas to the Central Council of the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), namely, that
our goal remains that of the establishment of the
Palestinian State on all of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including the West Bank, East Jerusalem and
the Gaza Strip. Moreover, President Abbas emphasized
that the Palestinian land and people are one, and that
they will never be divided.
The situation of the Palestinian people in the
Gaza Strip, the majority of whom are living under very
difficult circumstances and enduring severe socioeconomic and humanitarian hardships, is among the
high priorities on the Palestinian agenda. We shall
spare no effort to assist them until the abnormal
situation that now prevails in Gaza is redressed. In that
regard, we will continue to call upon, and to actively
engage, the international community, including here at
the United Nations, to help in any and all ways
possible to alleviate the hardships being experienced
by our people in the occupied Palestinian territory, in
particular those suffering in Gaza.

07-49245

S/PV.5736

Despite the difficulties we face as a result of the
continuation of Israel’s illegal policies and practices
and the additional difficulties arising from the situation
in Gaza, we now have before us a significant
opportunity to move towards ending Israel’s
occupation and the attainment of the two-State solution
on the basis of the 1967 borders. That would entail the
establishment of the Palestinian State in all the areas
occupied by Israel since 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and the achievement of a just and agreed
solution to the issue of Palestinian refugees on the
basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III), of
1948.
It is in that spirit that we see the positive aspects
of the recent speech by United States President George
Bush, in which he called for the convening of an
international conference in the autumn to find a
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict by ending the
occupation and achieving the two-State solution of
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and
security. We believe that the basis for such a
conference is well known: it consists of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative,
the Road Map and the principle of land for peace.
There is thus no need to create a new basis, since the
existing basis for a settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict contains the basic elements for peacemaking.
What we need now are the political will and
resolve to push this process forward, making it possible
for a Palestinian State to be swiftly established,
because the occupation has now been imposed on us
for more than 40 years, too much damage has already
been done to our people, and our people are
desperately yearning for peace and their freedom. All
concerned parties and all those who support the twoState solution and a peaceful Middle East should be
involved in the upcoming conference, which has
always been the forum preferred by the Palestinian and
Arab sides for resolving the conflict.
Ultimately, the conference — which could be
transformed so that it is under United Nations
auspices — could make it possible to find a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution based on the tenets
of international legitimacy. It could also pave the way
for the participation of those countries that wish to
contribute in a concrete and constructive way to the
building of a future sovereign, independent and viable
Palestinian State and that could monitor compliance

07-49245

with the peace treaty that we hope will be signed as the
final outcome of the international peace conference.
Energetically and in good faith, President Abbas
is engaging his counterpart, Mr. Ehud Olmert, Prime
Minister of Israel, to prepare constructively for what
we hope will be a fruitful and successful conference in
the autumn.
Although it is far too early to come to any serious
conclusions, we note the emergence of positive signals
in addition to President Bush’s speech. For instance,
there are the activities and meetings of the Arab
foreign ministers in that regard, including the Arab
League mission to Israel by the foreign ministers of
Egypt and Jordan to formally present the Arab Peace
Initiative, which calls for a comprehensive, just and
permanent solution to the entire Arab-Israeli conflict.
There are the recent visits to the region and the
meetings held by Ms. Condoleezza Rice, United States
Secretary of State; the recent meeting in Moscow
between President Mahmoud Abbas and President
Vladimir Putin; and the important meeting of the
Quartet principals in Lisbon, at which Mr. Tony Blair
was officially appointed as Quartet Special Envoy.
Those signals and activities have been very
important, because they may give our people hope for a
solution within the near future that will end their long
suffering and oppression. Indeed, it is our most earnest
hope that together, all of these efforts can build the
momentum necessary to help us overcome the
obstacles that we all currently face and move forward
on the path towards peace by producing serious
understandings and agreements leading to the longawaited meaningful negotiations between the two sides
on final-status issues concerning borders, Jerusalem
and the Palestinian refugees. Those essential
components must be resolved before the establishment
of a Palestinian State and the achievement of the peace
in the Middle East that we all seek.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Israel.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I wish to join my
colleagues in thanking Mr. Michael Williams for his
informative briefing and, even more, for his
commitment and dedication to his important and
challenging mission. His dedication and service have
been exemplary and have truly made a difference. We
thank him for all he has done and wish him well in the
future.

25

S/PV.5736

Let me briefly share with the Council a number
of positive developments on the Israeli-Palestinian
front. Those developments, it should be understood,
occurred against the backdrop of, and in spite of, the
continuing danger — now acknowledged by all —
posed by the extremists in our region, Hamas and
Hizbullah, which are backed and supported by their
evil patrons in Tehran and Damascus.
Just yesterday, Prime Minister Olmert met again
at length with President Abbas to discuss the
development of Palestinian institutions and mutual
issues concerning Israel and the Palestinians living side
by side. At least two more meetings will be held in the
near future to promote and advance the bilateral track.
A day earlier, Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni had a
meeting with Prime Minister Fayyad, at which the two
discussed enhanced economic and civilian cooperation.
They also agreed to hold direct talks between Israeli
and Palestinian heads of local authorities and
representatives of organizations to advance cooperative
projects.
Israel has also undertaken additional steps to
bolster the Palestinian Authority, including releasing
tax funds, freeing more than 250 Palestinian prisoners
and granting amnesty to those who renounce terror and
violence.
As we can see, Israel and the Palestinian
Authority are actively speaking, engaging with each
other and working together. That is due to the many
crucial choices made by the Palestinians. As just one
example, the action taken by the Palestinian security
forces this past Monday morning in Jenin, when they
assisted an Israel Defense Forces (IDF) officer who
had mistakenly entered the city, demonstrates the
strengthening of the Palestinian Government in its
efforts to combat terrorism and its commitment to
working with Israel to enhance security.
It is in that context that I must express my
sadness at witnessing once again the dichotomy
between the positive developments on the ground and
the repetitive Palestinian narrative. I can only express
my hope that, eventually, reality and common sense
will prevail and bridge the void between an age-old
ritual and the real world in which we live. Yes, there
are problems on the ground on both sides, but it is our
duty to build on the positive and promote hope, rather
than to continue the futile process of doom and

26

recriminations. Our hope lies in the promise of
tomorrow, not in being hostage to yesterday.
Yes, the Palestinian people have made some
important choices, but unfortunately the right choices
are not being made by everyone. While the moderates
have chosen an Israeli-Palestinian dialogue, the
extremists have chosen violence and instability,
threatening both Israeli and Palestinian security. In
Hamastan, in the Gaza Strip, we see the exact opposite
of the positive choices made in the West Bank.
In Gaza, Hamas hurriedly constructs positions
and fortifications, building tunnels for fighting and
smuggling explosives, antitank weapons and rockets
through the desert. Hamas has even sent its terrorists
for training in Iran so that they can attack Israel.
Iran, the world’s terror haven, is continuing to
destabilize our region. On the morning of 25 August,
IDF forces foiled a terrorist attack on the town of Netiv
Ha’asara north of the Gaza Strip. Imagine the blood,
death and carnage if the attack had not been prevented.
Lives were saved this time, but who knows when the
next attempt will be.
Since 1 August, Hamas has smuggled more than
13 tons of explosives and 150 rocket-propelled
grenades into Gaza. Some 40 tons of explosives were
smuggled in the past three months. Moreover, 56 terror
attacks, among them the firing of 20 Qassam rockets
occurred last week alone. Close to 70 rockets were
fired by Palestinian terrorists during August, marking a
sharp increase in rocket terror activity.
Two days ago, Corporal Gilad Shalit, the Israeli
soldier kidnapped by Hamas on 25 June last year,
celebrated his twenty-first birthday, but not at home
with friends and family as most of us do. Gilad Shalit
celebrated his birthday for the second year now in
captivity, alone in an undoubtedly dark and cold place,
devoid of the warmth and life he deserves. Hamas still
holds Gilad, creating a severe humanitarian situation. I
ask you to consider the shattering darkness Gilad
experienced on his twenty-first birthday and what must
be done to secure his immediate release and safe
return.
In spite of the volatile security situation in the
Gaza Strip, Israel continues to respond to humanitarian
needs there. Since 19 June, more than 60,000 tons of
humanitarian aid was transferred from Israel to the
Gaza Strip in cooperation with the Gaza District

07-49245

S/PV.5736

Coordination and Liaison Office. Israel remains
committed to ensuring the timely and safe passage of
aid through the appropriate channels.
If we consider all this, we see that important
choices are being made on the ground. A huge
difference can be seen in the moderate and pragmatic
choices being made in the West Bank and the extremist
and violent choices being made in Gaza. The masks
have now been removed. Hamas is not just choosing
extremism over moderation; it wishes to forcefully
convert the world to its hateful, violent and venomous
ideology and instil terror and fear in the hearts of those
who do not share its evil world view. Israel for its part,
will work with those that make the right choices, under
the direction and guidance of the Road Map, to
advance the political and economic horizons that sow
the seeds of peace.
With regard to the situation along the Blue Line,
Israel welcomes the extension of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) mandate for
another year. The unanimous adoption of resolution
1773 (2007) last week, was an important step in
maintaining regional security. Israel expresses its
appreciation to the troop-contributing countries, the
UNIFIL command, the strategic cell in New York and
the troops on the ground. Israel appreciates the
difficulty of their task and values their dedication.
They are undertaking a most significant and crucial
responsibility while faced with the challenges of
peacekeeping in our region.
Israel also wishes to join the Council in
expressing its condemnation of the recent attacks on
UNIFIL forces and to offer condolences to the families
of the victims and their countries of origin.

referring to what it termed, “Israel’s invasion into
Lebanon a year ago”. Ignorance is not always bliss.
Re-writing history is an affront to the intelligence of
the Council. Indeed, a year has passed, but that period
should not obliterate the real roots of last summer’s
conflict. Indonesia itself voted only last year for
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), which called
for the immediate release of our two boys, whose
abduction and brutal holding sparked the conflict.
There is an alarming degree of hypocrisy in voting for
the resolution last year and ignoring it today.
Membership in the Council should carry with it more
responsibility.
The presence of armed Hizbollah elements south
of the Litani river, and the transfer of weapons from
Iran and Syria to Hizbollah in Lebanon, in blatant
violation of the arms embargo, is also a cause for grave
alarm. Some of those weapons are destined for
southern Lebanon and have undoubtedly found their
way there. Israel has watched with great concern as
Hizbollah reverts to its previous capabilities. In that
respect, the passages over the Litani river are crucial.
Lastly, Iran and Syria — the State sponsors of
terror in the region and in Lebanon — are re-arming
Hizbollah in defiance of resolution 1701 (2006) and
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1747 (2007). The
international community must see to it that those forces
of extremism no longer threaten the well-being and
security of the region.
It is not enough for the moderates to merely shun
the extremists and shut out their darkness. We must
also usher in light and do so through the choices we
make and courses we chart. The region must transform
gloom into hope. That can only be accomplished
through responsible and sensible choices. The
international community has made its choice on who to
engage and the Palestinians and the Lebanese are
making their choices as well. Choosing the right
options means choosing a peaceful alternative, the
alternative of hope, which is more promising, more
secure and more dignified for all. The alternative of
peace begins with the people and their choices, and the
people of the Middle East, particularly their leaders,
must have the wisdom and courage to choose wisely.

Although it has been over a year since the
adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), the situation in
southern Lebanon remains precarious, fragile and
unsettling. Here I wish to stress three main areas that
demand the Council’s vigilant attention and immediate
action. The continued detention of our boys, IDF
soldiers Ehud Goldwasser and Eldad Regev, kidnapped
by Hizbollah terrorists on 12 June 2006 and the
absence of any sign of life pose grave humanitarian
concerns. I reiterate my call to the members of the
Council to make the utmost effort for their immediate
and unconditional release.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.

In that context, I wish to express my
disappointment at the statement made by Indonesia

Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of

07-49245

27

S/PV.5736

the Security Council for the month of August and to
express my deep appreciation to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of China and his delegation,
for their stewardship and wisdom while conducting last
month’s work. I also wish to thank Mr. Michael
Williams for his comprehensive briefing and express
our regrets for his departure. My delegation wishes
Mr. Williams all the best in his future endeavours and
sincerely hope that he will continue his efforts to help
resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict, which remains at the
core of the increasingly complex Middle East crisis.
Once again, we meet with this distinguished
Council to revisit the situation in my part of the world,
where legitimate hopes for a just and durable peace are
being crushed and shattered. Aware that this requires
bold steps and painful sacrifices, the Arab leaders who
met in 2002 in Beirut adopted, as you know, Sir, a
peace initiative based on Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on the principle of land
for peace. In exchange for full Israeli withdrawal from
all Arab territories occupied in June 1967 and for
Israel’s acceptance of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State to be established in the West Bank
and Gaza, along with the achievement of a just solution
to the Palestinian refugee problem to be agreed upon
pursuant to relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Arab heads of State offered in this historic initiative: to
consider the Arab-Israeli conflict as having ended; to
enter into a peace agreement with Israel; to establish —
in the context of such a comprehensive peace —
normal relations with Israel; and, to ensure that
security is provided for all the States in the region.
The 2007 Arab Summit recently held in Riyadh
not only renewed the Arab commitment to this peace
strategy, but also chose to reinvigorate it through the
formation of a follow-up committee entrusted with the
task of engaging all concerned parties. Regrettably,
however, this offer has still not been met on the Israeli
side by a partner capable of truly rising to the
challenge of peace. This has increased the
responsibility of the international community not to let
this opportunity for peace be missed.
In this regard, while welcoming the 17 July
proposal of United States President George Bush to
hold an international meeting in the coming fall to
address the Middle East conflict, we would like to
emphasize that any unwarranted conditionality may
jeopardize the desired outcome of such a laudable
effort.

28

On 24 August, the Council adopted unanimously
resolution 1773 (2007) to extend the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for
another year. Although the renewal was meant to
remain technical, the political message was no less
clear: the Security Council reaffirmed
“its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the political independence
of Lebanon within its internationally recognized
borders and under the sole and exclusive
authority of its Government.” (resolution 1733
(2007), fourth preambular paragraph)
The Council also reaffirmed its “attachment to the full
implementation of all provisions of resolution 1701 of
August 2006.”
Similarly, my Government remains entirely
committed to the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006), one year after its adoption. In relation to
this issue, allow me to draw your attention to the
following highly alarming facts:
While
my
Government
welcomed
the
appointment by the Secretary-General of a facilitator in
the matter of the abducted Israeli soldiers, Israel
continues to refuse to solve the longstanding issue of
the Lebanese detainees who have been aging in Israeli
prisons for decades now. We call for and expect their
immediate release.
Israel continues its violation of Lebanese airspace
in blatant and flagrant violation of resolution 1701
(2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty. The SecretaryGeneral, in his latest interim report on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), observed
that
“These violations occur on an almost daily basis
frequently numbering between 15 and 20 and
have even reached 32 overflights in a single day.”
(S/2007/392, para. 16)
These overflights, in the words of the SecretaryGeneral, “not only constitute repeated violations” of
resolution 1701 (2006) and of other relevant Security
Council resolutions, but
“also undermine the credibility of both UNIFIL
and the Lebanese Armed Forces in the eyes of the
local population, and negatively affect efforts to
stabilize the situation on the ground.” (ibid.)

07-49245

S/PV.5736

After such clear words by the Secretary-General, I feel
no need at this time to add a single letter in rebuttal of
any contrary fallacious arguments on the matter. Allow
me, however, to call for an immediate halt to these
violations and for the full respect of Lebanese
sovereignty.
The continued Israeli occupation of the Sheb’a
farms constitutes a violation of Security Council
resolution 425 (1978), which had in 1978 called upon
Israel to “withdraw forthwith its forces from all
Lebanese territory”. While we praise the progress
achieved by the senior cartographer appointed to
determine the territorial definition of the farms, we
believe that a political process must also start, based on
my Government’s proposal in its seven-point plan to
put this area under the interim jurisdiction of the
United Nations.
During the Israeli aggression on Lebanon last
summer, the Israeli army deliberately pounded
southern Lebanon with millions of cluster bombs. The
2006 annual report of the United Nations Mine Action
Service clearly specifies that over one million have not
exploded and have thus become tantamount to antipersonnel land mines, easily capable of claiming more
lives and victims. By the end of last June, more than
233 Lebanese civilians had fallen victims to Israeli
cluster bombs, many of whom were children.
Israel’s decision to drop those cluster bombs in
the first place constitutes a blatant violation of
international humanitarian law, since such munitions
are by nature non-discriminatory and may cause
unnecessary suffering to the civilian population.
Moreover, Israel’s persistent refusal to give the United
Nations the maps that indicate where it dropped the
cluster bombs is an additional flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, since the remaining
unexploded bomblets represent a continuous threat to
the safety and security of the Lebanese civilian
population.
My Government is determined to clean Lebanon
of Israel’s cluster bombs and put an end to the
sufferings they cause to my countrymen in southern
Lebanon. Moreover, on behalf of every Lebanese man
and woman who was killed, maimed, disfigured or
injured by a cluster bomb, on behalf of every Lebanese
child who was playing outside his home and never
came back and on behalf of every Lebanese child who
is threatened by the possibility of not coming back

07-49245

home, my Government pledges before you that it shall
not spare any effort to reach an international ban on
cluster bombs, so that those most ugly weapons
become things of the past.
This pledge is not the only good news from
Lebanon I wish to put before you today. I would also
like to assure you of the unwavering determination of
my Government and its army to put an end to the
terrorist group Fatah al-Islam in the Nahr al-Bared
camp and not allow it to continue threatening the
stability of my country. May I ask you as well to note
that in the midst of this fight, my Government took the
initiative to address the humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian refugees who had to leave the camp and
that it hopes that, with the aid of the international
community, the reconstruction of the camp and the
return of its inhabitants will not take long to
materialize.
Let me also mention that in my country on
5 August by-elections in Beirut and the Matn district
were held to replace two assassinated members of
parliament. The good news here lies in the fact that
despite the fierce political campaign that accompanied
those by-elections and the tight race between the
contending candidates, the process went smoothly and
without one single serious act of violence being
reported. Moreover, these by-elections represented the
democratic answer to the terrorist killings, and the fact
that the opposition candidate won one of the two
contested seats is the latest proof of the vitality of
Lebanon’s democracy in our part of the world and a
source of pride to my Government. We also hope that
the upcoming presidential election will bear additional
witness to my country’s entrenched democracy.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Mr. President, allow me to begin by
congratulating you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for August 2007. I cannot but
wholeheartedly thank the Permanent Representative of
the People’s Republic of China, Ambassador Wang
Guangya, and the members of his delegation for the
able manner in which they led the Council in its work
during July.
I would also like to address Mr. Michael
Williams, the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, who is participating today in his last

29

S/PV.5736

briefing to the Security Council. I truly wish that his
new post will allow him to continue to make sincere
efforts to activate and promote a just and
comprehensive peace process in the Middle East
region.
We meet here today to discuss once again the
situation in the Middle East, an item that the continued
Israeli occupation has caused us to remain seized of.
For decades now, the Security Council has failed to
find a solution to end that occupation for reasons that
are known to everyone. Due to this failure, the Israeli
occupation of Arab lands has been transformed over
time from an Israeli military occupation and
annexation by force of the territories of others to
colonial, provocative and aggressive settler activity
based on fait accompli and on continued acts of
aggression, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, against
the Palestinian people and against our citizens in the
occupied Syrian Golan.
The Charter of the United Nations and the tenets
of international law consider the annexation or
acquisition of territories of others by force a criminal
act endangering international peace and security. The
United Nations International Law Commission has
confirmed this definition. Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations, in total complementarity with the
tenets of international law, exhorted its Members to
“refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any state, or in any other
manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United
Nations”.
The Security Council, the General Assembly and
all other organs of the United Nations have adopted
hundreds of resolutions calling on Israel to end its
occupation of Arab territories. Regrettably, more than
40 years after Israel’s occupation of Arab territories,
including Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan, the clear
picture on the horizon still speaks of Israel’s rejection
of peace and its persistence in escalating acts of
aggression, its continued war crimes, its settlement
activities, its killing, terror, destruction, siege,
detention, imprisonment and continued building of the
separation wall.
These activities have been carried out in full view
of those who sing the praises of democracy and who
claim to be champions of human rights in other parts of
the world where the amount of human rights violations

30

is almost negligible in comparison to those committed
by Israel in the occupied Arab territories. This Israeli
policy, which is readily condoned by some and
deliberately protected by powerful States in the
Security Council, basically aims at keeping the
achievement of a just and comprehensive peace ever at
a distance.
In their recent summit in Riyadh, Arab leaders
relaunched the Arab Peace Initiative that was adopted
by the 2002 Beirut Summit. The Initiative confirmed
the Arab commitment to a just and comprehensive
peace as a strategic choice. It also confirmed that this
process is indivisible. Arab commitment to the
realization of a just and comprehensive peace must be
matched by a concomitant and serious commitment by
the Israeli Government and those who support it to the
achievement of that peace, including by compliance
with the resolutions of international legitimacy and
withdrawal from occupied territories as mandated by
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
Peace is a major political responsibility, the
weight of which can be felt only by those who truly
believe in it. We cannot talk about peace — this noble
word — in the context of a manoeuvring Israeli logic
of division, with its intention of circumventing the
necessary measures leading to such peace and Israel’s
attempts to dwarf the noble objectives of a just and
comprehensive peace process on which the
international community pins its hopes.
Syria followed the events in the Gaza Strip
between our Palestinian brothers with great sorrow.
Syria insists on the need for Palestinians to overcome
the adverse repercussions of these serious
developments by addressing their differences through
direct dialogue among parties concerned with a view to
restoring Palestinian national unity in order to best
serve the goals and noble cause of their people. Syria
would stress that it would make every effort possible to
push toward the realization of this objective.
The Israeli military manoeuvres that are
continuing in the occupied Syrian Golan for the second
time in a couple of months — described by the Israeli
officials themselves as the largest in scale in years —
starkly testify to the Israeli indifference to and
disregard for the possible consequences of preparing to
wage new wars and of provocations and continued
occupation. The disquieting irony is that these Israeli

07-49245

S/PV.5736

measures coincide with Israel’s attempt to market the
claims of its commitment to peace while its military
machine continues to mobilize in an unprecedented
manner that runs totally counter to the will not to
escalate tensions and the will to work for peace.
The command of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force in Golan (UNDOF)
confirmed on 11 July 2007 that the tension along the
Syrian-Israeli border has reached its highest level in
years. The UNDOF command also confirmed that
Israel bears the full responsibility for this tension.
These unquestionably suspicious Israeli military moves
in the occupied Syrian Golan are cause for serious
concern, particularly when they are accompanied by
public threats by Israel politicians and leaders in the
Israeli army regarding the possibility of an outbreak of
war with the Syrian Arab Republic. This is associated
with Israel’s continued attempts to consolidate and
expedite the settler activities in the occupied Syrian
Golan, the last instance of which was an attempt by the
Israeli Ministry of Tourism to grant new Syrian land —
an area of 80 dunums in the region of el-Bouteiha,
which is the southernmost point of occupied Syrian
Golan, at the intersection of the Jordanian, Syrian and
Palestinian borders — to build a tourist village.
Confirming Israel’s intention to act against peace
and against returning land to its rightful owners,
Mr. Netanyahu, the Chairman of the Likud Party, made
a statement on 2 August 2007 to settlers in the Katzrin
settlement, which was built on the ruins of Qasrin, a
Syrian village, stating “Golan Heights is part and
parcel of the State of Israel and it is the most beautiful
piece of land in northern Israel”. In addition,
statements have been made by Mr. Olmert, the Israeli
Prime Minister, in which he claimed that the Golan is
part and parcel of Israel and that it would remain in the
hands of Israelis as long as he remained the Prime
Minister of Israel.
Israel has proved yet again through such
irresponsible declarations that it is not really interested
in the peace process and that it continues to pursue a
policy of fait accompli by force and in a manner that
runs counter to the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations. Israel is also, through
statements like these, riding roughshod over repeated
Arab and Syrian calls for the realization of peace. This
proves beyond any doubt that Israel does not really
have the real political will to achieve peace.

07-49245

On a larger scale, this means that the
international community must adopt measures that
force Israel to comply with international resolutions
and to sit in good faith at the negotiations table.
The Syrian people will not surrender and will not
submit to occupation, and wants negotiations that will
restore all of its occupied territories to the boundaries
of 4 June 1967.
My country follows closely the developments
regarding the call for an international peace conference
next fall. It believes that any such initiative should be
clearly defined, with clear terms of reference and
objectives. Such a process must also provide the
necessary guarantees for the implementation of
internationally legitimate resolutions and should be a
comprehensive and a sincere peace initiative that will
bring about the recovery of all usurped Arab lands. The
policy of wasting time and ignoring the legitimate
rights of people is only a prescription for further
failures in addressing the questions of our region, and
it only attempts to protect Israeli settlement and
expansion projects.
The Syrian Arab Republic has chosen
comprehensive and just peace as a strategic option on
the basis of the well-known terms of reference of
peace, which definitely include the return of all
occupied Arab lands, including the Syrian Golan, to the
lines of 4 June 1967 and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its
capital. The continued occupation runs counter to
peace and means more conflict, more victims and more
destruction.
As the President of the Syrian Arab Republic,
President Assad, stated recently:
“Israelis must learn that genuine peace that
continues is more meaningful than any other
option because other options are not permanent.
The cost of peace is hundreds of times less than
the cost of occupation and aggression, which
cannot continue forever.”
That is the end of my statement. Allow me to
comment briefly on the statement we have just heard
by the Israeli representative.
The policy of State-sponsored terror pursued by
Israel is internationally documented. It is documented
by hundreds of relevant international institutions and
includes
the
slaughters,
crimes,
detentions,

31

S/PV.5736

imprisonments, the building of settlements, the
building of the racist wall of separation in the occupied
territories and the changing of demographics and of the
landmarks of Syrian and Palestinian territories.
The Israeli representative cannot hide the truth,
which is known to everyone. He cannot hide or cover
these facts through his unfounded claims. The truth to
which we refer is represented in the facts already cited
by Mr. Williams in his opening statement. The facts are
also corroborated by the commanders of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and
UNDOF, in addition to the advisory opinion issued by
the International Court of Justice and scores of
resolutions adopted by various United Nations
organizations, agencies, bodies and entities such as the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
The Israeli State acts of terror have already
harmed
UNIFIL
personnel
and
international
representatives. It has stood in the way of
implementing many of the resolutions of the Security
Council. It also stood against attempts by the
Secretary-General to send fact-finding missions to
verify and testify to the Israeli crimes committed in
Jenin, Nablus and Qana. The Israeli policy of Statesponsored terrorism has a long history. Israel refused to
receive the international committee that was sent to
investigate Israeli practices against civilians in the
occupied Arab territories.
Peace is action, not words, and the actions of the
Israeli Government are very far removed from its
words and the repeated hackneyed words spoken by its
Permanent Representative to which we must listen in
this Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, Mr. President, on behalf of the Arab Group, to
express my congratulations on the way in which you
have guided the work of the Council for the month of
August. Our Group is fully confident in the work of the
Council under your wise and skilful guidance. I would
also like to express our appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of China for assuming the presidency in
July with skill and efficiency. We also express our
appreciation to Mr. Michael Williams, Special
Coordinator for the Peace Process in the Middle East,

32

for his briefing on the current situation in our region. I
thank him on behalf of the Arab Group for the
constructive role he has played and to wish him every
success in his future endeavours in London. I hope that
he will remain in touch with us and remain involved
with the Palestinian question.
The Security Council has before it today the issue
of the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. This is one of the most important
items on the Council’s agenda, as it has been for more
that five decades. As the Council is aware, this issue,
with all its ramifications, is at the core of the ArabIsraeli conflict. The events of recent years have
confirmed the rightness of the international
community’s conviction that solving this question is
indeed at the heart of a comprehensive and just
solution to the conflict.
Since the Council debated the situation in the
Middle East last month, the occupied territories have
been a theatre for the pernicious escalation of acts of
violence by the Israeli occupation authorities.
At a time when the Islamic world is
commemorating the setting ablaze of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, Israel is continuing its irresponsible actions.
Chief among those are its demolition and excavation
work within the area surrounding the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque itself, in flagrant violation of its sanctity,
threatening its structural integrity, and attempting to
obliterate the character and religious symbols of the
Mosque. We resolutely condemn such hostile Israeli
actions, which undermine the third most Holy Place,
and the first Qiblah of the Islamic faith.
We therefore call upon the Security Council, the
body primarily responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to assume its
responsibilities and intervene immediately to compel
Israel to respect resolutions of international legality
and halt its actions. Those actions are threatening the
religious and cultural identity of Jerusalem. Moreover,
they constitute an act of provocation, an affront to the
feelings of Muslims and a violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949.
Those irresponsible practices are also flagrant
violations of 16 relevant Council resolutions,
especially resolution 465 (1980), which emphasized
that all measures, and legislative and administrative
actions, taken by the Israeli occupying Power to
change the legal character, demographic composition,

07-49245

S/PV.5736

institutional structure or status of occupied Jerusalem
had no legal validity. That is in addition to the fact that
Israel’s actions are in flagrant violation of the 1949
Fourth Geneva Convention, which applies to all
territories occupied by Israel in 1967, including
Jerusalem. Those measures are also in violation of the
Hague Convention of 1954, which stipulates that no
measures or acts of hostility should be undertaken
against religious sites, which are the special heritage of
peoples.
In addition to continuing its acts of demolition
and excavation around the Al-Aqsa Mosque, Israel is
also continuing its military incursions and repeated
acts of aggression in territory under the control of the
Palestinian Authority, namely, Gaza and the West
Bank. It is also continuing its economic blockade and
the illegal construction of its racist expansionist wall.
It is establishing a cordon of roads intended to strangle
Palestinian villages and towns, rendering all movement
and communication between them extremely difficult.
Israel is continuing to build and expand settlements.
All of those are illegal actions that flagrantly
violate international law, United Nations resolutions
and the Quartet Road Map, which the Council adopted
in resolution 1515 (2003). They not only have serious
consequences for the security and stability of the
region and the world, but they also undermine
international efforts to relaunch the Quartet peace
process, as well as any just and lasting comprehensive
solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict, at the very heart of
which is the Palestinian question.
Such a solution will not be attainable so long as
Israel continues its unilateral measures to establish a
fait accompli and influence the results of final status
negotiations. A lasting solution will be possible only if
we put an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian,
Syrian and Lebanese territories in accordance with
internationally binding resolutions, as well as with the
terms of reference of the Madrid Peace Conference, the
principle of land for peace, the requirements of the
Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative, ensuring that
the Palestinian people can fully regain their legitimate
political rights. At last they could thus achieve the
establishment of an independent State of their own on
their territory, with Jerusalem as its capital.
The Arab Group asserts its full solidarity with
Syria and demands that Israel fully withdraw from the

07-49245

occupied Syrian Arab Golan to the 4 June 1967
borders.
We are also in full solidarity with Lebanon, its
Government and its people in the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), especially as regards the return
of Lebanese territory still under Israeli occupation —
including the northern area of the Ghajar region, the
Shab’aa Farms and the Kafr Shuba hills. We also
support the efforts of the Government of Lebanon to
extend its authority over all of its territories.
The Arab Group urges the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities, compel Israel to cease its daily
violations of Lebanese air, ground and maritime
borders and to provide Lebanon with a map of the
landmines it has laid in the country. Israel must also
provide full information about the cluster and
fragmentation bombs dropped on Lebanese territory,
which pose a threat to the safety and security and
livelihood of civilians.
The Arab Group believes that it is also time to
release Lebanese prisoners who have languished in
Israeli jails for many years, in violation of
humanitarian and legal principles.
In conclusion, we reserve the right to once again
raise before the Council the issue of the deterioration
of the situation in the occupied Arab territories. We
hope that the Council will compel Israel to abide by the
resolutions pertaining to this conflict. The Council
should also assume its responsibilities and compel
Israel to become seriously involved in the peace
process and to respond to Arab initiatives, in particular
the Peace Initiative endorsed by the Beirut Summit in
2002 and reaffirmed at the recent Riyadh Summit.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I should like to begin
by making a special reference to Mr. Michael Williams,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
and to let him know how much we have appreciated his
solid, thorough and dedicated work. We wish him well
in his new job.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Montenegro and Serbia and the European Free Trade

33

S/PV.5736

Association country Liechtenstein, as well as Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this declaration.
The European Union believes it is a matter of the
utmost urgency to carry forward a credible peace
process that will give the Palestinian people an
independent, democratic and viable State, living side
by side with Israel and its other neighbours in peace
and security. Europe’s resolve to contribute to the
resolution of this conflict as part of bringing peace and
stability to the Middle East remains unchanged.
At this moment of increased diplomatic
initiatives and dialogue, we sense a window of
opportunity that should not be missed. The European
Union strongly encourages the parties to continue their
bilateral dialogue, which should both accomplish
concrete results and lead to meaningful political
negotiations to achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement of the conflict. In addition to the
engagement of the parties, the continued support of the
international community is crucial to advance the
peace process.
The European Union is firmly committed to
playing an active role, particularly within the
framework of the Quartet, to put in place a political
and diplomatic process offering the prospect of a
comprehensive settlement, in conformity with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and on the basis
of the Road Map, notably its goals and principles. That
commitment was renewed last July when the Quartet
principals met in Lisbon, with the participation of Tony
Blair as Quartet Representative for the first time. In
that context, the European Union welcomed President
Bush’s speech of 16 July. We expect that the Quartet
will participate and play an active role in the
preparation of the international meeting proposed for
November.
The European Union also stresses the importance
of renewing the Quartet’s dialogue with the parties and
representatives of the Arab League. We believe that the
Arab Peace Initiative is a major element intended to
advance regional peace. We look forward to a fruitful
next meeting of the Quartet, in the margins of the
General Assembly, to hear the first proposals of the
Quartet Representative and further discuss the way
forward.
The perspectives opened up in the political and
diplomatic spheres need to be matched by substantive

34

progress on the ground, where the situation remains of
particular concern.
The European Union is deeply concerned by the
serious events in Gaza. We reaffirm our full support for
President Abbas and the Government under Prime
Minister Fayyad. Reconciliation and national unity in
support of the programme of peace articulated by
President Abbas are the only way to achieve
Palestinian national goals by peaceful, lawful and
democratic means. The European Union opposes any
division of the Palestinian territories and confirms its
readiness to engage with all Palestinian parties whose
policies and actions reflect the Quartet principles.
We are following with particular apprehension
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza. We
continue to provide emergency and humanitarian
assistance to its population. In this context, we urge all
parties to work towards the opening of the crossings in
and out of Gaza for humanitarian and commercial
flows, in accordance with the Agreement on Movement
and Access.
Stopping all acts of violence and terror among the
parties is of the utmost importance if the peace process
is to succeed. We reiterate our call for the release of the
abducted Israeli soldier as well as of the Palestinian
legislators detained in Israel. Following recent
meetings between Prime Minister Olmert and President
Abbas, the European Union welcomes, as a first step,
the partial transfer by Israel of withheld Palestinian tax
and customs revenues, and we reiterate our call for the
immediate and regular release of the remaining and
future funds. We also commend the initial release of
prisoners, and we urge further steps to honour the
commitments made at those meetings, including the
removal of barriers and checkpoints in the West Bank.
Such moves will support progress on the political track
and help to create the necessary framework and
confidence to advance the peace process.
Settlement activities in and around East
Jerusalem and in the rest of the West Bank and the
ongoing construction of the barrier on Palestinian land,
which are against international law, are of particular
concern. As we have stated many times, we will not
recognize changes to the pre-1967 borders other than
those agreed by the parties. The European Union has
resumed its direct financial and technical assistance to
the Palestinian Authority. We are committed to helping
to build the institutions and the economy of the future

07-49245

S/PV.5736

Palestinian State, which we believe will play a
fundamental role in expediting the peace process. That
is also the core of the mandate of Tony Blair, whose
appointment as Quartet Representative the European
Union warmly welcomed.
The European Union strongly supports the
reinforcement of Lebanon’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence and its legitimate and
democratic Government. We renew the call for the full
and speedy implementation of resolutions 1701 (2006)
and 1559 (2004) and of all other relevant resolutions,
and we call on Syria and other countries in the region
to refrain from destabilizing the country.
The European Union welcomes the decision by
the Security Council on the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) and renews its commitment to continue to
play an active role in the Force. We strongly condemn
all acts of violence against UNIFIL, in particular the

07-49245

one in June, which claimed the lives of six
peacekeepers of the Spanish contingent.
The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the ongoing violence in Lebanon, in particular at
Nahr el-Bared, and reiterates its condemnation of the
attacks on Lebanese people and the Lebanese Armed
Forces. The European Union urges all political forces
to search for a solution to the political deadlock
through dialogue and with full respect for the country’s
democratic institutions. In that context, we also
welcome all the constructive initiatives and mediation
efforts that have been carried out by the international
community.
The President (spoke in French): There are still a
number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. Therefore, I intend, with the concurrence of
the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.40 p.m.

35
