United Nations

S/PV.5781

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5781st meeting
Tuesday, 20 November 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Natalegawa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Okio
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Tachie-Menson
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Arias
Mr. Voto-Bernales
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Matulay
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Wolcott

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2007/643)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-60503 (E)

*0760503*

S/PV.5781

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2007/643)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Canada, Colombia, Guatemala, Iceland, Israel,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Nepal, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, Senegal, Switzerland and
Viet Nam, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Angelo
Gnaedinger, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/643, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
I welcome the participation of the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this
meeting and invite him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: Let me begin by
expressing my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
chairing this important debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
Today is a fitting day for such a meeting. On this
day in 1945, the trial of the major war criminals began
at Nuremberg. The Nuremberg trials had a profound
influence on the development of international law.
They had an important bearing on the notion of
individual criminal responsibility for atrocities
committed against civilians in armed conflict. They
underlined that, even in war, certain acts are
unacceptable, and they reflected the world’s conviction
that civilians are entitled to protection.
Sixty-two years later, civilians continue to pay a
dreadful toll in today’s conflicts — in the Sudan,
Somalia, Afghanistan and Iraq. In those and other
conflicts, large numbers of civilians — women, girls,
boys and men — suffer unimaginable violations of
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. As I state in my report now before the
Council (S/2007/643), some victims are simply in the
wrong place at the wrong time. Others are deliberately
targeted and subjected to appalling human rights
abuses, in an environment of almost total impunity.
Deliberate attacks against civilians are often employed
as an instrument of warfare. That is why the protection
of civilians is, and must remain, an absolute priority —
for me as Secretary-General, for the United Nations,
for the Security Council and, above all, for Member
States, with whom rests the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians.
There has been some progress in recent years
towards strengthening the protection of civilians. We
see increased levels of humanitarian action and more
regular inclusion of protection activities in

07-60503

S/PV.5781

peacekeeping mandates. Greater attention is also being
placed on humanitarian issues during mediation
processes, and ultimately and on preventing disputes
from degenerating into violence in the first place, so as
to spare civilians from the horrors of war. Around the
world, we see increased momentum towards combating
impunity for war crimes and crimes against humanity.
At the World Summit in 2005, all the world’s
Governments agreed in principle to the responsibility
to protect. I will work with Member States and civil
society to translate that concept from word to deed to
ensure timely action when populations face genocide,
ethnic cleansing or crimes against humanity.
The Council has taken a number of important
steps, including the adoption, last year, of resolution
1674 (2006), on the protection of civilians. The
resolution establishes an important framework for
action. Here, too, we must now work together to
translate that text into real action. In my report, I have
tried to show ways in which that may be done. The
Emergency Relief Coordinator will elaborate on those
recommendations in greater detail. However, allow me
to mention one of the proposals: the establishment of a
Security Council working group on the protection of
civilians.
I believe that the establishment of such a group is
an important next step, perhaps even an inevitable next
step, in the evolution of the Council’s consideration of
the protection of civilians. It would underline the
Council’s commitment to this cause. It would give
practical meaning to the Council’s commitment. It
would ensure more timely and systematic consideration
of the protection of civilians in the Council’s
deliberations. It would assist the Council to move
decisively towards practical implementation. That
ultimately is where the Council’s words must have the
most meaning: on the ground, in support of the affected
civilians who need protection from the shocking
indignities of armed conflict.
The plight of children in armed conflict is
particularly disturbing. Eighteen years ago today, the
General Assembly adopted the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. Eleven years later, it adopted the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict. Yet these instruments have yet to be
translated into reality. Every year, thousands of
children are killed or wounded as a direct result of

07-60503

fighting, and the number of child soldiers around the
world is estimated at 250,000.
We saw progress in 2005 when the Security
Council adopted resolution 1612 (2005), which
established the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. Thanks to the resolution’s monitoring and
reporting mechanism, the Council is now in a much
better position to take effective measures against
perpetrators of grave violations of the rights of
children in armed conflict.
Another vital tool is the work of my Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms.
Radhika Coomaraswamy. By carrying out field visits
and consulting actively with the concerned parties, she
helps ensure that they fulfil their child protection
responsibilities. My Special Representative, in
collaboration with the entire United Nations system,
also works to support the demobilization of child
combatants and their reintegration into their
communities.
The Council has mandated peacekeeping
operations to assist with the protection of civilians
within the limits of their capabilities and areas of
deployment. It is critical that peacekeeping operations
be empowered with the resources and political support
they need to implement their mandates. I see Darfur as
a test case, where all concerned must collectively meet
the challenges of deploying an effective mission and
achieving a peace agreement.
We must also ensure safe, timely and unhindered
humanitarian access to those in need, wherever
required. Access is the fundamental prerequisite for
humanitarian action and protection. For millions of
vulnerable people caught in conflict, being accessible
to humanitarian workers is often their only hope and
means of survival. I would like to emphasize the
importance of regular reporting to the Council by the
Emergency Relief Coordinator on humanitarian access
concerns. I believe that that is critical.
Also critical is the need for concerted action in
response to particularly grave situations. The Council
must act to ensure that those in need of lifesaving
assistance receive it and that those who provide it do so
in a secure environment. Attacks against humanitarian
workers should never be tolerated. I trust that the
Council will have a fruitful debate on this vital issue,
which is key to achieving sustainable peace around the
world.

3

S/PV.5781

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
At this meeting, we will hear a briefing by
Mr. John
Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator. I now give the floor to Mr. Holmes.
Mr. Holmes: I am grateful for this opportunity to
brief the Council on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and, more specifically, on the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2007/643) before the Council
today. I believe the specific recommendations for
action in the report will be critical to more systematic
consideration by the Council of protection of civilian
concerns and the implementation of the Council’s
landmark resolution 1674 (2006).
A leap of imagination is not always easy to make,
sitting in this warm and comfortable Chamber, but let
us remember the essential background. Throughout the
world’s conflict zones, people live under almost
constant threat of being attacked in their homes, of
having their lives, or those of their families, wrecked
as they travel to work or to school, to visit the market
or to worship. They risk random killing, violence and
abduction, harassment and discrimination. They risk
being forced to take up arms, sometimes even against
their own families and communities, in the most brutal
ways. They risk torture, rape and abuse. They risk,
above all, being forced from their homes and their
land, forced into a downward spiral of opportunities
lost forever, lasting dependency and destitution in
temporary and inadequate shelters that often become
urban slums.
A case in point is the growing toll on civilians in
Somalia from fighting between insurgent groups and
Ethiopian and Government forces. I urge all parties to
the conflict to refrain from indiscriminate attacks
affecting civilians. And I call on the Council to remind
all forces of their responsibilities under international
humanitarian law. Reports of civilian suffering in the
Ogaden region of Ethiopia, as a result of fighting
between the Ethiopian forces and the Ogaden National
Liberation Front (ONLF) rebels, are also of increasing
concern.
Likewise, in a different but similarly worrying
context, the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in Gaza, is reaching the limits of
what is bearable for any community. The combination
of access restrictions even for humanitarian deliveries,

4

economic deprivation, Israeli military incursions and
aerial attacks and intra-Palestinian violence is driving
the civilian population into a situation where the risk of
provoking even more violence and tragedy is only too
evident.
And in Darfur, too, the humanitarian issues grow
ever more worrying, as the violence increases once
again, resulting in yet more deaths, more displacement
and more relocations of humanitarian personnel.
These are three situations of particular current
concern. But, as reported to the Council before,
civilians are also frequently the victims of attacks in
places like Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sri Lanka and
Iraq. Such attacks are often aimed deliberately at
instilling fear, destabilizing civilian populations and
forcing displacement. Suicide attacks are a particularly
disturbing manifestation of that, given their often
intentionally indiscriminate nature. This was
demonstrated with chilling effect earlier this month
when a suicide bombing in the northern Afghanistan
province of Baghlan led to the deaths of scores of
civilians, including many schoolchildren.
Incidentally, let me take this opportunity to
correct a misleading impression given by one sentence
in paragraph 22 of the report, which was intended to
say that suicide attacks are a feature in an increasing
number of countries, mentioning Afghanistan, Iraq,
Israel and Somalia, but which could be read as
suggesting, incorrectly, that suicide attacks are
increasing in each of those countries, including Israel,
which is not the case.
Targeting civilians shows blatant contempt for the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law, including its basic tenets: the principles of
distinction and proportionality. It also often presents
Member States with the daunting challenge of how to
respond to such violence, particularly when perpetrated
by non-State armed groups, whose members are often
difficult if not impossible to identify. What is clear,
however, is that any military response must itself
comply with international humanitarian law as well as
show respect for the human and cultural dignity of
those already exposed to insurgent attacks.
Previous reports on the protection of civilians as
well as the Council’s aide-memoire (S/PRST/2002/6,
annex), have outlined a broad range of concerns and
proposed actions. Unfortunately, as the nature of

07-60503

S/PV.5781

conflict evolves, so do the issues of protection. The
present report makes a number of proposals with
regard to compliance with international humanitarian
law in situations of asymmetric warfare, the use of
cluster munitions and accountability. But I would like
to focus my remarks today on four of the actions
presented in the report: on combating sexual violence;
on ensuring rapid and unimpeded access; a more
systematic and proactive action to address housing,
land and property issues; and the establishment of a
Security Council working group on the protection of
civilians.
First, there is an unequivocal need for more
concerted and innovative action to prevent and respond
to sexual violence in armed conflict. The report
contains a number of recommendations to this end
addressed to Member States, with whom the primary
responsibility lies for preventing and addressing sexual
violence. But combating sexual violence, and the
impunity on which it thrives, requires a rethink of how
we use the tools at the disposal of the international
community and, in particular, the Security Council.
We need, for instance, to look at referring
situations of grave incidents of rape and other forms of
sexual violence to the International Criminal Court
(ICC). In addition, or as an alternative, we may even
need to look at imposing targeted sanctions against
States or non-State armed groups that flagrantly
perpetrate or support such crimes. I fully appreciate
that the latter, in particular, would be a complex
undertaking. However, complexity cannot be an excuse
for inaction in the face of these appalling crimes.
Also, as recommended in the report, in situations
where local justice mechanisms are overwhelmed, the
Council should look for creative ways to support States
to hold the perpetrators of sexual violence accountable,
for example, through the establishment of special ad
hoc judicial arrangements.
This would, I believe, be a particularly important
step in relation to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As I noted in my briefing to the Council
following my mission to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in September, to do justice to the women of
that country, we cannot be satisfied with just treating
the wounds inflicted by sexual violence; we have to
find better ways to stop it. The Council should send a
clear message of deterrence by treating serious acts of
sexual violence for what they are — war crimes and

07-60503

crimes against humanity that should no longer be
tolerated.
The second action is access — an essential, if not
the most essential element of our efforts to provide
assistance and protection. The Council has on several
occasions underlined the need for all relevant parties,
including non-State actors and neighbouring States, to
cooperate fully with the United Nations in providing
safe, timely and unimpeded access to civilians in
armed conflict. Yet as the report brings out, constraints
on access are many, varied and, in a number of places,
the rule rather than the exception. The result is millions
of people excluded from access to life-saving
assistance and the minimal protection provided by the
mere presence of humanitarian workers. Constraints on
access should have consequences for those that impose
them and not just for those who suffer from them.
Alarmingly, in a number of the countries referred
to in the report, already critical situations have
deteriorated still further. In Somalia, for example,
fighting in Mogadishu has led to an increase in the
number of internally displaced to an alarming one
million people, while thousands of others are trapped
in their homes, unable to reach safety, let alone
assistance.
In the meantime, humanitarian agencies are
increasingly treated with suspicion by the parties to the
conflict and their activities impeded. A recent example
of this was the forcible detention of the head of the
World Food Programme (WFP) by the Somali National
Security Service in October.
Elsewhere, the expulsions earlier this month of
the Humanitarian Coordinator in Myanmar and the
head of the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in South Darfur,
impede our efforts to provide assistance and protection
in already difficult circumstances. Of particular
concern is the fact that security incidents involving
humanitarian staff continue to mount and to undermine
our ability to provide life-saving assistance. The
Secretary-General’s report on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel notes that between July 2006
and June 2007 there were 507 violent attacks directed
against United Nations personnel, 442 incidents of
harassment and intimidation, 534 cases of robberies,
232 physical assaults, 126 cases of hijacking and 273
reported cases of arrest and detention by State and nonState actors. Those figures do not include similar

5

S/PV.5781

attacks and incidents involving the staff of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), who are
often present in greater numbers and more places than
United Nations personnel.
During a similar period, attacks, for example,
against United Nations and NGO staff in Darfur,
increased by 150 per cent. Only last month, seven
humanitarian workers were killed; ten vehicles were
hijacked and seven convoys were ambushed. In
Afghanistan, the WFP has suffered unprecedented
attacks on its food aid convoys in the past 11 months.
More than 30 incidents involving WFP trucks have
been reported this year, against five in 2006.
As requested by the Council, OCHA is
developing a monitoring and reporting mechanism to
facilitate more in-depth analysis of the causes and
consequences of access constraints. This analysis will
be annexed to future reports on the protection of
civilians and included in my regular briefings to the
Council. Such analysis will provide an important
opportunity for action in response to particularly grave
situations. It will also produce an expectation of action
by the Council. And, in my view, justifiably so.
To overcome some of the less obvious obstacles
to access, we need to give serious consideration to the
development of a standard moratorium on immigration
and customs requirements for humanitarian workers
and supplies. But in particularly grave cases, the
Council should consider concerted advocacy and
negotiation with warring parties for the establishment
of “deconflicting” arrangements, for example, highlevel diplomacy to promote humanitarian corridors or
days of tranquillity where these can make a real
contribution. Last but not least, the Council should
hold situation-specific debates on access and even,
where appropriate, consider referring grave instances
of denial of access, as well as situations involving
attacks against humanitarian workers, to the
International Criminal Court. Denying access
exacerbates malnutrition and disease, increases civilian
deaths and prolongs human suffering. There should be
no impunity for those responsible.
Thirdly, there is the critical need to address more
effectively, and much earlier on, housing, land and
property issues, often at the origins of conflict and
almost always a result of conflict, as people leave or
are forced from their homes and their land. The
resolution of such issues is inevitably linked to the

6

achievement and consolidation of lasting peace and the
prevention of future violence. In Darfur for example,
after four years of conflict and continuing
displacement, reaching common agreement on land
tenure and compensation for the loss of property has
emerged as a key element of a sustainable peace.
Recording loss of land, homes, or property,
upholding rights and entitlements, reinforcing the right
to return as a means of demonstrating our nonacceptance of ethnic cleansing or sectarian violence,
and mediating disputes in areas of return — all these
should become standard measures, even while conflict
continues. This means ensuring that mechanisms are in
place at the national level to address such issues. And it
means equipping peacekeeping missions with the
mandate, tools and expertise required to promote and
support these national efforts.
Finally, whereas the first years of establishing the
protection of civilians on the Council’s agenda were
dedicated mostly to raising awareness of the issues and
then to developing possible tools, we have now
reached a critical new phase in our collective efforts to
implement resolution 1674 (2006). Establishing a
Council working group on the protection of civilians,
as suggested in the Secretary-General’s report, would
mark this new phase. I am not suggesting the
establishment of a heavy reporting mechanism similar
to the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflicts. Rather, we would like to see a regular forum
for timely consultation on protection of civilians’
concerns between the Council in its entirety and OCHA
and other relevant departments.
We believe this would help ensure a more
consistent application of the aide-memoire and other
protection of civilians concerns in the Council’s
deliberations, for example on the establishment or
renewal of peacekeeping mandates and other relevant
missions, the development of draft resolutions, and
presidential statements.
I realize that these are all significant proposals
for the Council and its working methods and require
further deliberation.
Fundamental to the protection of civilians is the
resolution of the conflicts which cause their suffering.
The United Nations in all its aspects certainly needs to
do more to that end, but beyond that, the systematic
implementation of resolution 1674 (2006) and the
measures contained in an updated Council aide-

07-60503

S/PV.5781

memoire on the protection of civilians would show real
commitment to the millions of victims. That would
send a message whose impact would reverberate
around all the conflicts that civilians face throughout
the world.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached among Council members, I wish
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and statement, and Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes for his very relevant comments on the
subject of our debate today.
Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
made by our Portuguese colleague on behalf of the
European Union.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
key element of international humanitarian law. The
sixth report on the protection of civilians submitted by
the Secretary-General reveals the extent of the
challenge before us and in that context suggests a
series of actions that warrant not only thorough
discussion on the part of the Council, but also a
strengthened follow-up by the Security Council.
At the United Nations World Summit in the
autumn of 2005, we all acknowledged and accepted the
principle of the responsibility to protect, which the
Secretary-General has just recalled in all of its
importance. As we all know, the principle reaffirms
States’ obligation to protect their own population
against such grave crimes as genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing. If States
refuse to accept that responsibility or are unable to
fulfil it, it falls to the international community. In that
context, the Security Council must assume its role and
ensure the implementation of the principles agreed by
all Member States.
In that respect, we are pleased by the special
attention that the Secretary-General has devoted to that
problem, as demonstrated in his recent appointment of

07-60503

Mr. Francis Deng. Belgium hopes that the pending
issues related to his mandate will soon be resolved.
I will focus my statement on a few dimensions of
the situation under discussion today: the question of
humanitarian access, the scourge of sexual violence as
a weapon of war, and the matter of cluster munitions.
In conflict zones, access to the people affected is
not always guaranteed. Such access is a prerequisite to
any humanitarian action, as are the safety of
humanitarian and United Nations personnel on the
ground. The nature of the obstacles differs from
conflict to conflict. In that regard, the speedy
identification of those obstacles is critical, as it can
help to save lives. We must therefore consider how best
to further involve the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
Last month, during the Security Council’s open
debate on strengthening the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, we noted the growing scourge of sexual
violence, in particular in situations of armed conflict.
The situation that prevails, inter alia, in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is most
disturbing, as confirmed by the Secretary-General’s
report. It is not only the extent of the phenomenon that
is shocking, but also the barbarity of such actions and
the methods employed. That practice is particularly
repugnant when used as a weapon of war.
It is clear that the convening of a Security
Council debate is not enough to end that scourge. The
Council must pay more systematic attention to the
phenomenon and address it head on. In that context,
Belgium welcomes the efforts made by the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and by the recent creation of an
internal task force devoted to issues of sexual violence
against women in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
More generally, it is crucial to recall and to stress,
as does resolution 1674 (2006), States’ responsibility to
end impunity and to bring to justice the perpetrators of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other flagrant violations of international humanitarian
law. We have several instruments at our disposal,
including the International Criminal Court and
mechanisms of transitional justice. In the case of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, an important
contribution to that goal could be made by the mapping

7

S/PV.5781

exercise currently being carried out by the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights with respect to
serious human rights violations committed from 1993
to 2003.
The use of cluster munitions wreaks unacceptable
harm on civilian populations, even after a ceasefire or
the cessation of hostilities is declared. Belgium is
therefore working for the adoption, following an open
and inclusive process, of a legally-binding instrument
to ban cluster munitions. Such an instrument, we feel,
should entail commitments with respect to the
destruction of stockpiles, provide for assistance to
victims and include provisions on international
cooperation.
To that end, on 30 October, we hosted in Brussels
a European Regional Conference on Cluster Munitions.
The principle statements and the conclusions of the
rapporteurs highlighted positive developments in the
positions that were expressed, identified certain areas
of agreement, and stressed something that I feel to be
just as important: specific issues to be addressed with a
view to the negotiation of a future treaty. The
international momentum of which the Brussels
conference was part will, of course, continue in the
context of the Oslo process.
In conclusion, Belgium believes that the
humanitarian dimension of a conflict should be better
integrated into the Council’s work. We therefore
support any effort to provide more systematic
consideration of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict by the Security Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
preparing his very thorough report. We share his
concern over the high number of refugees and
internally displaced persons throughout the world.
According to the report, poor leadership is in
evidence in Iraq. Known events in that country have
created more than 2 million refugees and 2.2 million
internally displaced persons. Their problems must be
resolved as soon as possible. In addition to the strictly
humanitarian dimension, they loom as an onerous
burden on neighbouring countries. The scope of
internal displacement from Darfur — some 240,000
people — is also a cause for serious alarm. Prospects
for improvement in the situation will depend above all
on the peace talks and the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

8

The responsibility to protect civilians falls first
and foremost to the Governments of States in conflict.
We believe that such responsibility should also be
borne in mind by non-State actors. We condemn the
actions of armed groups, in particular the use of suicide
bombers and the practice of hostage-taking. Civilians
should not be deliberately attacked or killed by the
indiscriminate or excessive use of force, which is also
a violation of international humanitarian law.
The Secretary-General rightly notes the alarming
trends towards the erosion of principles related to
distinction and proportionality. In this respect, in
particular, we support his call for the multinational
forces in Iraq and Afghanistan to include concrete
information in their quarterly reports to the Council on
actions to protect civilian populations.
We are becoming more and more concerned about
the activity of private security companies which often
flagrantly violate the rights of civilian populations.
One thinks especially of the conduct of such companies
in Iraq, with the wounding and death of civilians,
including children and women. We would expect the
facts of the suffering of children to be reflected in the
UNICEF note submitted to the Council’s Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflicts. We
emphasize the requirement that the staff of these types
of companies should comply scrupulously with the
norms of international law, both as they apply to times
of the armed conflict and as they apply to human
rights. We would especially note that, in cases that are
unclear from the standpoint of current international
law, responsibility for the actions of these
organizations should be borne by the States hiring
them; or, alternatively, one could consider the staff of
such security firms as mercenaries.
Like the Secretary-General, we welcome the
initiative of the Government of Switzerland and the
International Committee of the Red Cross to consider
questions at the intergovernmental level on the use of
private military and security firms in the context of
compliance with international humanitarian law. We
note the Secretary-General’s balanced treatment of the
concept of responsibility to protect as the responsibility
of each State for the protection of individuals in their
jurisdiction from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. It is the job of
the United Nations and of the Security Council to
support these national efforts.

07-60503

S/PV.5781

However, here it would be premature to talk
about the functions of the so-called Special
Representative on the Prevention of Genocide and
Mass Atrocities, whose mandate is not yet agreed with
the Security Council. In our view, the SecretaryGeneral should provide the Council with clarifications
and specific proposals on the broadening of the Special
Representative’s mandate. This would help us to clarify
what exactly is meant by the term “mass atrocities” and
how the new mandate would interface with the work of
other agencies in the United Nations system.
We should study the Secretary-General’s
proposed actions on the conduct of hostilities, on
prevention of sexual violence, humanitarian access and
property rights. Consideration of such measures
should, of course, be non-selective from the standpoint
of the conflict situations involved.
With respect to Action five in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, namely, to create a Security Council
working group on the protection of civilians, the
advisability of this very bureaucratized action step
gives us strong reservations. Not more than a month
ago, a similar proposal was introduced in the Council’s
thematic discussion on women, peace and security —
which raises the question of how many working groups
the Council needs to create, bearing in mind that in the
Secretary-General’s report individual chapters are also
assigned to the elderly, persons with disabilities,
journalists and many other subjects for so-called
thematic discussions.
Instead of establishing new bureaucratic
structures and discussions, the United Nations should
expeditiously and effectively react to instances of
violence against civilians and the destruction of
civilian sites during armed conflict. It is important to
strive for scrupulous compliance by all parties with the
norms of international humanitarian law and the
relevant decisions of the Security Council. The most
direct way to resolve all problems is through the
responsible conduct of all States.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to welcome SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon to our meeting and thank him
for his statement. We would like to express our thanks
to Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his briefing
and our appreciation for all his efforts and the large
amount of work he has carried out in the field since he
took office about a year ago. We also commend the

07-60503

relevant United Nations bodies for their work in the
humanitarian field over the years.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
been a classic item for the United Nations since the
Organization’s founding. The international community
has established for this purpose a comparatively
complete international humanitarian legal framework,
with comprehensive provisions contained in the
relevant international legal instruments, including the
1949 Fourth Geneva Convention and the two
Additional Protocols of 1977. The Security Council has
been considering this issue for nearly a decade and has
adopted numerous resolutions and presidential
statements. All the aforementioned has provided
guidance for the practical work in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
However, with the change of the characters of
conflicts and the emergence of new factors, and as a
result of the interlinkage of complex historical,
political, territorial, religious and resource-related
issues, we are still witnessing the sad situation in
which large numbers of civilians are affected, harmed
and devastated by armed conflict. We strongly urge
parties to conflicts to abide strictly by international
humanitarian law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions and to fulfil their corresponding obligations
to protect the lives, property and legitimate interests of
civilians.
In order to improve the work in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, it is necessary to enhance
international cooperation and to give full play to the
role of international bodies, the Government concerned
and humanitarian bodies. There is need to emphasize
protection and humanitarian relief and to ensure
compliance with international law, as well as to pay
attention to conflict prevention. I wish to emphasize
the following points.
First, the Security Council should continue to
fulfil its primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security, in accordance with the
United Nations Charter, and play its unique role in the
protection of civilians. It is necessary to intensify
efforts in preventing and resolving conflicts and in
peacebuilding, so as to provide a secure environment
for civilians — which is, in the end, the most effective
protection. This requires cooperation between the
Security Council and other relevant United Nations
bodies and only when the Council functions within its

9

S/PV.5781

spheres of competence can it play its proper part in this
integrated undertaking.
Secondly, it is necessary always to bear in mind
the need to respect the role of Governments in the
protection of civilians and to let them play this role.
Governments bear the primary responsibility to protect
their civilians. While the international community and
outside forces can provide help, the provisions of the
Charter must be followed in doing so, and care must be
taken not to undermine the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the country concerned. Even when outside
support is necessary, the will of the country concerned
must be fully respected and forcible intervention
avoided. The internal judicial organs of the country
concerned should also be allowed to play a bigger role
in ending impunity.
Thirdly, humanitarian relief work should be
carried out in a judicious and effective manner, in
accordance with the principles of fairness, neutrality,
objectivity and independence. Humanitarian relief is
very important in the protection of civilians and
constitutes an indispensable link in efforts to address
any conflict situation. However, it is necessary to
ensure the credibility and humanitarian nature of
humanitarian relief work, which should comply with
international humanitarian law and should not replace
or interfere in conflict resolution and political process.
We find it deplorable that certain bodies use
humanitarian relief as a pretext to engage in illegal
activities in conflict regions.
Fourthly, the concept of the responsibility to
protect should be interpreted and applied in a prudent
and accurate manner. The Outcome Document of the
2005 World Summit contains detailed elaboration and
provisions on the responsibility to protect and
stipulates explicitly that this concept should be
discussed by the General Assembly. The Security
Council should not become a forum for extrapolating
this concept or engaging in other similar legislative
activities, because that is a task for the whole
membership of the United Nations. At present, this
concept is not yet mature, and many Member States
have considerable concerns about it. The relevant
discussions should be held within the framework of the
General Assembly, and the Security Council should not
prejudge the result of such discussions.
Fifthly, the Security Council should continue to
address the protection of civilians in the context of

10

specific conflicts. Each conflict has its own causes and
characteristics, and efforts to address humanitarian
problems, including the protection of civilians, cannot
be separated from the peace process and political
situation of a specific conflict. The protection of
civilians cannot be addressed in isolation, nor can
superficial symptoms be our sole concern. Since the
country-specific consideration mechanism of the
Council has been effective, and in order to avoid
overlap and repetition, we are not in favour of
establishing a special working group on the protection
of civilians.
Finally, we are willing to work together with
other members of the Council to strive for more
constructive results in the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts through pragmatic and effective
efforts.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First,
allow me to express our sincere gratitude to you
personally, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Indonesia for having convened this important debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Similarly, we would like to express our gratitude for
the detailed report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/643) and the briefing by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, which highlighted
the urgency with which we must respond to this issue.
The Security Council, in its resolution 1674
(2006), reaffirmed its condemnation of attacks that are
deliberately aimed at civilians as a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law and human rights
standards. Under this resolution and the standards set
out in the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols, the Council must ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights in
regions where peacekeeping missions are deployed.
The mere discussion of this matter necessarily
brings to mind paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome Document, through which we
adopted the responsibility to protect as a standard of
this Organization. That concept, above and beyond the
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal official States, clearly
establishes that when a Government will not or cannot
protect the rights of its citizens, the international
community, and therefore the United Nations, assumes
the responsibility of doing so. Sexual violence against
women as a tool of war or as simple political pressure

07-60503

S/PV.5781

presents a clear example in which the international
community has the obligation to act. Within that
context, we must assess and analyse our achievements
and we must confess that we have failed in that respect.
This Organization, and in particular the Security
Council, must review the way in which we tackle this
issue.
For the Republic of Panama, the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict establishes a basis for the discussion on
how to proceed in this matter, with specific
recommendations on responding to those challenges
more effectively. The measures set out include specific
activities, such as the systematic inclusion of
information on, inter alia, sexual violence and access to
humanitarian assistance in the reports that we receive.
This represents clear guidance, which is missing in our
current practice.
However, there are a few proposals that require
even more consideration and discussion, especially
regarding the establishment of a working group on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which we
support in principle. However, on that item, we believe
it would be more pertinent to reflect on our working
methods before developing new structures. Otherwise,
we run the risk of not achieving our main objective,
which is to be effective in protecting civilians in
situations of armed conflict.
Lastly, I would like to underscore that a central
part of our effort to protect civilian populations is to
bring to justice those who have committed crimes
against humanity and/or violations of international
humanitarian law. That is why we reiterate our support
for the International Criminal Court to comply with its
mission to put an end to impunity for those responsible
for these crimes.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I wish to
start by thanking you, Mr. President, for including this
issue on our agenda today. I welcome the fact that the
Secretary-General took the trouble to join us today, and
I thank him for his statement. I think that exemplifies
his commitment to doing more to protect civilians in
armed conflict. We are also grateful for his thoughtprovoking report (S/2007/643) and to Sir John Holmes
for the work of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). I believe the discussion
today has demonstrated the centrality of this issue to
all of the work of the Council.

07-60503

As the Secretary-General’s report notes,
resolution 1674 (2006) was a watershed in the
Council’s work in the protection of civilians. The
challenge is to build on that achievement. The United
Kingdom sees three roles that the Council should play:
first, in setting standards to be applied to the protection
of civilians during armed conflict; secondly, in
ensuring integrity and effectiveness in United Nations
missions; and thirdly, in pressuring and persuading
States to meet their obligations.
I wish to address the normative framework and
the need to put those norms into practice. I will also
highlight some country situations in which action is
needed.
Resolution 1674 (2006) affirmed the agreement
reached at the 2005 World Summit on the
responsibility to protect. The resolution recognizes the
primary responsibility of States for protecting their
own citizens, but also underscores the shared
responsibility of the international community to help
States fulfil that responsibility.
What we want is a partnership where
international assistance, for example in building
judicial capacity or in reforming the security sector,
helps strengthen States’ ability to exercise their
sovereign responsibilities. But in those exceptional
cases in which States cannot or will not protect
civilians from the gravest abuses of their human rights,
the international community not only has a right to act,
but a responsibility to do so. That action can come in a
range of forms, from sanctions against those
responsible to direct intervention to protect civilians
and should always be proportionate and carefully
chosen.
That is part of the wider challenge of becoming
collectively more capable of anticipating and
preventing crises and more effective in our actions
when such crises arise. We therefore need to build on
the responsibility to protect through improving our
ability across the conflict cycle.
We need to do more before conflict breaks out by
being more aware of potential crises and ready to act
through a range of tools. The work of the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide and Mass Atrocities and the special adviser
on the prevention and resolution of conflict is central
to our efforts. We welcome those appointments. I join

11

S/PV.5781

my Belgian colleague in expressing the hope that their
positions will soon be confirmed.
We need to do more during conflict, through
more emphasis on humanitarian access and on
preventing or punishing abuses.
We need to do more post-conflict by being better
at stabilization and peacebuilding. In particular, as my
Prime Minister, Gordon Brown, has proposed, we need
to develop the capacity to deploy international civilian
capabilities to rebuild shattered societies, just as we
can deploy military units to help preserve the peace.
The report of the Secretary-General shows the
scale of the task we face. It details the scourge of
sexual violence, a problem caused by the sense of
impunity from justice that its perpetrators believe they
enjoy. If States cannot provide a functioning system of
law and order, it becomes the responsibility of the
international community to ensure that justice is done.
That is integral to building peace in post-conflict
societies and to deterring future crimes. United Nations
peacekeeping missions also have a crucial role to play
in tackling sexual violence.
In eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there are widespread abuses of the civilian
population by armed combatants, of which the brutal
and calculated practice of sexual violence is a
particularly grave example. All those responsible, in
the armed forces and in illegal armed groups, must be
brought to justice in order to secure justice for their
victims and to deter others. Therefore, in renewing the
mandate for the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo at the end of
this year, we should ensure more effective action,
including supporting the recent agreement between
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
tackle the scourge of the Forces Démocratiques de
Libération du Rwanda, the former génocidaires and
other ethnic armed groups who terrorize the civilian
population.
The conflict in Darfur continues to be
characterized by gross and systematic violations and
abuses of human rights and of international
humanitarian law. In addition, the Government in
Khartoum continues to ignore the demands of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). One of the
indictees even remains a government Minister. The
Government of the Sudan is required to cooperate with
the ICC and to surrender the two individuals for whom

12

arrest warrants have been issued. The Council will
consider that issue in detail when the ICC Prosecutor
reports to us next month.
The
Secretary-General’s
report
contains
substantive recommendations. The United Kingdom
agrees that the United Nations needs to be more
systematic in including the protection of civilians in
the reporting we receive and the mandates we adopt.
And the Council should hear from OCHA and the
Department of Political Affairs, as well as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as we
consider peacekeeping issues, where protection is key.
Moreover, we agree that safe, timely and
unimpeded access for the delivery of assistance is
crucial. We welcome OCHA’s initiative of developing a
monitoring and reporting mechanism. And we agree
that we need more emphasis on reporting on sexual
violence and on ways to address it, including sanctions
against those responsible.
Above all, we need to mainstream the protection
agenda in the Council’s work and across the conflict
cycle. That is a big challenge, but it is one that we have
to meet. We will work with the Secretariat, Council
colleagues and others to take this forward.
Finally, I associate myself with the statement to
be made later by the representative of Portugal on
behalf of the European Union.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank the Council presidency for offering us this
opportunity to revisit the crucial issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his commitment to the subject
and greatly appreciate his report (S/2007/643). I should
also like to thank Mr. John Holmes for the detailed
briefing that he has just given us.
Since our last debate on this subject, on 22 June
2007 (see S/PV.5703), the Council has acted in
response to a number of specific situations in which the
issue of protecting civilians was key. By virtue of our
resolution 1769 (2007), the hybrid force in Darfur has
a mandate to protect civilians and to facilitate the work
of humanitarian workers. It must continue to be fully
deployed. Likewise, under our resolution 1778 (2007),
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad has a mandate of protection,
together with the European Union. In both cases, the

07-60503

S/PV.5781

protection mandates are placed under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

the report, the Court’s arrest warrants must be
executed.

The Council remains seized of other situations
requiring the protection of civilians, ranging from
Somalia to Iraq and from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to Afghanistan. Incidentally, I should like to
confirm here the French decision — and its
implementation — to accompany World Food
Programme convoys to the coasts of Somalia, effective
as of yesterday.

Finally, we fully share the Secretary-General’s
view that, in the conduct of hostilities, the parties to a
conflict cannot ignore the collateral effect of certain
weapons that they use. We support the recommendation
concerning the development of a legally binding
instrument prohibiting the production, use, stockpiling
and transfer of cluster munitions.

In keeping with Article 99 of the Charter, the
Secretary-General has always brought to our attention
the most serious situations of violations of
international humanitarian law and of human rights.
We are grateful to him for his initiative to further
strengthen the Council’s early warning mechanism,
based on paragraphs 138 and 139 of the Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) of the
2005 World Summit. We welcome the appointment of
Mr. Francis Deng as Special Adviser for the Prevention
of Genocide and Mass Atrocities, since he can act,
alongside the Secretary-General, as a focal point for
the protection of civilians. We also welcome the
Secretary-General’s intention to appoint a Special
Adviser for the Responsibility to Protect, Mr. Ed Luck.
Indeed, 20 years after the emergence of the concept, at
the initiative of France, the time had come for concrete
and full implementation, fulfilling the hopes of people
in distress.
The Secretary-General’s report contains specific
proposals that should enable the Council to act more
effectively. I should like to highlight some of them.
Regarding action one, related to the conduct of
hostilities, the Council must always remember that
respect for international humanitarian law is mandatory
for all, including non-governmental forces and private
security firms, in all circumstances. Among the most
important principles of international humanitarian law
are those of distinction and proportionality. We share
the Secretary-General’s concern at the erosion of
respect for those principles.
We also believe that there can be no lasting or
preventive protection of civilians in a context of
impunity. France thus reaffirms its support for the
activities of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
recalls in particular that the Council has asked the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the ICC,
on the basis of resolution 1593 (2005). As recalled in

07-60503

With regard to action two, related to sexual
violence, we have had several opportunities to express
our deep concern — recently, during the Council’s
debate on 23 October (see S/PV.5766) and during the
Third Committee’s adoption of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States, entitled “Elimination
of rape and other forms of sexual violence in all their
manifestations, including in conflict and related
situations,” of which my country was a sponsor. In the
spirit of the presidential statement adopted by the
Council on 23 October (S/PRST/2007/40), France
supports the Secretariat in its intention to be as
accurate as possible in reporting to us on possible cases
of sexual violence.
Action three, concerning humanitarian access, is
of particular importance to France. In 1988 and 1990,
we submitted the first two resolutions to the General
Assembly dealing with access to victims and the
establishment of humanitarian corridors. The free
access of humanitarian personnel to civilians in need is
a key requirement set out by the Council in its
resolution 1674 (2006). The Council must be fully
informed about obstacles to humanitarian assistance
and, on the other hand — as our Chinese colleague
mentioned — about excesses or offences that could be
committed
by
unscrupulous
humanitarian
organizations. In that connection, my country is
pleased that Mr. Holmes reports regularly to the
Council on the issue of access, both verbally, through
briefings to the Council twice a year, and in written
form, through an annex to his report.
The Secretary-General has welcomed the
Council’s action against the scourge of child soldiers
and in general against the situation of children in
armed conflicts. The success of that action is based on
the detailed information transmitted to the Council by
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. It
is also based on the consideration of that information

13

S/PV.5781

by a working group that France has the honour to chair
and the possibility that it will report to the Council and
propose concrete measures.
Finally, through action five, the SecretaryGeneral proposes the establishment of a Security
Council working group on the protection of civilians.
France supports that proposal, which we understand
will take the form of an expert group. We are pleased
that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations have begun a joint study to examine the
effects on the ground of the protection mandates given
to peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, I should like once again to express
to the Secretary-General and the Under-SecretaryGeneral our admiration and respect for their
commitment on the ground and their will to strengthen
the Council’s means of action. We will carry out our
responsibilities.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to thank the Indonesian presidency for
organizing this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We also thank the Secretary
General for having taken time from his busy schedule
to join us in this debate. We wish also to commend
Mr. John
Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, for briefing the Council. We look forward
to the briefing to be given later by the representative of
the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The sixth report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, contained in
document S/2007/643, is a stark reminder that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict has become
even more urgent since the Security Council first
addressed this issue eight years ago. According to the
report, the nature of contemporary armed conflicts
presents new and unique challenges for protecting
civilians and has raised issues that require further study
by the Security Council before it responds
appropriately.
However, while exploring the response to these
new challenges for the protection of civilians, it is
important that on the question of the conduct of
hostilities there is an accurate and factual account of
conditions on the ground. For example, one of the most
objectionable forms of attack on civilians, which needs
to be utterly condemned, is the use of suicide attacks.

14

When suicide attacks were used against civilians in
Israel, they were roundly condemned by everyone,
including Palestinians. Suicide attacks have since
decreased in Israel and have not taken place in a long
time, and it is for this reason that we regret that the
report did not make that clear.
In his letter to the Security Council, dated
19 November 2007, Ambassador Riyad Mansour,
Permanent Observer of Palestine, confirms the
decrease in suicide attacks. He also points out that
“[t]he perpetuation of reporting, including certain
language usage that overlooks the existence of this
occupation, is unacceptable. Of course, this in no way
implies that the occupied people are absolved from
respecting international law, which should have
primacy in all circumstances; but rather, the point is to
stress that any examination of the situation and
developments in this regard must be considered within
the overall context of the occupation, which
unquestionably impacts all aspects of the situation on
the ground and remains the root cause of this conflict”.
The fact that suicide attacks are still used against
civilians in Afghanistan, Iraq, Sri Lanka and Somalia
remains a challenge for the international community.
In situations of conflict it is incumbent on States,
with the support of the United Nations and relevant
humanitarian actors, to protect civilians from abuse, to
mitigate the impact of warfare and to alleviate their
suffering. For this reason, my delegation wishes to
reaffirm the primary responsibility of each State to
protect its citizens and persons within its jurisdiction,
as proclaimed in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document. Furthermore, it is important that
humanitarian assistance continues to be provided in
accordance with the principles of neutrality and
impartiality, and parties to the conflict must allow
timely and unhindered access of humanitarian
assistance to civilians.
Perhaps the most cruel and despicable tool of
conflict is the systematic use of gender-based violence,
particularly rape and other forms of sexual violence. It
is for this reason that my delegation has always
supported the call for the elimination of rape and other
forms of sexual violence in all their manifestations,
including in conflict and related situations.
In its recent open debate on women and peace
and security (see S/PV.5766 and Resumption 1), the

07-60503

S/PV.5781

Council stressed its repeated condemnation of all acts
of violence, including killing, maiming, sexual
violence, exploitation and abuse in situations of armed
conflict. The Council called on all parties to armed
conflict to cease such acts with immediate effect and
adopt specific measures to protect women and girls
from all forms of violence. The Council stressed the
need to end impunity for such acts as part of a
comprehensive approach to seeking peace, justice,
truth and national reconciliation.
Furthermore, it is important that steps be taken to
ensure that all aspects of peacekeeping operations have
adequate training of personnel on the specific needs of
women and children prior to deployment. The
zero-tolerance policy of the United Nations must be
uniformly applied, and action should be taken by States
and international and regional institutions to
investigate and punish those who perpetrate acts of
gender-based violence against women and girls in
situations of armed conflict.
Above all, the international community should
assist in providing all necessary assistance to the
victims of rape and other sexual violence, who are
usually forgotten after their crimes have been
publicized.
Another major result of conflict is the
unprecedented wave of displaced people, both within
and across borders. The report points out that for
35 million people flight has become the only option as
displacement has become the main feature of conflict,
creating a great humanitarian challenge. It is worth
noting that the report further points out that this
displacement phenomenon can be found anywhere in
the world where there is armed conflict, whether it be
in Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo or the Darfur region of the Sudan.
The next challenge for the international
community will be how to resettle people in the
territories from which they fled during war, but which
may now be occupied by the victors in the conflicts.
Ensuring the right of safe and unimpeded return for
refugees and internally displaced persons needs to be
addressed if future peace is to be sustained and further
violence prevented. The right of people to return to
their former homes and countries is sacrosanct and
should never be compromised.
In resolution 1674 (2006) the Security Council
reaffirmed the importance of preventing armed conflict

07-60503

and its recurrence by stressing the need for a
comprehensive approach through promoting economic
growth, poverty eradication, sustainable development,
national reconciliation, good governance and
democracy, the rule of law, and respect for and
protection of human rights. This confirms the agreed
principle that development, peace and security and
human rights are interlinked and should form the basis
for our collective security and well-being.
South Africa expresses deep concern about the
impact of unexploded cluster munitions on civilians,
particularly children, who are maimed and even killed
by these weapons long after the war has ended. These
weapons constitute an obstacle to the return of refugees
and other displaced persons, humanitarian aid
operations, reconstruction and economic development,
as well as to the restoration of normal social
conditions, and have serious and lasting social and
economic consequences. Concerted efforts are required
to end the use of cluster munitions, and my delegation
looks forward to future discussions in the United
Nations on how to address the danger posed by cluster
munitions.
We are pleased that the report of the SecretaryGeneral addresses the disturbing and seemingly
increasing trend of attacks on humanitarian workers.
We welcome Security Council resolution 1502 (2003)
on the protection of United Nations personnel,
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in
conflict zones. The report points out that between 1997
and 2005 the absolute number of acts of violence
perpetrated against humanitarian workers nearly
doubled. The international community will have to
redouble its efforts if it wants to protect the
humanitarian workers who are often the only lifeline
for the victims of war.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is,
and must remain, an absolute priority for the Council.
My delegation is therefore of the view that finding a
common solution to the protection of civilians will
require the cooperation of each and every Member
State. We also believe that the protection of civilians in
armed conflict would be better addressed in partnership
with regional mechanisms, and that strengthening
dialogue and cooperation between the Security Council
and regional organizations would contribute to tackling
common security challenges and ensuring speedy
action on the ground.

15

S/PV.5781

Mr. Spatafora (Italy): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate
and for again drawing our attention to a central issue
that, as the Permanent Representative of South Africa
has said, is an absolute priority.
Italy fully associates itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Portugal on behalf
of the European Union. I will just add a few remarks.
We warmly welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2007/643) and the briefing by UnderSecretary-General Holmes. We welcome them because
they are extremely focused and action-oriented. The
presence of the Secretary-General among us, his very
lucid and passionate statement and the quality of the
report are a clear demonstration of the primary
importance of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict in the agenda and of the personal commitment
of the Secretary-General on behalf of all of us.
The Security Council has no doubt made
substantial progress on this issue. I will not repeat what
previous speakers have said about the progress made; it
is enough to read paragraph 10 of the report of the
Secretary-General. But, shifting our attention from the
Security Council to the field, I wonder whether we
could say that there has been substantial progress in the
situation on the ground. I think that, as previous
speakers have said, if we read the report of the
Secretary-General closely, some doubts emerge as to
whether there has been progress. Indeed, as I in fact
believe, there may have been some steps backward. I
think that in the future we will have to take what I
would call a less Security Council-centred approach for
identifying benchmarks and a more ground-centred
approach for assessing whether or not benchmarks
have been met.
There is no doubt that the protection agenda has
gained momentum. We now have to build on the
progress made, and we need to do so through — I
repeat — an operational approach. Let us address the
remaining strong concerns through effective and
sustainable proposals. The report of the Secretary
General is a road map for action for all of us. As stated
by the Secretary-General, the report provides a
framework for action, with a series of five very precise
and focused recommendations. Under-SecretaryGeneral Holmes has also been very clear about which
actions we should embark upon in the following weeks

16

and months. Let us deliver on those proposed actions.
Once again, what is at stake is our credibility.
The report paints a troubling picture of conflict
situations throughout the world — negative
developments in the conduct of hostilities, constraints
on or denials of access for humanitarian personnel to
vulnerable people caught in conflict and the use of
sexual violence as a calculated method of warfare. As
has been said, it is a very powerful reminder to all of
us that we must never lose sight of the fact that what
matters most at the end of the day is whether and how
we are able to deliver and to have an impact on the
ground in providing relief for those who suffer. We
must never lose sight of the wider picture.
In that connection, and mindful of what UnderSecretary-General Holmes has told us with regard to
his views as to its potential as a regular forum for
timely consultations, we also strongly favour the
proposal by the Secretary-General to establish a
working group. I would like to add a bit more to what
Ambassador Holmes has said. I think the working
group should also be a tool for an enhanced groundcentred operational approach. The working group will
make a difference if it adds value to the ground-centred
approach. We very much appreciate what Ambassador
Holmes has said about an enhanced monitoring and
reporting mechanism. If I may, I would just like to add
that I feel, think and hope that what he means is what
we understand as proactive monitoring — not just a
listing of what has happened.
In operational terms, let us concentrate on
developing a framework to move the process forward.
We need appropriate tools with regard to different
points.
First, on peacekeeping, United Nations operations
must be clearly mandated to ensure the protection of
civilians and subsequently to report on it. We take this
opportunity to welcome the joint study being
conducted by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations referred to in the report of
the Secretary-General.
Secondly, on access, there is a need for more
systematic and timely reports, as necessary, by the
Emergency Relief Coordinator to the Council on
serious constraints on access. As I said before, we also
need an effective system of proactive monitoring and
prevention. The attention of the Council must be drawn

07-60503

S/PV.5781

to situations of constraint on access as soon as they
arise. We will then have to react and find ways to be
effective in operational terms, and not just in words. In
that regard, as other speakers have done, we reaffirm
the principle that those who are deemed responsible for
denial of access by humanitarian personnel to civilian
populations could be prosecuted by the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
With regard to sexual violence, we recall the
ICC’s role in punishing those responsible for atrocious
crimes such as rape.
Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): I wish to express
my delegation’s appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his statement and for his very comprehensive sixth
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2007/643). I also wish to express our appreciation to
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
for his briefing.
In discussing this subject, which is one of the
critical issues facing the international community, it is
important that we consider the means of preventing
conflicts. It is now widely recognized that the
promotion of human security and human development
is the basis for conflict prevention. That brings to the
fore the need for the international community, working
in collaboration with the relevant Governments and
civil society, to promote acceptable standards of
governance, economic management and the rule of law
in potential areas of conflict. In this regard, my
delegation wishes to recall resolution 1674 (2006) and
to emphasize the need for a coordinated,
comprehensive approach to the promotion of economic
growth,
poverty
eradication
and
sustainable
development in vulnerable areas and regions by the
United Nations and its agencies. Regional and
subregional organizations also have a role to play in
this area. We believe that many conflicts could be
avoided if these ideas were actively pursued.
In considering the Secretary-General’s report, we
note the relative decline in the number of conflicts in
the world. There is, however, no reason for
complacency in view of the brutality and atrocities of
the remaining conflicts, which have brought misery
and untold suffering to millions. The world’s refugee
population stands at 9.9 million and internally
displaced persons at a record 24.5 million. That is a
stark reminder of the challenges facing the
international community.

07-60503

While it is recognized that the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians falls on
States and Governments, the present situation clearly
indicates that in most conflicts, States and
Governments are either unable or unwilling to provide
that protection. The international community, therefore,
has a moral and legal duty to extend this protection as
affirmed in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document (General Assembly
resolution 60/1), and as stressed in Council resolution
1674 (2006).
In this context, we are pleased to note the
progress, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s report,
in creating the necessary regulatory and policymaking
framework to enhance the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, such as, inter alia, strengthening
peacekeeping mandates to cover the protection of
civilians, strengthening peace mediation mandates and
combating impunity for war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
On the subject of peacekeeping and humanitarian
assistance, which have played key roles in keeping
conflicts in check and have reduced the scale of human
suffering, the position of my delegation is that these
two tools, while distinct, are mutually supportive and
complementary.
With
the
strengthening
of
peacekeeping mandates to make them more robust, it
may be possible to ensure not only the physical
protection of civilians, but also the facilitation of
humanitarian assistance.
The role of a fully operational International
Criminal Court in the development and enforcement of
international humanitarian law and in combating
impunity is also indispensable. The recent issuance by
the Court of arrest warrants for crimes against
humanity and war crimes, in respect of atrocities
committed by The Lord’s Resistance Army in Uganda,
as well as those committed in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Darfur, sends a strong positive
message that the international community will not
tolerate impunity.
In debating this matter, we cannot afford to forget
the valiant role played by journalists in reporting these
conflicts. Without the commitment and professionalism
of these journalists and media personnel, who have to
operate under great risks, the extent of some of these
conflicts and atrocities committed might have been
difficult to detect. We therefore unreservedly condemn

17

S/PV.5781

the deliberate targeting of journalists and media
personnel and call on all parties to conflicts to comply
with resolution 1738 (2006).
Finally, we wish to express our support for all
measures aimed at restricting and ultimately
prohibiting the use of cluster munitions, in view of
their devastating impact on civilians. The use of such
weapons is unconscionable and unacceptable. We also
strongly
support
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation for the establishment of an expert
level working group to facilitate the systematic and
sustained consideration and analysis of the protection
of civilians.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
which forms part of the ongoing effort of the
international community and the Council to promote
the protection of civilians in conflict areas, in
particular the protection of vulnerable groups,
including women and children. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for participating in this
important debate, and to thank Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his important
briefing to the Council.
Despite the repeated condemnations of the
deliberate targeting of civilians, acts of violence and
attacks against them, forced displacement of civilians
and the deliberate denial of humanitarian access, the
world continues to witness an increase in the tragic
daily suffering of civilians in areas of armed conflict
and areas under foreign occupation. That suffering
includes displacement, which has become one of the
most prominent features of contemporary armed
conflict. Its effects last for years, causing decades of
suffering and deprivation and a daily struggle for
survival. It also includes the collateral killing of
civilians in areas of conflict or of military operations.
Innocent people are killed simply because they happen
to be near areas affected by armed conflict. All parties
in such areas must be called upon to take all necessary
measures to prevent harming civilians in accordance
with the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949.
The principle of the responsibility to protect, as
set out in the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) essentially stresses
that each State has the responsibility to protect its

18

citizens and individuals subject to its jurisdiction from
acts of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. While the principle of the
responsibility to protect reflects a noble human value,
it is easily exploited and abused; this prompts us to be
cautious in dealing with this principle. Our objectives
must therefore not be politicized; they must transcend
individual interests and reflect pure humanitarian
motives.
The report of the Secretary-General notes
progress in the promotion of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. In this regard, we commend United
Nations peacekeeping operations in areas of armed
conflict for their continuous efforts to protect civilians,
despite the serious lack of capacity and security that
has resulted in the death of many peacekeepers in areas
affected by conflict.
Here, we recall the recommendations of the
Secretary-General, with which we fully agree, on
strengthening the role of United Nations peacekeeping
operations in the field of providing humanitarian
assistance, and on the importance of creating the
security conditions that would allow them to provide
such assistance. We also commend regional
organizations for the role they play in the protection of
civilians in areas of armed conflict and urge them to
continue their important role in mediation, conflict
resolution and peacekeeping, including intervention to
prevent innocent civilians in areas of armed conflict
from being deprived of humanitarian assistance.
The report of the Secretary-General depicts
worrying trends, such as the frequent targeting of
civilians, which has become tantamount to a tool of
intimidation, and the collateral killing that claims the
lives of many innocent civilians due to inaccurate
targeting and mistaken identity. Such trends prompt us
to call upon the parties to conflicts and international
troops to abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
Another cause for concern is the risks posed by
armed conflict mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General that especially affect the elderly and
people with disabilities, since they have less access to
assistance. A vivid example of this was the fate of the
elderly and the disabled in southern Lebanon who were
unable to flee the fighting in 2006 and faced the risk of
getting wounded or killed. At this juncture, we would
like to stress the need for the elderly and people with

07-60503

S/PV.5781

disabilities to receive the attention they require as part
of the efforts of national authorities and humanitarian
actors who provide protection and assistance to
civilians.
Ensuring access to humanitarian assistance is the
greatest challenge facing us today. As expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report, such access is a
prerequisite for action and protection in the
humanitarian field and is a means of escape for
civilians in areas of armed conflict, including areas
under foreign occupation. Despite the fact that
international humanitarian law requires the parties to
the conflict to authorize the rapid passage of
humanitarian assistance and facilitate its access to
civilians in need, a clear breach of those international
obligations is taking place today.
Our world today bears witness to the arbitrary
denial of access to humanitarian assistance. This can
take multiple forms, such as the internal checkpoints
set up in the occupied Palestinian territories that
restrict access to vital humanitarian assistance, in
addition to other examples that we see daily.
Another cause for concern is the growing
phenomenon of impunity in cases of sexual violence
against women and children in areas of conflict, be
they crimes committed by the parties to the conflict or
by United Nations peacekeepers. Reports indicate that
States experiencing cases of impunity suffer from
inefficient and weak investigative processes and
prosecution. That fact confirms the need to provide the
financial and technical support necessary to strengthen
national capacities in the administration of justice in
States within whose jurisdictions those acts of sexual
violence take place.
The humanitarian consequences of the use of
cluster munitions in armed conflicts have become a
major challenge before us today. The impact from their
killing, maiming and destruction of livelihood lasts for
years. Such weapons also destroy fields, crops and
sources of income for a whole generation. This
situation calls for concerted efforts to put an end to
their use once and for all.
What we need is not new mechanisms, for that
would be a waste of time and effort. To improve the
condition of civilians in areas of armed conflict and
areas under foreign occupation, we need effective,
on-the-ground implementation of actions and measures
contained in relevant Security Council resolutions. We

07-60503

stress, in this regard, that parties to armed conflicts,
State and non-State actors alike, bear the responsibility
to fully comply with their obligations under
international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions, as the responsibility to protect civilians
rests first and foremost with the States concerned.
Finally, we would like to reaffirm our full
commitment to promoting and strengthening the
protection of civilians in areas of conflict in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions.
Ms. Wolcott (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s important
discussion. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his participation in this meeting and to
express our appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Holmes.
People in every country share the desire for a life
of opportunity for themselves and their children. They
want their nations to be successful, prosperous and to
ensure basic security, employment and educational
opportunities, by which each generation does better
than its predecessor.
There are many States throughout the world
striving to provide such an environment for their
citizens. However, repressive regimes, global terrorism
and extremism, intransigent poverty and other factors
prevent many people from having their basic needs met
and force them to live in fear.
The Secretary-General, in his most recent report
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
reminds us all that
“the protection of civilians is a human, political
and legal imperative that recognizes the inherent
dignity and worth of every human being. It is a
cause that unites us all in the responsibility to
protect civilians from abuse, to mitigate the
impact of warfare and to alleviate their
suffering.” (S/2007/643, para. 3)
In that spirit, I would like to comment on some of
the challenges raised in the Secretary-General’s report.
First is ensuring humanitarian access to civilians
in need. As noted in the report, humanitarian access to
conflict areas is often hindered by lack of security and
infrastructure. However, in some cases, State and
non-State actors flagrantly deny access, mobilizing
direct attacks against humanitarian workers and

19

S/PV.5781

making it impossible to meet emergency needs. In
many crises, deliberate attacks on humanitarian
workers remain a significant impediment to life-saving
aid. We must all work together to provide for the safety
and security of relief workers as well as civilians.
In Darfur, where more than 4.2 million people
depend on the lifeline that the international community
provides, aid is frequently hindered due to Government
actions, despite an agreement that the Government of
the Sudan and the United Nations signed in March to
foster an improved working relationship and to provide
a forum to address issues of concern. The absence of
key United Nations humanitarian staff to coordinate
the international response makes it more difficult for
humanitarian agencies to provide aid to the more than
one million people in southern Darfur.
Similarly, in Burma, the regime’s restrictions on
humanitarian agencies led the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the United Nations Programme
on HIV and AIDS to close their offices, depriving
Burmese citizens who were in need.
With regard to the report’s discussions of the
situation in Afghanistan and Iraq, I want to make clear
that the United States recalls the obligation of all
parties to the conflict, under applicable international
law, to allow and facilitate passage of humanitarian
relief, to the extent feasible, for civilians in need. We
urge all nations to follow through on these important
obligations. We support the Secretary-General’s
observation that humanitarian agencies cannot assist
people they cannot reach.
The second challenge is the prevention of sexual
violence in conflict. The United States condemns
sexual violence as an instrument of policy and calls on
all Member States to end this gross injustice. We
applaud the recent adoption by the Third Committee of
the General Assembly of a draft resolution calling on
States to end impunity by prosecuting and punishing
those who rape and use other sexual violence to
advance military or political objectives, to protect and
support victims and to develop and implement
comprehensive
strategies
on
prevention
and
prosecution of rape.
The United States has responded in many ways to
the intolerable widespread violence against civilians.
At the behest of Secretary Rice, the United States
Department of State and the Agency for International
Development are implementing an initiative to target

20

five key strategic areas to help address the issue of
gender-based violence, including access to justice,
human rights monitoring efforts, access to accurate
information, and humanitarian protection to include
clinical care. The Department of State also supports
programmes focusing on prevention and response to
gender-based violence for Darfur-Sudanese refugees in
Chad. The United States urges all Member States to
take similar concrete steps to end impunity for
perpetrators and the use of rape as an instrument of
war.
The third challenge is strengthening refugee
protection and maximizing opportunities for refugees
and internally displace persons’ self-reliance. The
United States continues to support strong and effective
international responses to humanitarian crises.
Unfortunately, protracted conflicts continue to create
forced displacement of large numbers of civilians.
Renewed displacement in Somalia, eastern Congo and
the Sudan’s Darfur province are tragic reminders of the
risk to civilians who are deliberately targeted during
armed conflicts.
Where conflict is causing civilians to flee and
seek asylum, we are actively working with other
Governments to provide protection to those in need.
The United States remains the single largest
contributor of humanitarian assistance for Iraqis.
Between 2003 and the end of this year, we will have
provided almost $1 billion in humanitarian assistance
for Iraqis, both in Iraq and in neighbouring countries.
We have made almost $200 million available in 2007
to assist displaced Iraqis, including providing
$39 million to date to the joint United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees/UNICEF appeal for the
education of Iraqi children in Jordan and Syria. During
the past year, the United States has also significantly
ramped up resettlement processing for Iraqi refugees,
including expanding processing facilities and hiring
and training staff to process Iraqi refugee applicants in
Jordan, Syria, Egypt, Lebanon and Turkey. Now that
we have those facilities and personnel in place, we
hope to admit as many as 12,000 Iraqi refugees during
the course of the next fiscal year.
The
United
States
continues
to
seek
comprehensive approaches to resolving protected
refugee situations through support for durable
solutions. We also seek innovative approaches to
developing livelihood strategies and to maximizing

07-60503

S/PV.5781

opportunities
empowerment.

for

refugee

self-reliance

and

without harming civilians, our enemy will give us the
opportunity tomorrow”.

We call on Member States to renew their
commitment to upholding the right to asylum, to
protecting civilians from forcible return, and to
providing durable solutions for refugees. The United
States is proud to have assisted approximately
1 million African refugees to return home over the past
two years.

In the first half of 2007, there were over 2,500
incidents of NATO troops in contact with the enemy.
Of those, there were 34 civilian casualty incidents, and
just four of those occurred during deliberately-planned
operations. Despite precautions, civilian casualties can
and do occur in a war zone. When that happens,
commanders work with the Government of Afghanistan
and the United Nations to conduct after-action reviews
with the goal of preventing future incidents. In glaring
contrast, terrorist groups in Afghanistan, Iraq and
elsewhere deliberately target civilians, in flagrant
violation of the most fundamental tenets of
international humanitarian law. It is well past time for
all Member States to have zero tolerance for armed
groups that deliberately target civilians or put civilians
in harm’s way with the goal of spreading fear and
destabilizing communities.

Fourthly, with respect to combating the deliberate
targeting of civilians, the Secretary-General’s report
rightly underscores the importance of the principles of
distinction
and
proportionality.
In
resolution
1674 (2006), the Council recalled that the deliberate
targeting of civilians in situations of armed conflict is a
flagrant violation of international law, reiterated its
condemnation of such practices in the strongest
possible terms, and demanded that all parties
immediately put an end to such practices.
Yet all too often, we see parties to armed conflict
resort to the deliberate targeting of the civilian
population as a means to create a climate of fear. We
have seen, for example, the human toll of terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan. According to the SecretaryGeneral’s September 2007 report on the situation in
Afghanistan, the country suffered from more than
100 suicide attacks between January and August of this
year, resulting in the deaths of more than 145 civilians.
The report also notes concern about incidental civilian
casualties resulting from military operations.
In Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere in the world,
we face ruthless enemies that have no respect for
human life and follow no rules of engagement. In our
own military operations, we do everything feasible to
avoid the loss of innocent life. We are very concerned
about civilian casualties and we take deliberate
precautions to minimize the risk to civilian
populations. In Afghanistan, the issue of civilian
casualties is at the top of the list of concerns for
commanders of NATO’s International Security
Assistance Force and Operation Enduring Freedom. At
every phase of an operation, from beginning planning
to conducting the operation, precautions are taken to
minimize the risk to civilians. If operations pose a
significant risk to civilians, the operations are changed
or cancelled. As the NATO Secretary General has
stated, “If we cannot neutralize our enemy today

07-60503

Fifthly, with respect to addressing the
humanitarian impact of cluster munitions, it is
important to highlight the decision of the Meeting of
the States Parties to the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons (CCW) last week in Geneva to
instruct Government experts to “negotiate a proposal to
address urgently the humanitarian impact of cluster
munitions, while striking the right balance between
military and humanitarian considerations”. The United
States believes that the CCW is the right framework to
take up that issue because it is uniquely well placed to
strike that balance between humanitarian and military
considerations. However, the United States believes
that cluster munitions continue to be legitimate
weapons when employed properly and in accordance
with existing international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, the United States applauds the
Secretary-General’s report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and looks forward to
reviewing
and
considering
the
report’s
recommendations. At this time, however, we note the
importance of the Security Council, when faced with
particular situations threatening international peace and
security, being able and willing to craft responses that
deal with the particularity of the threat at hand. It
follows from this that the adoption of a one-size-fits-all
approach — for example, statements that the Security
Council should in all cases adopt provisions of a
certain type — may not represent the most effective
way for the Security Council to proceed.

21

S/PV.5781

As an example, while we agree with the report
that disputes over land tenure can lead to armed
conflict and abuse when civilians are driven from their
homes and their properties are appropriated, it is less
clear to us that United Nations peacekeeping missions
should in all cases be mandated to deal with those
issues in the manner specified in the report.
With respect to the International Criminal Court,
we think it important for recommendations of that type
to distinguish in the future between the positions of
those that are parties to the Rome Statute and of those
that have chosen not to become parties. Different
States have different views about the best mechanism
for combating impunity, and it should not be assumed
that the International Criminal Court holds a privileged
position in the hierarchy of tools available for
combating impunity.
The United States appreciates the efforts of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), as well as OCHA’s interest in keeping the
Council apprised and informed about that important
topic. We welcome the idea of OCHA inviting Security
Council members to informal OCHA briefings on
situations seized by the Council, but are not convinced
that a formal working group is necessary.
In closing, the United States would like to
commend OCHA and its humanitarian partners for
their valuable work in providing life-saving assistance
and advocating for the protection of civilians,
particularly children, women, the elderly and other
vulnerable groups.
Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to express the gratitude of my delegation to the
Secretary-General for his participation in this meeting,
which underscores his valuable commitment to this
issue. I would also like to thank Sir John Holmes for
his valuable briefing.
Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later by the representative of Portugal
on behalf of the European Union.
Being deeply concerned about the situation of
millions of people trapped in conflict situations around
the globe, we fully support the continuing efforts to
strengthen the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts, especially of women and children, in
accordance with existing international norms. In that
respect, we fully support the implementation of the

22

commitments made in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document, as well as the implementation of
the Council’s resolutions, including 1674 (2006) and
1738 (2006).
My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
latest report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, contained in document S/2007/643, and can
support the recommendations made in the
aforementioned report.
The information provided from conflict regions
clearly shows serious gaps in the practical
implementation of the existing legal instruments for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, in particular
the Hague Conventions and the Geneva Conventions
and their Additional Protocols. Despite the joint efforts
of the entire international community and all the
important steps towards improved protection taken by
this Council, including through its latest resolutions on
the Sudan/Darfur, Chad, the Central African Republic
and the subregion, we are witnessing continuous and
deliberate attacks against civilians, not excluding
attacks against humanitarian personnel, rape and other
sexual violence — used often as a weapon of war —
abductions and the use of child soldiers in many
conflict situations.
We fully share the Secretary-General’s view that,
where we cannot prevent armed conflict, the protection
of civilians is, and must remain, an absolute priority
for the whole international community.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the peacekeeping troops, who very often face mortal
risk in their struggle to provide protection to people in
conflict areas. Slovakia also commends and supports
the tireless work of the United Nations and other
agencies, especially the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF, as well as
non-governmental organizations and other humanitarian
organizations, which do their best to provide assistance
to populations in conflict regions, including to nearly
10 million refugees and over 24 million internally
displaced persons.
In this regard, I would like to stress that denial of
humanitarian access is unacceptable. Deeply concerned
about the wide scale of restrictions imposed on
humanitarian organizations in many conflict situations,
we reiterate our call upon Governments and other

07-60503

S/PV.5781

parties to conflict to lift restrictions and to facilitate the
work of humanitarian organizations.
Our deepest concerns continue to be linked with
widespread and often systematic sexual violence, in
particular in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Reports of more then 4,500 cases of rape during the
first six months of 2007 in South Kivu province alone,
and especially those reports about the involvement of
some elements of the governmental forces in these
crimes, are truly alarming.
Slovakia strongly condemns such crimes and
fully supports the use of all available means to end
impunity for the perpetrators, including, where
necessary, through the engagement of the International
Criminal Court and targeted measures by the Security
Council. In this respect, we also reiterate our full
support for the zero tolerance policy in respect of
crimes committed by United Nations personnel.
We believe that national authorities and the whole
international community must respond more effectively
to crimes against civilians, including rape and other
forms of sexual violence, in armed conflict. Measures
by Governments, the United Nations system and all
other actors working on the ground should be based on
effective, reliable and better focused monitoring and
analysis.
Slovakia, therefore, supports the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to establish a Security Council
working group on the protection of civilians.
Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
convening this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to express
my gratitude for the briefing given by the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John
Holmes, and to acknowledge the work that is being
done by his Office to improve the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
Peru welcomes the sixth report of the SecretaryGeneral on this matter (S/2007/643); it is a report of
high quality. It offers a view of the positive
developments, as well as of new and continuing
problems that affect civilians in situations of armed
conflict, and it offers to the Security Council important
recommendations for their protection.
In this context, we are concerned by the overview
that the report presents on the situation of civilians in

07-60503

armed conflict. Even though there has been an
encouraging decline in the number of conflicts, in
today’s armed conflicts human rights violations and
violations of international humanitarian law have
increased, and the civilian population, particularly
women and children, are still the main victims. In
many cases, it is precisely women and children who are
even direct targets of the attacks, and victims of
gender-based sexual violence in a climate of almost
total impunity. The dangers that are faced by the
civilian population in conflicts in places such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Gaza,
Iraq, Darfur, Chad and Afghanistan, to mention only a
few, show that, despite the good intentions of the
international community, of the Security Council and
even of the respective Governments, the civilian
population still lacks significant protection. In this
respect, Peru believes that the Security Council should
continue to promote effective and feasible actions to
guarantee the protection of civilians who find
themselves immersed in armed conflicts, as well as of
displaced persons and refugees.
I would like to make a few comments on the
report’s recommendations. First of all, we agree with
the Secretary-General that ensuring humanitarian
access to the civilian population affected by conflict is
a fundamental requirement for their protection. In
accordance with international humanitarian law, the
parties to a conflict must allow and facilitate
unhindered access by all humanitarian assistance
providers to civilians in need. Regrettably, the reality
on the ground shows us that access is still far from
being safe, timely and free from obstacles. This means
that millions of people are deprived of assistance that
is crucial for their survival.
As a result, we support what is said in action
three, “Access”, in particular in reference to having the
Emergency Relief Coordinator systematically bring to
the Council’s attention situations where serious access
concerns exist, including through the biannual
briefings and as an annex to the Secretary-General’s
reports on this matter.
Secondly, the report of the Secretary-General is
enlightening in pointing out that women and children
are still the main victims of acts of violence in armed
conflict, and that increasingly sexual abuse and rape of
women and girls are used intentionally as a weapon of
war by the parties to armed conflict.

23

S/PV.5781

Peru joins in rejecting sexual violence in conflict
situations and agrees that we must act firmly, both
nationally and internationally, in order to bring an end
to these practices through policies and programmes
that promote the prevention of violence. We also
believe it is important for the international community
to support the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and that the Secretary-General report on the
progress of mainstreaming a gender perspective in
peacekeeping missions. We also support what is said in
action two, “Sexual violence”, in particular with
respect to referring grave incidents of rape and other
forms of sexual violence to the International Criminal
Court. Furthermore, States, as a matter of priority, must
assume their responsibility to bring to justice and
punish those responsible for crimes, as a
comprehensive approach to peace, justice, truth and
national reconciliation.
Thirdly, action four, “Housing, land and property
rights” is very relevant, in particular the systematic
inclusion in resolutions of references to the rights of
displaced persons and refugees to return to their homes
and places of origin safely and to the non-acceptance
of the results of ethnic cleansing or sectarian violence,
as well as mandating United Nations peacekeeping and
other relevant missions to prevent the illegal
appropriation or confiscation of land and property
abandoned by refugees and displaced persons and to
support the issuance of ownership documentation when
this has been lost or destroyed.
Fourthly, we agree with the Secretary-General
that the Security Council should call upon parties to
conflict, and upon multinational forces that it has
authorized, to uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In this respect, we support action one, “Conduct of
hostilities”; we believe it is important for peacekeeping
and other relevant United Nations missions to report on
the measures adopted to guarantee the protection of
civilians during hostilities.
Fifthly, we agree that we must bring an end to the
terrible humanitarian consequences of cluster
munitions. Cases such as Cambodia, Kosovo, southern
Lebanon and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
mentioned in the report speak volumes about the
damage caused by these weapons, which continue to
mutilate civilians after a conflict is over and which
prevent the return of displaced persons and refugees to

24

their homes, as well as the
development of the affected areas.

socio-economic

We are encouraged by the fact that the response
of the international community has been positive,
reflecting a clear political will to move towards a
solution. We must adopt a binding instrument that bans
cluster munitions that cause unacceptable damage to
the civilian population.
In the light of the situations described in the
report, it is necessary to reaffirm the responsibility of
the United Nations to defend human rights throughout
the world and to continue to place priority on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is important
to seek full implementation of resolution 1674 (2006),
which contains crucial provisions for improving the
international system to protect civilians in armed
conflict, including the responsibility to protect
populations from war crimes, genocide, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.
The proposal of the Secretary-General, contained
in action five of the report, on the establishment of a
dedicated, expert-level working group of the Council
on the protection of civilians is an idea that should be
carefully studied. However, we believe that for the
present, it is important that reports on armed conflicts
that are on the agenda of the Council should contain
information on the protection of civilians. Likewise,
warning mechanisms for the Council, including that of
the Secretary-General, should be activated in order to
protect civilian populations.
Lastly, we must acknowledge that, in order to
strengthen the protection of civilians after the cessation
of conflict, decisive action must be undertaken to build
sustainable institutions in the affected countries in
order to fight impunity, strengthen stability and
generate conditions of governance that would make it
possible to reduce poverty and create opportunities for
well-being and development.
Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to welcome the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator and to thank him for his very informative
briefing on the exhaustive report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2007/643). We also welcome the Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, an
organization which, as we all know, does a great deal

07-60503

S/PV.5781

to assist and support the victims who are at the centre
of our concerns today.
My delegation fully concurs with the statement to
be made by Mr. Gaspar Martins, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Angola, on behalf of
the Group of African States.
Generally speaking, what we draw from the sixth
report of the Secretary-General is a very gloomy
picture, given the number of civilian victims of armed
conflicts and their geographical distribution. It is a
tragedy, often with irreparable effects, experienced
every day and at every moment by thousands of
people. Like the Permanent Representative of Italy,
who spoke earlier, we have doubts concerning any
progress made regarding the number of people who are
still suffering from the effects of those violent acts.
Given the situation, my delegation agrees with the
Secretary-General that actions are more important than
words and that, when it is not possible to prevent an
armed conflict, the protection of civilians should be a
priority. We believe that it is a moral duty.
This sixth report is even more informative in its
definition of the nature of current armed conflicts, in
the alarming figures it provides on the numbers of
displaced persons and, especially, in its depiction of the
situation of women, children, the elderly and people
with disabilities, who are among those most affected
and who have endured the most serious difficulties and
extreme violence. We believe that the international
community should be able to take some of the actions
necessary to confront those challenges, as noted in
section IV of the report of the Secretary-General. We
would like to say a few words on the following points.
The responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity was emphasized in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1),
particularly in paragraphs 138 and 139. That
responsibility belongs first and foremost to
Governments, which need to shoulder it effectively by
conducting background educational work and in
publicizing
information
regarding
international
instruments, particularly international humanitarian
law. In that regard, we should note that some
Governments that are not able to accomplish this
themselves should benefit from assistance from the
international community.

07-60503

Moreover, the International Criminal Court
should play a pre-eminent role in judging those who
commit the most serious crimes, when they are not
considered to be within the competence of national
jurisdictions or when national jurisdictions are not able
to exercise their role. My delegation reiterates our
commitment to a policy of zero tolerance for all forms
of violence, all acts of sexual exploitation and other
actions against civilians, during conflicts and during
peacekeeping missions, by military, police and civilian
personnel, in accordance paragraph 20 of resolution
1674 (2006) of 28 April 2006.
We also wish to reiterate here that we condemn
acts of terrorism and the use of mercenaries. The nature
of conflicts and the actors involved are significant
factors in exacerbating armed violence against
civilians, which then often results in a higher number
of deaths, displaced persons and refugees.
In the kinds of internal conflicts that we see now,
as the Secretary-General mentioned, in which
Government troops are facing armed rebellions, the
protagonists often use measures or methods that can
exacerbate the illicit traffic in and proliferation of
weapons and drugs, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, sexual violence, trafficking in women and
children, the recruitment of child soldiers and punitive
expeditions against vulnerable people. Given those
practices, the international community, and first and
foremost the Council, must do more to coordinate
efforts to coherently combat acts of terrorism and the
use of mercenaries. In that regard, the Council should
set the example through its unity, cohesion and
impartiality.
We also agree with the Secretary-General that the
access and assistance of humanitarian personnel to
civilian populations should be assured. The report of
the Secretary-General notes 2.2 million internally
displaced persons in Iraq, the same number in the
single region of Darfur in the Sudan, 300,000 in the
Central African Republic, 170,000 in Chad, 700,000 in
Somalia and 1.2 million in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Those figures alone cannot show the deep
and indelible scars of the victims and those close to
them.
We therefore condemn very firmly the acts of
sexual exploitation and abuse of and trade in women
and children carried out by combatants, but also by
other actors, and sometimes peacekeeping forces. We

25

S/PV.5781

are convinced that the only way to assist those
hundreds of millions of people, who have no voice and
no hope, is to require that the parties to a conflict
facilitate access for humanitarian organizations.
Finally, we would like to note that the protection
of humanitarian personnel and journalists should also
be ensured. It is regrettable to note the increase and the
frequency of violent acts against humanitarian
personnel of the United Nations and other
humanitarian organizations, journalists and media
professionals over the past few years. We should note
that resolution 1738 (2006) of 23 December 2006
emphasizes that States have the responsibility to meet
their obligation under international law to put an end to
impunity and to bring to justice those responsible for
grave violations of international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to put
particular emphasis on the need for all United Nations
Member States complying with arms embargoes,
because it is very often the violation of an embargo
that fuels the action of rebel groups and other forms of
terrorism.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Indonesia.
Let me join others in thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his statement and his written report
(S/2007/643). I should also like to preface our
statement by expressing appreciation to Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
statement.
Every year, thousands of civilians fall victim to
situations of armed conflict. Their plight should be a
concern for all of us. It is our shared responsibility to
alleviate the suffering of victims wherever it occurs. A
humanitarian crisis caused by armed conflict can be
broadcast online in a matter of seconds. That can be
attributed in no small part to the role of the media in
projecting and amplifying such strong images into our
private spheres. However, it often takes more time and
further effort before needed assistance can be funnelled
in time and in line with the needs of civilians in such
precarious circumstances. Thus, as the Council, we
should offer guidance on both ways in which assistance
can be provided to victims and steps to be taken
against those who deliberately disregard human life
and to discourage such actions in the first place. In
addressing such actions, the Council would act in

26

accordance with the fundamental principles of the
Charter and international law.
Our efforts to stabilize any particular conflict
situation are focused on political dialogue, negotiations
and reconciliation processes. However, the plight of
victims does not always receive full attention. Most
often, civilians are the victims and the bystanders in
war. As non-combatants, they do not choose to engage
in the conflict taking place around them. While any
loss of life in a war is regrettable, formal and informal
laws of war have, throughout time, been intended to
protect civilians. We believe that those who are
innocent should be protected by the international
community and that the perpetrators of illegal acts
should be brought to justice.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/643)
made a valuable contribution by identifying various
means of assisting victims of armed conflict. It also
highlighted the plight of victims in various armed
conflict situations. Indeed, it assisted us by presenting
a well-rounded picture of the situation.
The impact of war on civilians goes far beyond
targeting them as combatants; it includes the auxiliary
effects of war, including physical displacement,
disease, hunger and the wreckage and death wrought
by the placement of anti-personnel landmines on
civilian territory. Efforts to combat those ills and to
ensure respect for basic human rights can include a
range of measures, including the timely delivery of
food and medical support, rehabilitation and advocacy
to victims.
We consider all acts against relief workers,
humanitarian aid convoys and others engaged in
providing humanitarian assistance to the population to
counter the effects of war to be deplorable. The
deliberate targeting of such individuals is a crime, and
we invoke the relevant international laws, including the
1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel and its Optional Protocol, for
that purpose.
In the twenty-first century, the number of civilian
deaths in wartime has been growing, and the dynamics
are complicated by the role of non-State actors.
Civilians are deliberately targeted in many conflicts,
which runs counter to international norms on the laws
of war and human rights and draws condemnation from
the international community. Such practices must be
stopped.

07-60503

S/PV.5781

Non-State actors pose additional problems,
because they are difficult to identify and apprehend.
Non-State armed groups pose special challenges for
penalty and law enforcement. In the case of non-State
actors such as terrorist groups, there should be equal
protection for civilians through penalties on individuals
through enforcement of international law, in addition to
the punishment that they receive for their activities as a
group. My delegation condemns civilian casualties
brought about by any terrorist act.
Let me reiterate that the protection of civilians is
a universal and timeless issue. Generation after
generation has envisaged effective measures to protect
civilians from the looming danger of armed conflicts.
Our current discussion is part of that long and
unbroken chain of efforts. Our effort requires
togetherness; no one can claim this issue alone. This is
an issue of humanity that binds us together, but it can
be unravelled by our own narrow political objectives.
We should avoid that trap, as well as the trap of
engaging in a “blame game”. We hope that by bringing
this issue to the attention of the Council today, we will
be able to reinvigorate it and to encourage the quest for
new solutions to address it or to strengthen the existing
mechanism.
The Secretary-General’s report contained an array
of recommendations aimed at furthering our common
efforts that can contribute to the overall efforts of the
United Nations system, international stakeholders and
national Governments to address this pertinent issue.
We believe that while the best protection from armed
conflict is found in its prevention, in the absence of
peace we must remain vigilant as to its impacts on the
civilian population and must do our best to minimize
human suffering and deaths.
Finally, our efforts should be focused on
maintaining the current momentum by strengthening
the United Nations system, working together with
Member States and other stakeholders in a coordinated,
coherent, comprehensive and cooperative manner.
What is required is an approach that includes
development
and
humanitarian
dimensions,
undergirded by political will on the part of States to
ensure that civilians are protected in times of war.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

07-60503

We will now hear a statement by Mr. Angelo
Gnaedinger, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. I give him the floor.
Mr. Gnaedinger (International Committee of the
Red Cross): Let me first thank you, Mr. President, and
the other members of the Security Council for the
opportunity to address the Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. That issue is at the heart of
the mandate and the operational priorities of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
The ICRC would like to congratulate the
Secretary-General on his report (S/2007/643), which
takes an incisive look at the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. He presents a sobering picture,
emphasizing the disparity between our collective
aspiration to protect civilians and the harsh realities.
The ICRC both shares his concerns and concurs with
the priorities that he establishes.
On the basis of what the ICRC observes in the
field, it must be stressed that, right now as we speak,
hundreds of thousands of civilians are being driven
from their homes. Many are killed at random or simply
disappear. Protecting and assisting displaced people
therefore constitutes the major part of ICRC field
operations today, including measures designed to
prevent displacement in the first place.
Despite recent initiatives, both at the operational
level and in the realm of international legal norms, the
world’s response to scourges such as forced
displacement, forced disappearances and sexual
violence remains inadequate. The Secretary-General
rightly points to the collective failure to tackle the
issue of sexual violence, including in cases where rape
is deliberately used as a method of warfare. The plight
of rape victims still stands in stark contrast to the alltoo-frequent impunity for their aggressors.
Likewise, the ICRC joins the Secretary-General
in voicing humanitarian concern over the impact of
cluster munitions. Such weapons have severe
consequences for civilians both during conflict, owing
to the large areas affected by them, and as explosive
remnants of war long after the fighting has ended. The
ICRC calls on States to immediately end the use of
inaccurate and unreliable cluster munitions and to
negotiate a new treaty of international humanitarian
law to prohibit their use.

27

S/PV.5781

Private military and security companies are
increasingly involved in activities that bring them close
to the heart of military operations. We call on
Governments to ensure that such companies operate in
full compliance with international humanitarian law.

people affected by armed conflict. The ICRC’s specific
contribution to protecting civilians is thus
complementary to protection efforts by other actors, in
particular the many measures taken by the United
Nations.

The ICRC would like to stress that today,
international humanitarian law is as relevant as ever in
armed conflicts. The main impediment to protecting
civilians remains the lack of political will to make sure
it is respected by all. Far too often, parties to conflicts
disregard humanitarian law and deliberately target
civilians. We are seeing a dangerous erosion of
distinction and proportionality as the cardinal
principles governing the conduct of hostilities. The
ICRC believes that the fundamental values underlying
these principles are timeless.

In practice, ICRC protection activities are at the
core of a constant dialogue with all parties to conflict.
Every day, hundreds of ICRC staff have contact with
Government representatives, military officers and local
authorities, as well as with leaders of armed groups, in
order to preserve the life, health and dignity of
civilians and detainees. Their protection needs can best
be understood and addressed through direct contact and
presence in the field. Only strict adherence to the
fundamental principles of impartial, independent and
specifically neutral humanitarian action enables the
ICRC to maintain that dialogue and that access.

During the thirtieth International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent, which is to convene
in Geneva next week, the High Contracting Parties to
the Geneva Conventions will be called upon to reaffirm
the relevance and validity of those principles.
Achieving the broadest possible support for and
compliance with the law must be our priority. Article 1
common to the four Geneva Conventions clearly
stipulates that States have an obligation to both respect
and ensure respect for international humanitarian law
in all circumstances. By means of Article 89 of
Protocol I Additional to the Geneva Conventions, the
High Contracting Parties have also committed
themselves “to act jointly or individually, in
cooperation with the United Nations and in conformity
with the United Nations Charter”, in the event of
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
States must employ all appropriate means, including
political, legal, economic and security measures, to
honour this commitment.
Security Council resolutions now indeed tend to
incorporate protection of the civilian population as a
standard aspect of peacekeeping operations. In this
respect, it should be kept in mind that protection of
civilians by United Nations peacekeepers implies a
military and security dimension, which must be clearly
distinguished from protection activities carried out by
humanitarian actors.
For its part, the ICRC has a mandate under
humanitarian law to remind all those using armed
force — be they Governments or non-State actors — of
their obligations under the law and to seek access to

28

The ICRC is committed to being part of the
collective effort to protect civilians caught up in armed
conflict, a cause that unites us all. Our failure to act
would be intolerable.
The President: I give
representative of Switzerland.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the delegation of Indonesia for organizing
today’s open debate. We welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General this morning, an encouraging signal
confirming the Secretariat’s commitment on this
important issue. I congratulate him on his excellent
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2007/643), and thank the Under-Secretary-General
for his briefing.
Switzerland fully endorses the report’s emphasis
of certain challenges, including the denial of access to
civilians and sexual violence. We also welcome the
practical and operational aspect of the report. We will
support operational implementation of initiatives
suggested by the Secretary-General.
The written version of my statement now being
distributed focuses on compliance with international
law, access, the group of experts on protection, sexual
violence and the right to shelter, land and property —
thus referring to the five actions proposed in the report
of the Secretary-General. So as not to take up more
time than we are given, I will limit myself to
discussing three of these points.

07-60503

S/PV.5781

First of all, the erosion in current conflicts of the
principles of distinction and proportionality is
disconcerting, and the indiscriminate attacks against
civilian populations and humanitarian actors in the
performance of their duties are inadmissible. It is the
duty of the Security Council to remind all parties to a
conflict that they are bound at all times to respect
international law, and we call upon the Council to
systematically do everything possible to demand that
the parties to a conflict, as well as peacekeeping forces,
respect international law, in particular international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We feel very
strongly that resolutions establishing peacekeeping
missions, as well as all other types of missions, must
insist on respect for these obligations.
Rigorous efforts to combat impunity for the
perpetrators of violations are also implicit in respect
for international humanitarian law. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) has an important role to play in
cases where national jurisdictions are unable to judge
those who have committed the most serious
international crimes. Once again, we call on all States
that have not yet ratified the ICC Statute to do so as
soon as possible.
My second comment has to do with the
importance of unhindered access by humanitarian
actors to civilian populations in armed conflict. It is
important that the Security Council be fully informed
of cases of obstruction to humanitarian assistance, and
Switzerland supports the Secretary-General’s proposal
in favour of systematic reporting to the Council on
situations where serious access concerns exist.
We call upon the Council to ensure that in its
resolutions, parties to a conflict are required to
guarantee rapid and unhindered access to civilians in
need. The Swiss Government plans to hold a meeting
of experts next spring, focusing on humanitarian access
in conflict situations. We hope in that way to contribute
to the efforts of the international community, and to
propose innovative solutions that are in the interest of
the victims and that respect the law.
Finally, questions relating to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict must be better integrated in
the discussion of mandates of peacekeeping missions,
in efforts at mediation and conflict resolution and in
other United Nations missions. We consider it essential
that the Secretariat and the Council pursue a more
systematic and structured dialogue on the key aspects

07-60503

of the implementation of Security Council resolution
1674 (2006). In this context, the establishment of an
expert-level working group on the protection of
civilians has received my Government’s full attention.
In conclusion, I would like to note that the
protection of civilians in conflict situations also
depends on the capacity of the United Nations to enter
into partnerships with regional organizations. It is with
this in mind that a regional meeting organized by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) with the support of Switzerland and Canada
was convened in Dakar in April 2007. We encourage
OCHA to organize similar meetings to create
awareness of these problems elsewhere in Africa, Asia,
the Middle East and Europe.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): First of all,
Mr. President, allow me to thank you for organizing
this open meeting, and to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2007/643). The report reflects the same
commitment to the issue which the Secretary-General
has already shown through his visits to regions where
some of the worst examples of brutality against
civilians have been witnessed. The report is also to be
commended because it does not avoid a direct
description of the sort of brutality inflicted on
civilians, or of the countries and regions where that is
happening. I would also like to thank Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his briefing.
One of the positive developments in the discourse
concerning security in recent years has been the
refocusing on issues relating to the security of the
individual. The development of the concept of human
security since the early 1990s and the ground-breaking
recognition of the responsibility to protect have given
us conceptual approaches in tune with what the
Secretary-General refers to as the shared fundamental
values that make it imperative to recognize the inherent
dignity and worth of every human being.
That places a heavy burden on the Security
Council in particular in its work to maintain peace and
security. Its work must include not only the prevention
of conflict where at all possible and the resolution of
conflicts that arise. The Council also has a role in
addressing the very serious issues related to the

29

S/PV.5781

millions of civilians caught up in conflicts in which
they are not combatants and over which they have no
control.
The massive displacement of civilians by conflict
not only imposes suffering on millions, it also makes
much more difficult the re-establishment of peace
following the conclusion of a conflict. Of particular
concern at present is the growing number of displaced
persons and refugees from the conflict in Iraq. Iceland
will continue to make its contribution through the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
assist Iraqi refugees in neighbouring countries.
Iceland would like to welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s unambiguous comments earlier this year on
the “atrocious inhumane impact of cluster munitions”.
Iceland will continue its support for the ongoing Oslo
process towards a legally binding instrument of
international law that prohibits the use, development,
stockpiling and transfer of cluster munitions that cause
unacceptable harm to civilians. That process clearly
has added value to the certain conventional weapons
track.
One of the most disturbing chapters in the
Secretary-General’s report concerns sexual violence.
Although not exclusively inflicted on women and girls,
they constitute by far the most vulnerable and
numerous group of victims. As the report states, such
violence, particularly where it is a systematic tool of
war, is a grave war crime. The effect of such violence
is not only that it inflicts tremendous suffering on
individual women and their families but that it also
destroys the fabric of societies and communities,
making recovery and peacebuilding far more difficult
if peace is regained. In that context, we welcome the
adoption by the Third Committee of the draft
resolution on eliminating rape and other forms of
sexual violence in all their manifestations, including in
conflict and related situations.
Rape is not an inevitable consequence of war; it
can be prevented. Effective measures to reduce
impunity are essential to signal to all those envisaging
the use of such methods that the international
community will not tolerate such crimes. The
International Criminal Court and other tribunals
provide the tools for decreasing impunity. As has been
observed by many experts, sexual violence is not only
the product of conflict. Indeed, sexual violence is

30

incipient in all societies. It is therefore the duty of all
States to look to their own legislation as well.
Providing assistance to victims in the form of
medical help, counselling and protection against
further aggression must also be provided. Iceland has
concentrated its efforts in recent years on resettling
women from Colombia at risk of sexual violence.
Iceland is a strong supporter of the United
Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate
Violence against Women and has contributed to it for
years. In 2008 Iceland will double its contribution to
the Fund, thereby confirming our commitment to fight
against violence against women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): Thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this open debate. New
Zealand welcomes the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2007/643), which provides an important assessment
of developments and highlights challenges to the
effective protection of civilians in contemporary
conflict situations.
New Zealand is appalled by the number of
civilians who continue to be the victims and targets in
armed conflicts — from Darfur and Somalia in the
Horn of Africa, to West Africa, Iraq, Afghanistan and
the Middle East. It is a sad reality that the changed
nature of contemporary conflicts has placed the safety
and security of unarmed men, women and children at
even greater risk.
In addition, the number of violent and frequently
fatal attacks deliberately targeting humanitarian
workers, most of them unarmed civilians participating
in or supporting United Nations missions in the field, is
simply intolerable. The safeguarding of humanitarian
personnel remains a key challenge for the United
Nations. Another concern for New Zealand is the rising
number of journalists and media personnel killed or
injured while reporting from areas of conflict.
The recognition in the report of the impact of
armed conflict on older persons and persons with
disabilities is also strongly supported by New Zealand.
New Zealand commends the steps taken so far to
strengthen the normative framework for the protection
of civilians. We welcomed the acceptance by leaders at

07-60503

S/PV.5781

the 2005 World Summit of the international
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, including, potentially, through collective
action under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. We were pleased by the reaffirmation of that
language in resolution 1674 (2006). Looking ahead, we
continue to support further operationalization of the
concept. In that context, we welcome the appointment
by the Secretary-General of a special adviser on the
responsibility to protect within the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities.
We also welcome efforts to provide a more active
role for peacekeepers to protect civilians through the
mandates of Security Council resolutions — for
instance, in resolution 1769 (2007), which established
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur.
Despite some progress, much more needs to be
done on combating impunity. We continue to be
appalled at the high level of impunity that has been
allowed to exist, which sends a message that the
international community is not prepared to take action
even when fundamental human rights are breached.
New Zealand encourages members to provide
their full support to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) by acceding to the Rome Statute. We also call on
all United Nations Member States, especially States
parties to the Rome Statute, to cooperate fully with the
Court. Universality and our full support are crucial if
we are to end impunity for the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes against civilians, such as those carried
out in the Darfur region of the Sudan, where ICC arrest
warrants remain outstanding. We urge the Sudan to
take measures to prevent further violations of human
rights, ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice in
accordance with international law and facilitate
assistance to vulnerable populations.
We recognize that the greatest challenge in
protecting civilians, as identified in the report, is
humanitarian access. Facilitating the passage of
humanitarian relief for civilians is required by
international humanitarian law. The increase in
deliberate attacks on humanitarian workers as part of
efforts to prevent such access is an abomination. For
that reason, New Zealand strongly advocated the
conclusion of an optional protocol to the Convention

07-60503

on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel. We signed the Optional Protocol in
September last year and urge other States to do the
same.
Perpetrators
who
deliberately
prevent
humanitarian access must be held accountable for their
actions. Grave instances of denial of access, such as
intentionally using starvation as a method of warfare,
are war crimes and fall within the jurisdiction of the
ICC. New Zealand strongly supports efforts aimed at
raising awareness around serious access situations. The
proposal for the Emergency Relief Coordinator to bring
serious challenges to the attention of the Security
Council is therefore a welcome initiative.
The use of sexual violence as a method of
warfare is completely abhorrent and cannot be allowed
to continue. Rape and other forms of sexual violence
may be war crimes or crimes against humanity and
within the jurisdiction of the ICC. We note that earlier
this year the ICC Prosecutor launched an investigation
in the Central African Republic in relation to alleged
offences that includes many serious sexual crimes.
New Zealand remains deeply concerned about
acts of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers and other United Nations
personnel. These acts constitute an appalling breach of
trust by those charged with the responsibility of
protecting vulnerable people. New Zealand welcomed
therefore the recent adoption by the General Assembly
of amendments to the model memorandum of
understanding with troop-contributing countries as one
important part of the broader United Nations response
to this issue.
We are strongly supportive of many of the
practical concrete action points recommended in the
report, which we hope will be instrumental in
developing the tools and strategies necessary to help
address the significant challenges that remain. Critical
to the success of these actions will be the ability to
keep these issues at the forefront of this Council’s
work.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

31
