A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/233
1 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 132 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/49/803/Add.1)]
49/233.

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/218 B of 14 September 1993 and its decision
48/472 B of 24 March 1994,
Having considered the reports of and notes by the Secretary-General 1/
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, 2/
Reaffirming Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations in respect
of the role of the General Assembly in the consideration and approval of
budgets of the Organization,
Reaffirming also the requirement of all Member States to fulfil promptly
and in full their obligations as set out in the Charter,
Recognizing the detrimental effect of the withholding of assessed
contributions on the administrative and financial functioning of the United
Nations,
Recognizing also that late payment of assessed contributions adversely
affects the short-term financial situation of the Organization,
Recognizing further the need to improve the management of peace-keeping
operations,

1/
A/48/421 and Add.1, A/48/622, A/48/707, A/48/912, A/48/945 and
Corr.1, A/49/557 and A/49/717 and Corr.1 and 2.
2/

A/49/664 and Add.1.

95-76261
/...

A/RES/49/233
Page 2

Desiring to streamline the administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of peace-keeping operations,
Reiterating the importance of continuous dialogue and transparency
between the Organization and Member States aimed at improving current
administrative and budgetary practices and procedures,
I
Budget cycles
Aware of the substantial workload for the General Assembly, the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Secretariat that
has resulted from the current procedures for reviewing peace-keeping budgets,
1.
Endorses the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, contained in paragraph 30 of its
report, 3/ relating to financial periods for each peace-keeping operation;
2.
Decides, in this regard, that the financial period for each peacekeeping operation shall be from 1 July to 30 June, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit the necessary draft amendments to the Financial Regulations
for approval by the General Assembly at its resumed forty-ninth session;
3.
Decides also that for peace-keeping operations with budgetary
requirements not subject to fluctuation there would be consideration and
approval of a budget once a year;
4.
Decides further that for other peace-keeping operations, budget
estimates would be considered and approved by the General Assembly twice a
year, that is, for the periods from 1 July to 31 December and from 1 January
to 30 June;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to introduce
the procedures described in paragraphs 3 and 4 above as soon as possible and
no later than 1 July 1996;
6.
Urges the Secretary-General to submit, in the context of the
consideration of peace-keeping budget estimates, the related performance
report for each peace-keeping operation for the previous financial period,
together with such supplementary, up-to-date financial performance data for
the current period as are available, and requests him to ensure, to the extent
possible, that reports are based on actual expenditure rather than projected
data;
7.
Decides that the assessments on Member States of appropriations
approved by the General Assembly for peace-keeping operations are subject to
the approval of mandates by the Security Council;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit twice a year to the
General Assembly for information purposes a table summarizing the proposed
budgetary requirements of each peace-keeping operation for the period 1 July
to 30 June, including a breakdown of expenditure by major line item and the
aggregate total resource requirement;

3/

A/49/664.
/...

A/RES/49/233
Page 3

II
Contingent-owned equipment
Recognizing the problems of the current system pertaining to the
determination of the value of contingent-owned equipment and the consequent
delay in reimbursement to States providing troops and equipment,
Reiterating the importance of finding an early and viable solution to
this problem with a view to ensuring the continued participation of Member
States in peace-keeping operations, and welcoming the efforts of the
Secretariat in this regard,
1.
Endorses the observations and recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in paragraphs
104 to 110 of its report 3/ on the procedures relating to the reimbursement
for contingent-owned equipment;
2.
Authorizes the Secretary-General to proceed with the project
outlined in the annex to the present resolution, which is aimed at setting
comprehensive standards for each category of equipment, as well as
establishing rates of reimbursement, on the understanding that Member States,
in particular troop-contributing countries, will be invited by the
Secretary-General to participate in the process, and that proposals for
establishing new rates of reimbursement will be submitted to the General
Assembly for approval;
3.
Invites Member States to contribute voluntarily to participation
in the above-mentioned process, and requests the Secretary-General to make
every effort to meet any expenditure required from within existing budgetary
resources;
III
Death and disability benefits
Taking note of the proposals of the Secretary-General contained in
paragraphs 70 and 71 of his report 4/ on revising the current arrangements for
compensation for death and disability, and the related comments of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 5/
Expressing deep concern at the delay in the settlement of claims in
respect of death and disability,
Noting with concern that the report of the Secretary-General 4/ did not
provide the Advisory Committee with sufficient information to allow it to make
informed recommendations in this respect,
Taking note of the views expressed by Member States,
1.
Decides that underlying any system of compensation for death and
disability should be the need for:
(a)

Equal treatment of Member States;

(b)
Compensation to the beneficiary that is not lower than
reimbursement by the United Nations;

4/

A/48/945 and Corr.1.

5/

A/49/664, paras. 88-90.
/...

A/RES/49/233
Page 4

(c)
possible;
(d)

Simplification of administrative arrangements to the extent
Speedy settlement of claims for death and disability;

2.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit concrete proposals, based
on the principles contained in paragraph 1 above, on possible revisions to the
current compensation arrangements and, in doing so, to include detailed
information on the administrative and financial implications of, inter alia,
the following options:
(a)
Current arrangements with a reasonable minimum level of
compensation payable for death and disability;
(b)
A system of compensation featuring standardized rates of
reimbursement for death and disability;
(c)

A uniform global insurance scheme to cover all troops;

(d)
The proposals submitted by the Secretary-General in paragraph 71
of his report; 4/
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly for its consideration, through the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, the proposals mentioned in paragraph 2
above by 31 May 1995;
IV
Financial authority
Reaffirming the necessity to provide peace-keeping operations with
adequate financial resources, especially in their start-up and expanded
phases, to enable the timely, full and effective implementation of their
mandates in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Mindful that the expenditure incurred for start-up costs or expanded
activities of peace-keeping operations in recent years has, on occasion,
exceeded the current levels of commitment authority granted to the SecretaryGeneral and to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,
1.
Decides that, if a decision of the Security Council relating to
the start-up phase or expansion phase of peace-keeping operations results in
the need for expenditure, the Secretary-General is authorized, with the prior
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and subject to the Financial Regulations of the United Nations and
the provisions in paragraph 2 below, to enter into commitments not to exceed
50 million United States dollars per decision of the Security Council; the
cumulative total of outstanding commitment authority, in respect of the
start-up or expansion phase of peace-keeping operations, not to exceed 150
million dollars at any one time; however, appropriation by the General
Assembly of any outstanding commitments shall automatically restore the
balance of the limit of 150 million dollars to the extent of the amount
appropriated;
2.
Decides also that, if a decision of the Security Council results
in the need for the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the
start-up or expansion phase of peace-keeping operations in an amount exceeding
50 million dollars per decision of the Security Council, or exceeding the
total of the 150 million dollars referred to above, the matter shall be
brought to the General Assembly, as soon as possible, for a decision on
commitment authority and assessment;
/...

A/RES/49/233
Page 5

3.
Decides further that the question of assessment of an appropriate
amount of the costs relating to the start-up and expansion phases of peacekeeping operations shall be considered by the General Assembly at its fiftieth
session in the light of the experience gained from the implementation of the
present resolution;
4.
Resolves that the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee
shall report to the General Assembly on any exercise of the commitment
authority given under the provisions of the present resolution, together with
the circumstances relating thereto, in the context of the next report
submitted to the Assembly on the financing of the relevant peace-keeping
operation;
V
Host country agreements
1.
Takes note of Security Council resolution 868 (1993) of
29 September 1993, and recalls General Assembly resolution 48/42 of 10
December 1993;
2.
Endorses the views of the Secretary-General 6/ and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions 7/ on the necessity of
securing host country agreements prior to mission deployment;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to include in his reports to the
General Assembly on the financing of each peace-keeping operation or mission,
information related to the status of the negotiation of the host country
agreement and its implementation in so far as it relates to the administration
of the peace-keeping operation;
4.
Encourages Member States to meet all their obligations under host
country agreements;
VI
International contractual personnel
Noting with deep concern the issues raised by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions in paragraphs 69 to 71 of its
report, 3/
Noting the information provided by the representatives of the SecretaryGeneral on the use of international contractual personnel,
1.
Endorses the comments of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions contained in paragraph 69 of its report; 3/
2.
Notes that the thorough and independent investigation and
evaluation of the use of international contractual personnel in the United
Nations Protection Force, called for by the Advisory Committee in paragraph 72
of its report, is currently being carried out by the Office of Internal
Oversight Services, and requests that the results of this study be submitted
to the General Assembly in order to enable it to take a decision on this issue
at its resumed forty-ninth session;
3.
Decides that, pending the outcome of the investigation and
evaluation and the decision by the General Assembly referred to in paragraph 2

6/

A/48/945 and Corr.1, paras. 105 and 106.

7/

A/49/664, para. 114.
/...

A/RES/49/233
Page 6

above, the pilot project for the use of international contractual personnel
shall not be extended beyond the United Nations Protection Force;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide it, at its resumed
forty-ninth session, with a report on the steps taken to address the concerns
expressed by the Advisory Committee;
VII
Liquidation
Recalling its resolution 48/240 B of 29 July 1994 on the financing of
the United Nations Operation in Mozambique, and its decision 48/496 of the
same date on the financing of the United Nations peace-keeping operations,
1.
Endorses the proposals of the Secretary-General for the
disposition of assets following liquidation of peace-keeping operations or
other missions, and the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions regarding efforts to be made to obtain
from the relevant Government its agreement to compensate the United Nations
for residual value of any surplus assets installed in the country in
accordance with paragraph 110 (d) of the report of the Secretary-General, 4/
or General Assembly approval for those assets which would be considered as
contributions;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly,
no later than 31 March 1995, on the feasibility of procedures for valuation
and transfer of costs for assets to be redeployed from a peace-keeping
operation during its liquidation phase to other peace-keeping operations or
other United Nations bodies, and for reimbursement to the special account for
the liquidating operation as expeditiously as possible;
VIII
Mission subsistence allowance
1.
Endorses the observations and recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions as contained in paragraphs
80 to 85 of its report 3/ concerning mission subsistence allowance;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to review the entitlements of staff
assigned to field missions, including the purpose of and basis for the
establishment of mission subsistence allowance, and to submit a report thereon
to the General Assembly at its fiftieth session;
IX
Review by the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal
Oversight Services to undertake, without prejudice to its programme of work,
an inspection of the units within the Secretariat responsible for logistical,
operational and administrative arrangements in peace-keeping and other field
operations, with a view to identifying problems and recommending measures to
enhance the efficient utilization of resources, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its resumed forty-ninth session;

/...

A/RES/49/233
Page 7

X
Oversight
Welcoming the initiatives of the Secretary-General to enhance oversight
of peace-keeping operations, as described in his report 4/ submitted in
response to the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, 8/
Having considered the financial report and audited financial statements
for the biennium ended 31 December 1993 and report of the Board of Auditors on
the United Nations peace-keeping operations, 9/
Having also considered the report of the Advisory Committee, 2/ as well
as the introductory statement of its Chairman, 10/
1.
Endorses the proposal that some peace-keeping operations may
require a resident audit function, encourages the Secretary-General to include
in future peace-keeping budget submissions for such peace-keeping operations
proposals for resident auditor posts, with full justification, as necessary,
and requests him to take appropriate measures to ensure functional
independence of the auditors in the conduct of their duties in accordance with
paragraph 56 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions; 3/
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to examine alternative methods for
enhancing the audit functions in those peace-keeping operations which will not
have resident auditors, and their relative costs, and to make proposals to the
General Assembly for its consideration no later than at its fiftieth session;
3.
Endorses the comments and recommendations of the Advisory
Committee with respect to the concepts of a roving finance officer and a
management review officer, and requests the Secretary-General to clarify
further those concepts, as well as the accountability of programme managers,
in a report to be submitted to the General Assembly no later than at its
fiftieth session;
XI
Peace-keeping Reserve Fund
Having considered the proposals of the Secretary-General contained in
paragraphs 37 to 41 of his report 4/ and of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in paragraphs 15 to 19 of its
report, 3/
1.
Decides to maintain the Peace-keeping Reserve Fund at its present
level at the present stage;
2.
Recalls its resolution 47/217 of 23 December 1992, and decides to
limit the utilization of the Peace-keeping Reserve Fund to the start-up phase
of new peace-keeping operations, to the expansion of existing ones or to
unforeseen and extraordinary expenditures related to peace-keeping;

8/

A/47/990.

9/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 5 and corrigendum (A/49/5), vol. II and Corr.1.
10/

See A/C.5/49/SR.25.
/...

A/RES/49/233
Page 8

3.
Strongly urges all Member States to make every possible effort to
ensure full and timely payment of their assessed contributions for
peace-keeping operations, so as to improve the cash-flow situation by enabling
replenishment of the relevant reserves;
XII
Rotation of troops
1.
Underlines that responsibility for the duration of tours of duty
of contingents assigned to peace-keeping operations is an operational matter
that lies primarily with troop-contributing Governments;
2.
Takes note of the observations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions in paragraph 77 of its report 3/
regarding the advisability of extending the duration of duty and the timing of
rotation of military personnel serving in peace-keeping operations, and the
views expressed by Member States;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General, given the operational implications
of the question of the tours of duty of contingents, to submit the report
referred to in paragraph 77 of the report of the Advisory Committee to the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations;
XIII
Standardization of the budget process and format
1.
Endorses the observations made by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions in paragraphs 41 to 47 of its
report; 3/
2.
Endorses also the proposals of the Secretary-General on the
improvements to the budget format, as summarized in paragraph 41 of the report
of the Advisory Committee, and calls upon the Secretary-General to prepare all
future peace-keeping budgets accordingly;
3.
Welcomes the development of the Standard Cost Manual, to be made
available to Member States before 1 May 1995, and the modifications proposed
by the Secretary-General, including standardized costing, ratios and variance
analysis;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide it with a mock-up budget
for a single peace-keeping operation, based on the above-mentioned Standard
Cost Manual, for its consideration, taking into account the comments of the
Advisory Committee and the views expressed by Member States;
5.
Requests the Advisory Committee to review the proposed Standard
Cost Manual and the mock-up budget by 31 August 1995, with a view to
submitting its views on them to the General Assembly at its fiftieth session;
XIV
Start-up kits
Welcoming with appreciation the establishment at Brindisi, Italy, of the
first permanent United Nations logistics base to support peace-keeping
operations, the premises of which have been put at the disposal of the
Organization at no cost,
Endorses the request of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions for a detailed report, including further information
regarding the financial and personnel arrangements, cost parameters,
/...

A/RES/49/233
Page 9

legislative justification, issues of ownership and inventory control of
stocked equipment, accounting procedures and alternatives for mission start-up
kits, as well as the use of the Brindisi logistics base for storage and
maintenance, to be submitted to the General Assembly before the end of its
forty-ninth session.
95th plenary meeting
23 December 1994

ANNEX
Project plan and time-line for reform of methodology
and procedures for determining reimbursements to
troop-contributing countries for contingent-owned equipment
Standardization project plan
In order to simplify the process of reimbursement for contingent-owned
equipment, and thereby reduce the lead-time associated with the payment of
claims, the following project intends to standardize the equipment for which
reimbursement will be authorized and to identify appropriate rates of
reimbursement for such equipment. This effort will be undertaken in five
phases:
(a)
Phase I (1 January-14 March 1995). The Secretariat will prepare
draft guidelines on the types of items to be included as standards for
contingent-owned equipment, such as systems (aircraft, vehicles, etc.); major
repairable equipment (generators, communications equipment, etc.); and other
equipment and consumables (tentage, mess gear, paper, etc.) for which
reimbursement shall be authorized when deployed in connection with a battalion
of troops or specialized companies such as medical, signals, aviation support,
logistics, communications, etc. Pursuant to the guidelines provided, Member
States will provide comments and recommendations which will be consolidated
and presented to the phase II working group. Member States will be asked to
provide their comments and recommendations and notify the United Nations of
their intent to participate in the phase II working group no later than
10 February 1995;
(b)
Phase II (15 March-14 May 1995). A review of the comments and
recommendations of Member States will be conducted by the Secretariat in order
to provide a consolidated working paper to the representatives of Member
States participating in the phase II working group. Consultations with and
among representatives of Member States will form the basis for the development
of a single comprehensive document identifying those standard requirements for
which reimbursement will be authorized;
(c)
Phase III (17 May-15 June 1995). A fixed scale will be developed
identifying annual reimbursement rates for each of the systems (with
appropriate adjustment factors being applied according to the source of
maintenance support provided, for example, a wet lease/dry lease concept),
authorized as a result of the phase II working group consolidation by selected
financial analysts of participating Member States. This phase will also result
in the development of a single flat rate of reimbursement for all other
equipment and consumables;
(d)
Phase IV. This phase will involve implementation, at Headquarters
and in field missions, of this revised reimbursement procedure, including
specifically the distribution of a note verbale by 15 July 1995 initiating
revised reimbursement procedures for contingent-owned equipment,
implementation of revised budgeting practices incorporating new reimbursement
/...

A/RES/49/233
Page 10

rates for contingent-owned equipment in budgets prepared after 1 August 1995
and development of automated systems to process claims for reimbursement;
(e)
Phase V. This phase will involve a periodic review and update of
the phase II and phase III standards to be completed on a triennial basis,
with the first review scheduled for March 1998.
