S/2004/989

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 December 2004
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit a letter dated 21 December 2004 from the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the report on the
activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group for the period 2003-2004 (see annex).

04-65980 (E) 231204

*0465980*

S/2004/989

Annex
Letter dated 21 December 2004 from the Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa to
the President of the Security Council
On behalf of the Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, I have the honour to submit herewith the report
on the activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group for the period 2003-2004 under the
Chairmanship of Angola (see appendix). I will fully appreciate it if the report could
be circulated as a document of the Council.
(Signed) Ismael A. Gaspar Martins
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa

2

S/2004/989

Appendix
Report on the activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa for the period 2003-2004
Introduction
Security Council members will recall that the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa issued a detailed interim report
(S/2003/1118) on its activities in 2003. Some aspects of that report are also referred
to in the present one, taking into account their linkages and the continuity in the
implementation of the mandate of the Ad Hoc Working Group.
Security Council members will also recall that the Ad Hoc Working Group,
established pursuant to the recommendations of the public meeting on the situation
in Africa held in New York on 31 January 2003, has the following mandate,
according to document S/2002/207:
(a) To monitor the implementation of recommendations contained in
document S/PRST/2002/2 and previous presidential statements and resolutions
regarding conflict prevention and resolution in Africa;
(b) To propose recommendations on the enhancement of cooperation
between the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council as well as with
other United Nations agencies dealing with conflicts;
(c) To examine, in particular, regional and cross-conflict issues that affect
the Security Council’s work on African conflict prevention and resolution;
(d) To propose recommendations to the Security Council to enhance
cooperation in conflict prevention and resolution between the United Nations and
the African Union and subregional organizations.
The agenda proposed by the Chairmanship of Angola for the period under
review was based on the recommendations of the above-mentioned Security Council
public meeting on the situation in Africa; on the proposals made during the
Presidency of Mauritius of the Ad Hoc Working Group to ensure continuity; and on
new items included in the Chronogram of Action for 2003-2004.
In this connection, the Ad Hoc Working Group undertook or was involved in
the actions described below.

Conflict prevention and resolution
International Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in
the Great Lakes Region: the Conference aimed at mobilizing the international
community for assistance to the process of the Conference; other States Members of
the United Nations were invited to participate. The holding of the first Summit of
the Conference on 19 and 20 November 2004 in Dar es Salaam (United Republic of
Tanzania) was an important development in this process.
Democratic Republic of the Congo: the Ad Hoc Working Group focused on
enhancing the role of the United Nations and encouraged the parties to comply with
their commitments. The enhanced role of the United Nations Organization Mission

3

S/2004/989

in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was a positive development and responded
to concerns raised by the members of the Ad Hoc Working Group during the
meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo held on 16 April 2003.
On 30 May 2003, at the wrap-up session of the Presidency of Pakistan of the
Security Council on conflicts in Africa, Council missions and United Nations
mechanisms to promote peace, the Chairman, speaking on behalf of the Ad Hoc
Working Group, stated that the ad hoc working groups, if properly used, could be
important tools in promoting peace and addressing the crises that afflict the African
continent and called for better coordination among those ad hoc working groups.
The Ad Hoc Working Group developed a partnership with the International
Peace Academy and a joint meeting was held on 7 June 2004 including
presentations on various issues made by distinguished personalities from academic
institutions in the United States of America.
One panel considered the following theme: “Constraints, challenges and
opportunities: resolving conflicts in the twenty-first century”. Presentations were
made on Somalia, on the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and on the Security Council and
conflict prevention in Africa.
Another panel considered regional and international norms on unconstitutional
regime changes. Presentations were made on the role and capabilities of the African
Union, constitutional disorders in Africa and lessons from lusophone Africa,
particularly Guinea-Bissau.
Participants held a useful exchange of views on those themes, covering most
of the items in the Ad Hoc Working Group’s agenda for 2004. This has constituted a
new experience in respect of the future work of the Ad Hoc Working Group. The
participation of academicians from different universities and the expression of
different opinions constituted an enriching factor.

Security Council missions to Africa
On the basis of its informal discussions and interaction with other relevant
players, the Ad Hoc Working Group contributed inputs to the Security Council
missions to Africa. The Ad Hoc Working Group held meetings prior to the missions
of the Council to Central and West Africa in 2003 and 2004. Those meetings offered
a good opportunity for an exchange of views between Council members, the
representatives of the countries visited by the missions and other interested States
Members of the United Nations.

Cooperation between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council
The Ad Hoc Working Group enhanced its working relationship with the
Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Groups on Guinea-Bissau and
Burundi, both chaired by South Africa, and with the Group of Friends of GuineaBissau, chaired by the Gambia. In the meetings held, the need for the return to
constitutional normalcy in Guinea-Bissau was stressed, and the international

4

S/2004/989

community was called upon to take steps to help the country find a lasting solution
to its multifaceted problems through a comprehensive approach.
With regard to Burundi, at a meeting held on 15 March 2004, the Economic
and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Burundi made concrete
recommendations on ways in which the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council should work together comprehensively to assist in peace,
reconciliation, recovery and rehabilitation of that country.
The extension to other post-conflict situations of cooperation between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council, developed by the two
bodies in the case of Guinea-Bissau and Burundi, constitutes one of the chief
recommendations of the Ad Hoc Working Group.
The Chairman of the Group, or his representatives, participated in meetings
and videoconferences organized by the above-mentioned Economic and Social
Council Ad Hoc Advisory Groups.
The Ad Hoc Working Group encourages the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council to develop similar experiences for other post-conflict
situations.

African Union and other relevant bodies
Representatives of the African Union Chairmanship and of the Permanent
Observer Mission of the African Union in New York have been closely associated
with the meetings of the Ad Hoc Working Group, within the framework of its
mandate aimed at enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union.
The adoption by the Security Council of a presidential statement in its special
meeting in Nairobi (Kenya) on the institutional cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations (S/PRST/2004/44), and the cooperation between the
two bodies in the cases of the Sudanese region of Darfur and Burundi, are tangible
results of this increased relationship.
The Ad Hoc Working Group is thus well placed to play an incremental role in
developing further the cooperation between the newly created Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and the United Nations Security Council.
The Office of the Special Adviser on Africa has been associated to the
meetings of the Ad Hoc Working Group, taking into account its role in the
promotion of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development.

Observations
Members of the Security Council will recall that the creation of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa was proposed on
the initiative of Mauritius following the public meeting of the Council on the
situation in Africa held in New York on 29 January 2002.

5

S/2004/989

Following its three-year existence, it is time to reflect on how the Ad Hoc
Working Group can fully implement its mandate in order to play its role more
effectively within the Security Council framework.
Regarding conflict prevention and resolution, the Ad Hoc Working Group has
carried out actions aimed at examining regional and cross-conflict issues that affect
the Security Council’s work.
In order to diversify the viewpoints on issues examined by the Ad Hoc
Working Group, the Ad Hoc Working Group has taken advantage of its informal
character by involving non-Security Council members and by developing
partnerships with other institutions, such as the International Peace Academy.
In the paper on conflict recovery in Africa, the World Bank stated that, by
their very nature, African conflicts have become a development issue and, in this
connection, the Ad Hoc Working Group will continue working on strengthening its
relationship with the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Groups on
countries emerging from conflict.
In its presidential statement of 19 November 2004 (S/PRST/2004/44) on the
institutional relationship with the African Union, adopted in Nairobi, the Security
Council invited the Secretary-General to explore, in close cooperation with the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, new means of cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, specially taking into consideration the
expanded mandate and the new Organs of the African Union, and bearing in mind
that conflict prevention, management and resolution in Africa must entail
complementary efforts by the Africans and the international partners.
Finally, the Security Council may wish to consider including in its agenda
some important pending issues such as disarmament, demobilization, resettlement
and reintegration in the context of peacebuilding, and the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union and the peace and security mechanisms
established by some African subregional organizations, in order to develop
integrated approaches to conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The Ad Hoc Working Group could consider holding a meeting on goodneighbourly relations in Africa, stressing their importance for the prevention and
resolution of conflicts.
New York, 21 December 2004

6
