S/PV.8647

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8647th meeting

Friday, 25 October 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Moriko
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Michon
Mrs. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Repkin
Mr. Allen
Mr. Barkin

Agenda
The situation in Somalia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-33577 (E)
*1933577*

S/PV.8647

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing by
Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Permanent
Representative of Belgium, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution
751 (1992) concerning Somalia.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Pecsteen
de Buytswerve.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (spoke in French):
In accordance with paragraph 11 (g) of resolution 1844
(2008), I have the honour to brief the Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia,
covering the period from 27 June to 25 October.
During the reporting period, the Committee
convened two consultations. On 3 October, pursuant to
paragraph 49 of resolution 2444 (2018), the Committee
heard a briefing by the Deputy Director of the
Operations and Advocacy Division of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the fourteenth
report of the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator concerning
the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Somalia and
any impediments thereto. That report was transmitted
to the Security Council on 7 October (see S/2019/799).
In her briefing, the Deputy Director concluded that
although Somalia was on the right track — with major
achievements on the political, economic, humanitarian
and security fronts — the country remained vulnerable
to another climate shock or escalation of conflict.
Moreover, the delivery of humanitarian assistance
continued to be compromised as a result of inconsistent
funding. In that context, she emphasized that it was
essential that humanitarian assistance be exempted from
asset freezing measures, as provided for in paragraph 48
of resolution 2444 (2018). Humanitarian organizations
had collectively and individually strengthened their
systems to identify and detect the risks of aid diversion,
evaluate the capacity of implementation partners and
assess relevant programmes through enhanced auditing
2/6

25/10/2019

and reporting. The Deputy Director also called on
the humanitarian sector to supplement the sustained
provision of emergency assistance with longerterm solutions.
On 15 October, the Committee heard a briefing
by the Panel of Experts on Somalia on its final report,
submitted pursuant to paragraph 54 of resolution 2444
(2018). I will not detail the contents of the report here, as
it is anticipated that it will be submitted to the Council
in the coming days. In his remarks, the Coordinator of
the Panel of Experts noted that Al-Shabaab remained
a threat to Somalia and the region and that it had
been confirmed that Al-Shabaab had been producing
home-made explosives and had further expanded
its revenue stream by levying a tax on virtually all
trade in the south of the country. The group was once
again responsible for the highest number of attacks
against civilians, in violation of humanitarian law. The
Coordinator of the Panel also noted that the current
impasse between the Federal Government of Somalia
and federal member states had had implications for
peace and security in Somalia. Acknowledging the
significant progress made by the Federal Government in
the area of public
​​
finance management, the Coordinator
of the Panel nevertheless referred to the work that
remained to be done in that area.
With regard to the arms embargo, the Coordinator
of the Panel believed that that measure had largely
prevented heavier weapons from reaching Somalia
and ultimately falling into the hands of Al-Shabaab
and other armed actors. In recognizing that the current
political and security contexts had changed since the
embargo was first imposed in 1992, the Coordinator
stated that it was clear to the Panel that the embargo
should be streamlined, simplified and updated in
order to reflect the current realities of counterinsurgency in Somalia. That included strengthening
the monitoring of certain chemical components and
precursors, including commercial explosives, which
might be used by Al-Shabaab for the construction of
improvised explosive devices. With regard to the ban
on importing and exporting charcoal, the Coordinator
of the Panel stated that it was no longer clear whether
Al-Shabaab was deriving significant revenue from
that trade and recommended to conduct a review of
the ban, taking into account all implications for longterm peace and stability in Somalia, which will be vital
to achieving the effective implementation of relevant
Council resolutions.
19-33577

25/10/2019

The situation in Somalia

The Coordinator of the Panel concluded his
remarks by commenting on the Committee’s sanctions
list, which has been dormant for several years. He
urged Member States to use targeted sanctions to
discourage destructive behaviour in Somalia, including
that of arms dealers, charcoal traffickers, financiers of
terrorism, violators of international humanitarian law
and political spoilers.
Committee members had a fruitful exchange of
views with the Panel of Experts. They expressed their
gratitude and support for the work carried out by the
Panel in difficult circumstances and expressed the
hope that the Federal Government of Somalia would
participate constructively in that work. Of the 15
recommendations contained in the Panel’s final report,
only one is addressed to the Committee. On Friday
18 October, the Committee unanimously agreed on
the action to be undertaken in response to the Panel’s
recommendation. The Committee is in the process of
following up on that decision.
On 15 October, the Committee heard a briefing by
the Head of the Global Maritime Crime Programme
on the international community’s efforts to disrupt
the charcoal trade to and from Somalia, and on the
complex environment allowing terrorist groups and
transnational criminal organizations to exploit porous
borders in order to finance their operations. I would like
to highlight two important points from that briefing.
First, while the production of wood charcoal is
funding Al-Shabaab, it is not a significant source of
funding. Secondly, investigations into the charcoal
trade reveal close links between Al-Shabaab and
transnational organized criminal organizations, whose
criminal activities including trafficking of persons,
drugs and their chemical precursors, weapons, sugar,
tobacco and materials used to make bombs.
I will conclude by summarizing some figures
on exceptions to the arms embargo for the current
reporting period, as well as other work carried out by
the Committee.
The Committee received five pre-delivery
notifications, pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution
2142 (2014) and paragraph 14 of resolution 2444
(2018), submitted by supplier Member States, and one
additional notification, pursuant to paragraphs 14 and
22 of resolution 2444 (2018), submitted by the Federal
Government of Somalia. The Committee also received
two post-delivery confirmations from the Federal

S/PV. 8647

Government of Somalia, pursuant to paragraphs 14
and 22 of resolution 2444 (2018). The Committee
further received nine pre-delivery notifications,
pursuant to sub-item (g) of paragraph 10 of resolution
2111 (2013). In addition, the Committee received one
notification from a supplier State, pursuant to sub-item
(a) of paragraph 11 of resolution 2111 (2013) and did
not object to it. It is currently considering another such
notification. Finally, the Committee also received two
requests for clarification, one from a United Nations
entity and the other from a Member State, on the scope
and implementation of the arms embargo.
The President: I thank Ambassador Pecsteen de
Buytswerve for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the
Ambassador of Belgium for his briefing. Let me take
this opportunity today to make three points, first,
on the central role the sanctions regime plays in
maintaining peace and security in the region; secondly,
our expectations of the upcoming mandate renewal; and
finally, the importance of the Government of Somalia
engaging with the Panel of Experts.
We all have shared interests in working towards
the overall goal of transition to Somali-led security.
The Council has been unified in its support. The arms
embargo, charcoal ban and targeted sanctions were
put in place to support Somalia’s efforts, not to hinder
them. The now partial arms embargo is designed not
only to allow partners to support Somalia in its security
sector reform, as the United Kingdom is doing, but also
to prevent Al-Shabaab and other armed groups from
getting hold of those weapons.
The work that the Panel of Experts, the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia and Member States have done to
disrupt the charcoal trade — which was undertaken,
of course, at Somalia’s request — has resulted in a
reduction of charcoal exports. The Panel, through its
work, has uncovered more evidence and information
about Al-Shabaab’s use of chemical precursors. Those
chemicals can be used to make homemade improvised
explosive devices, which have been used to kill innocent
people. The sanctions regime is there to enhance
Somali security.

19-335773/6

S/PV.8647

The situation in Somalia

Turning to the mandate renewal and the future of
the sanctions regime, we believe that our collective aim
is to reach a stage where the arms embargo is no longer
needed, and the United Kingdom is, at the moment,
providing substantial bilateral support to the Somali
Government. Our support is focused on building
the capacity of Somali security forces, including on
weapons management. I know that other partners are
doing the same.
However, we still believe, at the moment, that the
partial arms embargo is essential to limiting weapons
and other materials from falling into the wrong hands.
We intend to present a draft resolution that makes
the sanctions regime more effective, sets out the key
requirements in one place and strengthens measures
against Al-Shabaab, which remains a serious concern in
Somalia and a growing threat to the region. As always,
we are willing and want to work with our Somali
partners to chart a path towards progress. Let me thank
the Chair for his work over the past year and the Panel
of Experts for their vital role in monitoring the regime.
It is unacceptable and regrettable that Somalia has
not cooperated fully with the Panel for the majority of
its mandate, which, let us remember, was established
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Committee, and its Chair in particular, have
continued to engage with Somalia to find a solution.
I believe that the Committee and the Council are open
to progress and to finding a way forward and through
this problem, but in order to do so we need Somalia to
engage with us.
Let me conclude by saying again that we depend
on the vital work of the Panel of Experts, as we do for
many issues before the Council. Its work is to support
peace and security in Somalia. Our efforts to support
Somali-led security will be effective only if we all
work together.
Mrs. Heusgen (Germany): I thank the Belgian
Ambassador for his briefing as Chair of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia.
I can only echo and underline what the
representative of the United Kingdom has just said.
Germany continues to fully support the Panel of Experts
and its work. We also strongly urge the Government of
Somalia to cooperate with the Panel of Experts. The
instrument of sanctions against Al-Shabaab is used
to support the Somali Government. If such sanctions
4/6

25/10/2019

are to succeed, the Government’s cooperation with
the Panel is important and should be in the interest
of the Government. Germany welcomes and supports
the intention of the Panel of Experts to review the
charcoal ban in 2020, as mentioned, but we believe
that the environmental impacts of the charcoal trade,
notably the effects of deforestation and worsening
roads, should be reflected in this review, as they have
had a devastating impact on the population and the
development of the country.
Mr. Barkin (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve for his briefing
today. His work as Chair of the of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia continues to contribute not only to
the work of the Council, but also to the international
efforts to advance peace and stability within Somalia
and in the region.
Despite positive developments, the Federal
Government of Somalia continues to face significant
challenges on its path towards building a safe, stable and
prosperous country. Somalia’s ongoing humanitarian
crisis remains particularly concerning. An estimated
1.7 million people in Somalia face life-threatening food
insecurity, and at least 4.2 million people require urgent
humanitarian assistance. The seemingly endless cycle
of attacks against civilians, including those cited in the
latest report of the Panel of Experts (S/2018/1002) and
echoed in numerous prior reports from United Nations
experts, must cease in order for Somalia to prosper.
I note that Al-Shabaab was once again responsible
for the highest number of attacks against civilians.
We are committed to the Somalia sanctions regime,
and to using this regime to disrupt Al-Shabaab and
its ability to conduct attacks against forces from
Somalia, the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the United States. As
part of that effort, we look forward to cooperating
closely with the Federal Government of Somalia and
the international community to disrupt and ultimately
eliminate the sources of financing for Al-Shabaab
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams (ISIS) in
Somalia. Al-Shabaab continues to expand its revenue
base through extensive informal taxation, and ISIS
increasingly uses Somalia as the financial conduit to
its regional affiliates. We look to partners to strengthen
information-sharing on those threats both with the
Federal Government of Somalia and multilaterally.
19-33577

25/10/2019

The situation in Somalia

As we work to counter terrorism in Somalia, the
United States continues to build the capacity of the
security forces of the Federal Government of Somalia to
secure and properly manage their conventional-weapon
stockpiles to prevent pilferage and unauthorized
transfers. International partners can help by coordinating
closely on their respective security assistance efforts
with the Somali Government. AMISOM and the
Somali Government should continue working towards
a conditions-based transfer of security responsibilities.
Finally, and in complete agreement with my
colleagues from Germany and Great Britain with
respect to the Federal Government of Somalia’s
non-cooperation with the Panel of Experts, we continue
to encourage Somali officials to engage with the Panel
and work to address the challenges — as highlighted
by the Panel — that impede Somalia’s progress towards
security and stability.
The ongoing refusal of the Federal Government of
Somalia to engage with the Panel of Experts and support
its work is troubling. The Panel serves as the eyes and
ears on the ground in Somalia and the region for the
sanctions committee, and ultimately for the Council.
We will not ignore or enable the ongoing efforts of the
Federal Government of Somalia to stymie the work of
the Panel of Experts. We look forward to engaging the
Council, the sanctions committee, the Panel of Experts
and our Somali partners to further the objectives of
peace and stability in Somalia and the region, and
ultimately to ensure a better future for all Somalis.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Ambassador of Belgium for his briefing and reiterate
France’s full support for the realization of his mission.
I will focus on three points.
The first concerns the arms embargo, which, as our
United Kingdom colleague mentioned earlier, is vital.
It directly impairs the ability of terrorist groups, in
particular Al-Shabaab, to acquire weapons and therefore
cannot be considered an impediment to combating
terrorism. It also plays a useful role in preventing
trafficking in arms and ammunition, especially from
Yemen. Finally, above all, it provides support for the
Somali authorities in reforming the security sector
and improving their capacities to manage weapons
and ammunition. We have noted progress, but we also
see that difficulties persist with regard to documented
cases of weapons diverted from the Somali armed

S/PV. 8647

forces to be found in the black market or in the hands of
members of Al-Shabaab.
My second point is that we must step up the fight
against the financing of Al-Shabaab. In that context,
we note that no illegal Somali charcoal exports have
been reported since the summer of 2018, which is good
news and demonstrates that the work done by the Panel
of Experts, together with certain Gulf countries, has
been successful. We must, however, remain vigilant to
ensure that such traffic does not resume.
We know that Somali charcoal is not Al-Shabaab’s
only source of funding. The terrorist group also
generates very significant amounts of revenue from
trafficking in arms, sugar and tobacco and new forms
of taxation, including on imports arriving at the port of
Mogadishu. It is therefore absolutely necessary that the
Somali authorities, with the support of the international
community and the Security Council, intensify their
vigilance and actions to combat the financing of
Al-Shabaab. We also hope that the Panel of Experts,
which enjoys particular expertise in this area, will be
able to support the efforts of the Somali authorities in
combating the financing of Al-Shabaab.
My last point concerns the cooperation of the
Somali federal authorities with the Panel of Experts. I
will be very clear on this point. For almost 10 months
the Security Council has been calling on the Somali
authorities to cooperate fully with the Panel, which
is mandated by the Council. The chairmanship of the
751 Committee has spared no effort to find a solution.
Nevertheless, the Somali authorities have continued to
refuse to cooperate with the Panel of Experts, which
constitutes a direct challenge to the authority of
the Council.
In that regard, we find it unacceptable that
the Security Council should receive by letter new
injunctions from the Somali Federal authorities, setting
new conditions for cooperation with the current and
future Panels of Experts. Without a change in attitude
on the part of the Somali authorities, we might have to
reconsider our position with regard to the considerable
support that the international community has been
providing for the security of Somalia for years. France
therefore unequivocally calls on the Somali authorities
to cooperate with the new Panel of Experts as soon as
its members are appointed, including by allowing it to
visit the country.

19-335775/6

S/PV.8647

The situation in Somalia

Lastly, I recall that we continue to believe that
Eritrea must commit to working in good faith with
Djibouti to resolve the border dispute between the two
countries and the issue of Djibouti prisoners of war. The
Council must continue to follow those two unresolved
issues, for which concrete and rapid progress would
make it possible to strengthen the peace process in
the region.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we thank the Permanent representative of
Belgium in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Sanctions Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia, for his detailed briefing on the
Committee’s activities and the relevant information on
its most salient work covering the period from June to
October. We reiterate our support for the efforts made
by the Chair of the Committee in effectively discharging
his responsibilities. As Chair of the Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
we greatly appreciate his commitment to working in
an open, transparent and objective manner with all
members of the Committee, in line with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
As we heard from the Permanent Representative
of Belgium, the Committee pursuant to resolution 751
(1992) has a critical and vital role to play in establishing
security and stability in Somalia, particularly in

6/6

25/10/2019

the context of implementing the sanctions regime,
insofar as this is an effective way to help the Federal
Government of Somalia prevent weapons falling into
the hands of Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups, as
well as to dry up sources of financing to those terrorist
groups by imposing the embargo on Somali charcoal.
We commend the progress made by the Federal
Government of Somalia in the management of its
weapons and ammunition. We also commend the tangible
improvement in the notification system following
the partial lifting of the arms embargo imposed on
Somalia. Furthermore, we welcome the outcome of the
second Somalia Partnership Forum, held in Mogadishu
earlier this month. The Forum has important positive
implications for structuring the budget of the Federal
Government and national development plans, as well
as for supporting the transition plan for transferring
security responsibilities in the country from the forces
of the African Union Mission in Somalia to the Somali
security forces.
In conclusion, we hope to effectively participate in
the negotiations pertaining to the renewal of the Panel
of Experts’ mandate in November. We hope to realize
our shared vision to support the Somali people so that
they can build an inclusive Federal State that safeguards
human rights and the basic freedoms of all its citizens.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

19-33577
