S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6034th meeting
Tuesday, 9 December 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jurica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Croatia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Payot
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Li Kexin
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Deruffe
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Riccardo
Mr. Gouider
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Rogachev
Mr. Malgas
Mr. Harvey
Ms. Willson
Mrs. Nguyen Thanh Ha

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Letter dated 26 November 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Croatia
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2008/738)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-63845 (E)

*0863845*

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Malaysia, the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I also wish to remind all
speakers, as was indicated by my President at this
morning’s session, to limit their statements to no more
than five minutes in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the
text in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Japan.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): The recent terrorist attacks
in Mumbai served as a poignant reminder for all of us
of the serious threat that terrorism continues to pose
seven years after the tragic events of September 2001.
Following the terrorist attacks in Mumbai, Japanese
Prime Minister Aso conveyed to Prime Minister Singh
of India Japan’s willingness to cooperate with India
and to assist in the investigation. Having just witnessed
that despicable crime, we consider it very timely to
have an open debate in the Security Council on the
topic of “Threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts”. We would therefore like to
express our sincere appreciation for the valuable
initiative taken by President Mesić in convening this
meeting.
Japan fully agrees with the idea emphasized in
the concept paper prepared by Croatia that it would be
meaningful for the international community to reaffirm

2

its solidarity against terrorism at this juncture. We also
endorse the paper’s recommendation strongly
advocating for a multidimensional and comprehensive
approach to countering terrorism.
I hardly need to reiterate the importance of the
role of the Council. In particular, three of the Council’s
subsidiary committees continue to play a crucial role.
Member States have primary responsibility for the
implementation of relevant resolutions. The Council
and its subsidiary bodies must do their best to facilitate
the efforts made by the Member States.
This year, as Chair of the Group of Eight (G-8),
Japan has been striving to strengthen cooperation
between the Counter-Terrorism Action Group
established by the G-8 and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate here at Headquarters.
It is our hope that this cooperation will contribute to
enhanced cooperation between the Council and
Member States, especially in the area of counterterrorism assistance.
Seven years after the 11 September attacks,
Afghanistan and its surrounding areas remain the most
critical region in our fight against terrorism. In this
regard, in addition to various measures taken on the
ground, we believe that full recognition should be
given to the importance of the related maritime
operations. Japan has been contributing to the counterterrorism operations in the Indian Ocean since 2001
and we are determined to continue this effort.
Japan also believes that regional cooperation has
a crucial role in our counter-terrorism efforts. To
advance such cooperation, Japan has been participating
actively in various regional initiatives and working
closely with regional partners, particularly in Southeast Asia. To cite one example, we have been
cooperating with countries that are preparing for their
accession to relevant international conventions. In
2003, we began to organize seminars, mainly for Asian
experts, on the promotion of accession to international
counter-terrorism conventions and protocols.
Counter-terrorism measures must not be confined
to traditional measures related to law enforcement;
non-traditional areas identified in the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy must also be
adequately addressed. In particular, efforts to reduce
poverty and measures in the area of education must be
further strengthened in order to address conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism.

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

Japan continues to believe that the United
Nations must play an integral role in the fight against
terrorism. The United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy provides a valuable basis for our
unified efforts in that context, and the unanimous
adoption of General Assembly resolution 62/272,
which reaffirmed the Strategy and called for its
implementation, was very welcome. Through this open
debate, the Council should renew its commitment to
addressing the serious threat to international peace and
security posed by terrorism. Japan takes this
opportunity to reaffirm its willingness to contribute to
the Council’s efforts in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): On behalf of the
Government and the people of Liechtenstein, I would like
to express our solidarity with and sincere condolences to
all those victimized by the recent terrorist attacks in India.
We unequivocally condemn such heinous acts of
terrorism — irrespective of their motivation and wherever
and by whomever committed — and reiterate our full
commitment to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism.
We are grateful for the concept paper
(S/2008/738) submitted by the President for today’s
debate, and our statement will be focused on a few
specific points.
We strongly agree with the notion reflected in the
paper that the use of armed force cannot be the only
answer to the scourge of terrorism and that terms such
as “war on terrorism” have brought about more
problems than solutions, in particular with respect to
the uniform application of international humanitarian
law.
We believe that today’s debate provides us with a
good opportunity to promote international solidarity in
countering terrorism on the basis of a comprehensive
approach, as reflected in the United Nations Global
Counter-terrorism Strategy of September 2006. Merely
reaffirming those commitments, however, will not by
itself improve our response to terrorism. During the seven
years following the attacks of 11 September 2001, the
United Nations has massively scaled up its global
counter-terrorism toolbox, and Member States as well as
international and regional organizations have taken
numerous steps to that effect; but still the threat of
terrorism seems more pervasive than ever. That simple

08-63845

fact underlines the limitations of traditional counterterrorism measures and the need to systematically address
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorist
activities.
This Council has a particular role to play in that
regard with respect to the need to address a number of
long-term conflict situations whose repercussions are
being felt all over the world and that are directly
related to violent extremism. Other parts of the United
Nations system, including the General Assembly, are
called upon to redouble their efforts, within their
respective mandates, that contribute to the prevention
of terrorism. In that regard, we recall that the General
Assembly has a particular responsibility that it needs to
address urgently: the finalization of the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
We hope that renewed vigour in global counterterrorism cooperation will bring about a political
climate in which the outstanding issues with respect to
what has been termed the definition of terrorism can be
solved.
The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy identifies
the absence of the rule of law, human rights violations
and a lack of good governance among the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism. It is equally true
that the fight against terrorism can have a negative
impact on the rule of law, human rights and good
governance, as States and international organizations
take sometimes urgent and forceful counter-terrorism
measures without allowing for appropriate checks and
balances on executive action.
The United Nations Special Rapporteur to
conduct a comprehensive study on terrorism and
human rights has given numerous relevant examples of
such measures where public and individual security
interests are not always properly balanced against the
human rights of affected individuals. Given the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
including with respect to the fight against international
terrorism, we are convinced that the Council should
lead by example when dealing with the difficult
question of balancing security interests and human
rights. We are therefore pleased that further
improvements have been made to the Council’s
counter-terrorism sanctions regime, and we urge the
Council to take further necessary steps in that regard.

3

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): Let me first of all
express my appreciation to you, Sir, and to your
country in its capacity as President of the Security
Council during the month of December 2008, for
organizing this open debate on one of the most critical
issues of international peace and security. The
continuing terrorist acts around the world are a
constant and painful reminder that terrorism remains
one of the most serious threats to all States and
peoples. Terrorist acts cause the increasing mistrust of
people in the capability of the international community
to effectively respond to those inhumane acts of
violence.
The terrible events that took place in Mumbai
represent the most cruel and large-scale terrorist act
since 11 September 2001. Together with the rest of the
international community, Kazakhstan pays special
tribute to the innocent victims of the barbaric act of the
terrorists and expresses its solidarity with the
Government of India.
In his telegram of condolences to Indian Prime
Minister Singh, President Nursultan Nazarbayev
pointed out that, in this time of tragedy, it is necessary
to strengthen international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. Kazakhstan is confident that only in
that manner will it be possible to confront any act of
terrorism.
Today we are facing unprecedented global
threats: inter-ethnic and inter-confessional conflicts;
international terrorism and organized crime; natural,
anthropogenic and humanitarian disasters; diseases and
epidemics; and energy and environmental problems.
The continued surge of terrorist acts throughout the
world has laid bare the transnational nature of
terrorism. One must recognize that terrorism is well
organized, financially self-sufficient and bolstered by
powerful ideological dictums that poison the
consciousness of an ever-greater number of people.
Against that background, the strengthening of the
international legal framework of counter-terrorist
cooperation is especially relevant. Kazakhstan supports
the adoption without further delay of a comprehensive
convention against international terrorism.
The United Nations, with its authority, universal
character and unique experience, continues to play an
indispensable leading and coordinating role in all

4

global affairs. Its effectiveness, however, depends on
our will; and we should, through joint efforts, reform
the Organization with a view to strengthening the role
of the Security Council in reacting expeditiously to the
main challenges to international peace and security.
We are sure that constructive and successful
cooperation among United Nations Member States on
the implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy will strengthen regional and international
security and eliminate the issue of international
terrorism in the future.
Regional and subregional arrangements play a
critical role in the efforts to enhance the effectiveness
of global actions against terrorism. In particular, a
significant contribution to counter-terrorism efforts in
the Eurasian region could be made by the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization. The Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-building Measures in Asia is another
such structure.
In conclusion, we would like to express once
again our deepest sorrow over the loss of innocent
lives in all acts of terrorism and convey our sympathies
and condolences to the families of the victims. We
believe that the international community should join in
the efforts to ensure broad and effective cooperation in
the struggle to eliminate the threat of terrorism forever.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Cuba firmly condemns and rejects terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, including State
terrorism. We consider that all terrorist acts, methods
and practices wherever, by whomever and against
whomever they are committed to be totally
unjustifiable, whatever the motive invoked to justify
them. The recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai are new
and clear proof of the danger that terrorism represents
for us all. Cuba expresses its sincere condolences to the
people and the Government of India with regard to the
victims of those criminal acts.
We urge all States to fulfil the obligations they
have undertaken to combat terrorism by prosecuting or,
where appropriate, extraditing the perpetrators of
terrorist acts; by preventing the organization,
instigation or financing of such acts against other
States from within or outside their territories or by

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

organizations based in their territories; or by refraining
from supplying arms or other means that could be used
for terrorist acts in other States, among other actions.
Cuba also rejects acts, measures and the use or
the threat of the use of force that violate the United
Nations Charter and international law and that any
State imposes or tries to impose against others under
the pretext of combating terrorism. Likewise, our
country categorically rejects the unilateral drawing up
of lists accusing States of allegedly supporting
terrorism, which are inconsistent with international
law.
We are convinced that multilateral cooperation,
under the auspices of the United Nations, is the most
effective way to combat international terrorism. We
stress the importance of the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy by
all Member States. In that respect, we consider it
appropriate to convene an international conference,
under the auspices of the United Nations, so as to
define terrorism and adopt comprehensive and
effective measures for joint action against it. We
support the conclusion, as soon as possible and within
the framework of the United Nations, of a
comprehensive convention on combating international
terrorism that includes the definition of terrorism.
For years, our country has been submitting to the
Security Council detailed information on the terrorist
acts against Cuba by various individuals and
organizations, as well as on the conspiratorial
protection that the United States Government offers
them. To date, our denunciations have not received any
concrete response from the Council.
It has been over a year and a half since the
release in the United States of the terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles, who is rightly designated the most notorious
terrorist of the Western hemisphere. Despite having all
the evidence against him for his countless terrorist acts,
the United States Government has never done so. Cuba
believes that that case is a clear and flagrant violation
of resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, as well as a number of international legal
instruments pertaining to the fight against terrorism.
Once again, the Cuban Government demands that the
United States authorities return the terrorist to the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which has requested
his extradition, or that they try him on their territory.

08-63845

While it lets self-confessed and unscrupulous
terrorists go free, for over 10 years the United States
Government has been keeping in high-security prisons
five Cuban anti-terrorist fighters political prisoners,
who were only trying, with great self-sacrifice and
courage, to obtain information on Miami-based
terrorist groups, so as to prevent their violent acts and
save the lives of Cuban and United States citizens.
Once again, we demand their immediate release.
Double standards cannot prevail. It is impossible
to eliminate terrorism, if some terrorist acts are
condemned, while others are silenced, tolerated or
justified. Cuba has never allowed, nor will it allow its
territory to be used for terrorist acts against any State,
without exception. As we have until now, we will
continue firmly to fight against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs. Eilon Shahar (Israel): At the outset, Sir, I
would like to thank you for convening this timely
debate. I would also like to thank you for your
leadership as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, and I further recognize the Croatian
stewardship of the Council of Europe’s Committee of
Experts on Terrorism. I also welcome the participation
of the President of Croatia and the Secretary-General
in this debate.
Israel believes that the issue of terrorism deserves
to be among the highest priorities of this Council, the
United Nations as a whole and all Member States. We
welcome the opportunity to help reinvigorate
international resolve to combat terrorism.
The recent horrific events in Mumbai clearly
demonstrated that terrorism is one of the greatest
global threats to international peace and security in
recent history. My Government extends its condolences
to the Indian people. Citizens from a number of other
nations, including Israel, were also killed in those
horrific days, and we also extend our condolences to
the citizens of those countries, and especially to the
families of all those who were lost and injured.
Among the locations targeted by the terrorists
was the Chabad House, where Israelis were singled out
for cold-blooded murder. Rising out of the maelstrom
of unspeakable acts was an Indian caregiver, who
risked her life to save a two-year-old Israeli child. The

5

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

caregiver’s actions are proof that, while terrorists seek
to destroy our way of life, the noblest human impulses
and values must and will prevail.
The events in Mumbai have shown, once again,
that terrorism knows no borders and that international
cooperation is crucial to defeating it. The chain of
cooperation, from country to country, must be strong
and complete. Otherwise, the terrorists will find the
weak link and exploit it. We must control our borders,
shut off the valve of funds to terrorist networks,
including through sources such as drug trafficking, and
face terrorism with a seamless, united front, pursuing
terrorists wherever they may be. We also urge States to
fully implement all their obligations under
international law and to adhere to all relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Israel lies in a region heavily scarred by
terrorism, and my country, in particular, has been on
the front line of efforts to combat that evil for many
decades. Israelis and Jews are targeted at home and
abroad because of the passport they carry or their
religion. Like any other terrorist group, Hezbollah and
Hamas, two organizations committed to the destruction
of my country, could not operate without the support
given to them by States, in this case, Iran and Syria.
We urge the international community to stand firm
against those organizations and to speak in one voice
against any State sponsorship of terrorism.
Terrorism is spreading at an alarming rate,
expanding both in geography and in the audacity of the
crimes. Terrorists abuse the benefits of globalization,
including the free flow of people and information, in
order to bring fear, misery and death to innocent
civilians. We must also be acutely aware of the dangers
of cyberterrorism. The perpetrators of terrorist acts
operate outside the conventions of international
relations and, indeed, in violation of basic human
behaviour norms. They are not constrained by law,
reason or even self-preservation. It is precisely those
factors that have made this plague so difficult to fight.
Yet, in spite of the scale of the threat, we are
hopeful. We have the tools to combat terrorists, but
what we are lacking is universal political will. There
are some regions and nations that have not displayed
the needed sense of urgency. In some cases, States may
turn a blind eye to terrorists in their midst. In other
cases, they may even use terrorist organizations as a
tool of foreign policy. However, whether the support is

6

active or passive, it is still support. States that assist
terrorists will, at the very least, alienate themselves
from the international community. They must also be
made to understand that they are helping to undermine
their own sovereignty and that it is difficult to reverse
that downward spiral.
Around the world there are failed States and
States in danger of collapse that have the destructive
capacity in either raw materials or developed
technology that can be used in weapons of mass
destruction. In that environment, it is critical that while
we combat terrorism, we do everything within our
power to ensure that terrorists cannot gain access to
any capacity to inflict mass destruction.
There can be no excuse or justification for
terrorism, for State sponsorship of terrorism or States
closing their eyes to the problem within their own
borders. All manifestations of terrorism must be
condemned, and we should deny any attempt to
legitimize certain kinds of terrorism or to make the
distinction between good terrorism and bad terrorism.
The General Assembly and the Security Council
consistently reaffirm this position.
Religious and political leaders have a special
responsibility to speak out against fanaticism and
extremism. Terrorist movements indoctrinate their
adherents — often susceptible youth — into believing
that violence is the only means available to realize
their goals. Some movements glorify martyrdom. We
need to address incitement to violence at all levels, in
the political sphere, in schools and in houses of
worship.
Combating terrorism is a difficult task, but one
which no State, no matter how limited in resources or
capacity, need tackle alone. Technical assistance in
many fields is available through a number of
international mechanisms, including the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We
applaud the work of these bodies and urge States to use
and support these available resources.
In conclusion, history tries to teach us a lesson
that we too often forget. Appeasement, silence and
neglect make a risky strategy in the face of danger.
Instead, let each one of us do all we can to confront
this threat. We should send a clear message through our

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

actions that the nations of the world are resolved to
eliminate terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Menon (Singapore): I would like to take this
opportunity to express our deepest condolences to our
Indian colleagues as well as to all who lost loved ones
in the recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai. The attacks
have shown that terrorism is a threat that spares no
one. The fatalities from the attacks included more than
20 foreigners from at least nine countries. Singapore
was also not left untouched by this tragedy. A
Singaporean woman, killed in the Mumbai attacks, was
the first Singaporean to fall victim to modern-day
terrorists.
The tragic events in Mumbai are a grim reminder
that the scourge of terrorism continues unabated.
Singapore stands firmly behind the Indian Government
in its fight against terrorism. It is equally if not even
more important for countries in the South Asian region
to work closely with one another to tackle a scourge
that has cost countless lives and brought pain and
suffering to all within the region. Not to do so would
be to waste a golden opportunity and play into the very
hands of those who seek to sow the seeds of discord
among the peoples of the region.
Seven years after the 11 September attacks and
six years since the first bomb attacks in Bali, terrorism
persists. The latest attacks in Mumbai, as well as the
continued incidents in Iraq and Afghanistan,
underscore the common terrorist threat that we
continue to face.
Terrorists continue to adapt and evolve. By
decentralizing their networks, spawning independent
home-grown
groups
and
harnessing
modern
technology, they are making it that much more difficult
for security authorities to detect and predict future
attacks. We are also seeing more and more instances of
plots or attacks involving self-radicalized individuals.
These individuals are not recruited by any terrorist
groups; they become exposed to deviant ideology,
frequently through the Internet, and embrace the
radical ideas they come across. They then facilitate, or
worse, participate in, terrorism.
Singapore recognizes the diversity and constantly
evolving nature of terrorism. The Singapore
Government has adopted a multipronged strategy to

08-63845

deal with terrorism. The first element of this strategy is
the use of a multi-ministry networked approach. Such
an approach integrates the work of otherwise separate
bodies, enables inter-agency coordination and allows
the Government to leverage the strengths of diverse
organizations.
The second element in our strategy is community
engagement. Singapore is a multicultural and
multireligious society; every community must play its
part to hold society together during a crisis.
Singapore’s Prime Minister launched the Community
Engagement Programme in February 2006. This
Programme aims to strengthen understanding and
develop trust among various ethnic communities and
across society. The goal is to be able to maintain social
harmony after any terrorist attack. A number of
interfaith events, dialogues and forums have been held
under the auspices of this Programme.
Singapore also relies heavily on members of all
of its religious communities to help counter any
misrepresentations of religion. For example, after
several members of the Jemaah Islamiyah group were
apprehended for planning terrorist acts on Singaporean
soil, our Muslim community stepped forward to help
rehabilitate them. Muslim clerics from the Religious
Rehabilitation Group work closely with the Singapore
authorities to counsel the detainees and their families
to correct their misinterpretation of Islam. The
Religious Rehabilitation Group has also reached out to
the wider community, both Muslim and non-Muslim,
through forums and publications.
Another key element in our strategy is
cooperation with the international community.
Terrorism is a global problem and it obviously requires
a global response. The United Nations continues to
play an important role in sending a clear political
signal
that
the
international
community’s
condemnation of terrorism in all of its forms and
manifestations is consistent, unequivocal and strong. In
this regard, Singapore welcomes the General
Assembly’s review of the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
September this year. Having assessed how far we have
come and what else needs to be done, we should leave
rhetoric aside and redouble our efforts to implement
concrete counter-terrorism measures. Singapore is
doing its part at the national and regional levels to
implement the Strategy. We look forward to continued
and closer cooperation with other Member States and

7

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

to
interacting
with
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force to further enhance counterterrorism efforts at the United Nations. Singapore also
looks forward to further progress in discussions on the
draft comprehensive convention on international
terrorism at the upcoming ad hoc committee meetings
during the current session of the General Assembly.
Terrorism cuts across national, geographic,
religious and ethnic boundaries. The transnational
nature of modern-day terrorism means that all
Governments will be faced with the challenge of
confronting this menace. Terrorists seldom work in
isolation and more often than not operate in wellorganized networks of individuals, cells and groups
around the world. The battle will be long-drawn-out.
Modern-day terrorists have deep ideological roots and
the adherents of these ideologies are prepared to go to
extreme lengths to achieve their aims. Therefore, it is
imperative that countries stay the course and continue
to work closely to combat this scourge and exchange
information on strategies to address the root causes of
the issue. It is only through our combined efforts that
we can hope to defeat the terrorist networks we are
currently facing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of
Croatia on convening this debate. We would also like
to acknowledge the Croatian delegation’s work in
heading the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
First of all, we would like to express the
solidarity and condolences of Mexico to the families of
the victims and to the people and the Government of
India for the tragic events of 26 November in Mumbai.
We regret the loss of so many human lives, among
them that of a Mexican citizen.
Terrorist attacks that have occurred in various
regions of the world require us to redouble our efforts
in international cooperation in combating terrorism,
and we firmly reiterate our rejection of terrorist
activity in any form or manifestation.
Mexico would like to stress the central role of the
Organization in combating terrorism and would recall
the framework that is the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. However, its effectiveness
will depend on the coordinated and comprehensive

8

implementation of the Strategy, and that is based on its
four pillars.
I would like to refer to the human rights pillar.
For my delegation, that is a central element in any
activity to combat terrorism. Since 2001, Mexico has
consistently urged that States ensure that the measures
that they adopt to combat terrorism comply with their
obligations with regard to international law, in
particular those relating to human rights, refugees and
humanitarian law. During our most recent term as a
member of the Security Council in 2003, we supported
the adoption of this approach in resolution 1456
(2003). Some weeks ago, the Third Committee of the
General Assembly took up this issue in a substantive
way, and we hope that in the next few days the
Assembly will adopt the resolution entitled “Protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the fight
against terrorism”.
In view of the intensification of communications
in the globalized world in which we live, it is easy for
terrorist organizations to use advanced technology and
resources to achieve their objectives. For this reason,
we consider the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) especially
important, particularly the work to strengthen measures
to detect and withhold financing for terrorist purposes.
Also, we should prevent those organizations from
having recourse to activities such as transnational
organized crime, trafficking in illicit drugs, moneylaundering and arms trafficking for their own purposes.
Mexico believes that it would be timely to
strengthen cooperation among the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), as well as among the
respective groups of experts, and to clarify differences
in their mandates and activities.
Mexico is fully committed to combating
terrorism. My country has actively participated in the
drawing up of treaties on this issue and seeks to
faithfully implement relevant Security Council
resolutions. Mexico is a party to the 13 international
legal instruments on terrorism and the two that exist in
the inter-American sphere.
We are especially concerned about the access
terrorist organizations have to conventional weapons
and the ease of that access due to the existing legal
vacuums that promote illicit arms trafficking,
constituting a threat to the security of many States.

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

Additionally, combating the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction is essential to preventing access to
those weapons by terrorist organizations. Mexico
recognizes the value of resolution 1540 (2004) in this
regard, as well as the efforts made by States to achieve
its full implementation.
Mexico believes that the United Nations should
give priority to comprehensive strategies in combating
terrorism in order to seek a lasting solution that deals
with the causes of conflicts and corrects at their roots
the impulses that lead to terrorism.
In this sense, the most effective actions against
terrorism are those that promote economic and social
development, because this scourge is not produced in a
void. Its origins and development are linked to specific
social, political and economic conditions, as well as to
concrete historical conflicts that have not been
resolved. It is in this framework that attempts are made
to foment or justify terrorist acts.
Also, specific and timely attention is necessary
for humanitarian problems and promoting education
and health in regions with the most severe structural
problems in order to prevent the emergence and
proliferation of terrorist organizations. For this reason,
Mexico believes that for an effective fight against
terrorism, the international community must maintain a
comprehensive and coordinated strategy. Insofar as the
international community can remain united, respecting
its values and strengthening international cooperation,
our chances of success will be better. We will fight
terrorism while promoting, defending and ensuring
respect for our own values.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to express Argentina’s condemnation of
the recent terrorist acts in Mumbai and its solidarity
with the Government and people of India.
I wish to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. The
subject is, I wish to stress, of the utmost importance for
all States and for my country. I also wish to recognize
Croatia for preparing the concept paper before us. It is
very useful for today’s debate in the Security Council.
The
Argentine
Republic
believes
that
international terrorist acts constitute a threat to peace
and international security, to life and human dignity

08-63845

and to peaceful and civilized coexistence. They also
endanger stability, democracy and the socio-economic
development of nations. In recent years, my country
suffered two brutal terrorist attacks, and we will not
cease to seek and punish the perpetrators.
An effective fight against terrorism necessarily
entails the commitment of the whole international
community, participating together organically and
permanently, legitimized by the fact that that
commitment is based on respect for general
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Such
organic and institutionalized participation to prevent
and eliminate terrorism implies the direct involvement
of the United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly and the Security Council and its subsidiary
organs, but also regional organizations. It also entails a
two-fold commitment by individual States. On the one
hand, they should become parties to the international
instruments negotiated to confront terrorism, among
which we emphasize the importance of the United
Nations conventions. On the other hand, they should
adopt domestic laws necessary to fully comply with
such instruments.
I wish to report that my country has ratified the
12 United Nations conventions on terrorism and has
enacted the domestic measures stipulated by those
instruments. It has also ratified the Inter-American
Convention Against Terrorism and signed the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Nuclear Terrorism.
At the national level, the Argentine Penal Code
was amended in 2007 so as to incorporate the crime of
illicit terrorist association. We have also amended Law
25.246, which created the Unit for Financial
Information, and entrusted that Unit with the
examination, treatment and transmission of information
related to the laundering of the assets produced by the
activities of an illicit terrorist group and the financing
of terrorism. In the context of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), my country adopted the
National Agenda for the Fight against Money
Laundering and the Financing of Terrorism.
My country gives priority to the fight against
terrorism also at the regional level, in the Organization
of American States (OAS) and MERCOSUR. In the
case of MERCOSUR, Argentina actively participates in

9

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

its working groups on terrorism. As regards to the
OAS, we participate in the activities of its InterAmerican Committee against Terrorism. We also
participate in the informal mechanism of the 3+1
Group on Tri-Border Area Security, composed of
Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and the United States.
As stated in the draft presidential statement to be
adopted at the end of this debate, Argentina believes
that Member States must work together urgently to
prevent and suppress terrorist acts, while at the same
time it emphasizes the central role of the United
Nations in the global fight against terrorism. We
reaffirm the importance of all Security Council
resolutions and those of the General Assembly.
Finally, Argentina reiterates its call, already
expressed, and as the President of the Security Council
will do on this occasion, to States to become parties, as
soon as possible, to all international instruments
dealing with terrorism and to implement those to which
they are party. Likewise, we join in firmly condemning
the incitement to commit terrorist acts and repudiate
any attempt to justify such acts, as that could incite the
commission of other terrorist acts.

acts and practices of terrorism. Terrorism is a crime
against humanity, and it can never be justified under
any pretext, regardless of its motivations and
objectives.
The recent heinous terrorist attack in the city of
Mumbai underscored once again the importance of a
firm commitment on the part of the international
community to effectively combat and eradicate
terrorism. Our hearts go out to the victims and their
families, who were targets of that monstrous crime
against humanity. It once again underlined the fact that
it is only through a coherent, consistent and resolute
stance on the part of the international community that
we can gain the upper hand against this scourge. We
therefore hope that our debate today not only will send
a strong message confirming our determination and
unity in the fight against terrorism, but also can
identify ways and means to further strengthen the
central role of the United Nations in global counterterrorism efforts.

Mr. İlkin (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to thank
Croatia for taking the initiative to organize this open
debate on such an important issue. I would also like to
thank His Excellency the President of Croatia for
presiding over this morning’s part of our meeting.

In fact, this Organization has already made some
significant contributions to global counter-terrorism
efforts, primarily through norm-setting and capacitybuilding. We commend those endeavours. However, we
can by no means consider our mission accomplished.
In the area of norm-setting, for instance, we ought to
finalize, without further delay, our work on the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
and present the international community with a
comprehensive instrument that would further
strengthen our efforts to combat terrorism.

In fact, terrorism is already one of the most
discussed topics at the United Nations. There is every
reason for that, since terrorism constitutes one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security.
Indeed, it concerns all nations, large and small, and it
takes its toll on human beings of every age, culture,
religion and nationality.

As regards capacity-building, on the other hand,
the United Nations should continue to strengthen the
facilitation of technical assistance aimed at enhancing
the capabilities of Member States in the fight against
terrorism. We must help those countries that are willing
to shoulder their counter-terrorism obligations but lack
the necessary resources and expertise to do so.

In other words, we all are vulnerable to this
global scourge. Thus, it requires a firm and united
response by all Member States. And that is why we see
each and every discussion on this issue, including
today’s debate, as useful in helping us to better
understand various national and regional perspectives
so as to find common ground for joint and more
effective responses.

In that context, we note with appreciation certain
steps taken, such as the recently introduced
Preliminary Implementation Assessment mechanism,
which is expected to identify areas in which countries
need to take additional measures for the full and
efficient implementation of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001).

The President: I now call on the representative
of Turkey.

In that regard, I would like to add my voice to
those of previous speakers in strongly condemning all

10

We also welcome the completion of the general
survey of the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and we are

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

looking forward to having the draft technical
implementation guide that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate is currently
preparing. We hope that those initial steps will pave the
way for the United Nations to play a more regulatory
and guiding role in steering our counter-terrorism
efforts.
That said, we need to work on developing a
global monitoring mechanism that would not only
identify threats and perpetrators in clear terms, but also
highlight the weak and strong aspects of our
implementation of the resolutions and agreements that
we collectively underwrite. It is only through such
central and effective monitoring and follow-up
mechanisms that we will be able to fulfil our
commitments and encourage tangible and substantive
cooperation among Member States in a way that can
create a synergy of efforts.
Turkey, as an advocate of strong international
cooperation in the field of counter-terrorism, is ready
and willing to contribute to all efforts to that end. In
the light of our upcoming membership, we are also
looking forward to actively and constructively
participating in the counter-terrorism activities of the
Security Council in the next two years by sharing our
experiences and best practices on this matter.
Before concluding, allow me to briefly mention
the Alliance of Civilizations initiative, which was
launched in 2005 by the Secretary-General under the
sponsorship of Turkey and Spain. The initiative, which
is aimed at building bridges among diverse cultures
and religions through our common values and ideals,
could in fact be one of the most effective ways of
dealing with all forms of extremism, including
terrorism.
Finally, we thank you once again, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. We are looking forward to
working with you in strengthening the international
community’s fight against terrorism.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, on
behalf of my Government, I would like to commend
the initiative of the Croatian presidency of the Security
Council to hold this debate, which indeed offers a
timely opportunity to engage in open deliberations with
a view to strengthening international solidarity and the

08-63845

leading role of the United Nations in global counterterrorism activities.
We remember all victims of terrorist acts and
express our condolences to the people of India and the
families of those who suffered as a result of the recent
terrorist attacks on Mumbai. Azerbaijan strongly
condemns terrorism as one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security and is making
sustained efforts to contribute to the international
community’s
efforts
aimed
at
consistent,
comprehensive and coordinated responses to prevent
and combat terrorism.
In addition to the potential threats facing us as a
result of our proximity to hotbeds of conflict and
regions that harbour major terrorist groups and are
sources of proliferation problems, Azerbaijan is a
direct target of specific externally sponsored terrorist
activity. Since the late 1980s, neighbouring Armenia
openly encroached upon the territory of Azerbaijan
and, in addition to launching combat operations there,
resorted to deliberate terrorist attacks against my
country’s citizens and critical infrastructure as a way to
implement its annexationist policy. In total, as a result
of the terrorist acts against Azerbaijan, more than 2,000
of Azerbaijan’s citizens have been killed, the majority
of them women, elderly persons and children.
Indeed, terrorism is closely related to aggressive
separatism. Areas of armed conflict — especially
territories under foreign military occupation — often
create conditions conducive to exploitation by
terrorists. Thus, the continuing occupation of a part of
Azerbaijan’s territory by Armenia provides fertile
ground for terrorist and related activities.
Against that background, we are seriously
concerned, inter alia, by the fact that conventional arms
control mechanisms are not effective in such
territories. The accumulation of a great number of
armaments and ammunition there, beyond the reach of
international control, poses a serious threat to regional
peace and security. Our particular concern relates to the
possibility of the use by terrorist groups of specific
weapons, including individual anti-aircraft missile
systems.
Those trends have had an immediate impact on
the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan. It is no
accident that Armenia’s military expenditures,
calculated in terms of gross domestic product, are
among the highest in the world. We regret that

11

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

members of the international community — especially
those mediating the negotiation process — show a
certain indifference to this problem, which in fact
negatively affects the prospects for a peaceful
resolution of the conflict as soon as possible.
In this regard, we deem it necessary to take more
efficient measures aimed at preventing those who are
in effective military and political control of occupied
territories from acquiring conventional weapons and to
disclose their attempts to deny responsibility. Equally,
reinforcement
of
existing
non-proliferation
mechanisms acquires additional significance and must
be a serious part of the international effort.
An important condition of counter-terrorist
activity is that States refrain from organizing,
financing, encouraging, providing, training or
otherwise directly or indirectly supporting terrorist
activities. Furthermore, insofar as international terrorist
activities still rely on physical movement to reach
another country in order to promote their messages and
in certain instances to collect material resources, it is
important that States take appropriate practical
measures to ensure that their respective territories are
not used for such activities, especially when they are
aimed at undermining the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Member States.
Terrorists must never be allowed to create a
pretext for their actions. All terrorist acts constitute
serious crimes; they are unjustifiable and unacceptable
and must be unequivocally condemned and prosecuted.
The absence of a clear definition of terrorism in
international law merely hampers the efforts of the
international community to bring not only individual
terrorists and organizations to account, but also States
that promote, support or finance terrorist activities. In
this regard, Azerbaijan reiterates its determination to
make every effort to reach an agreement on a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
that will serve as an effective instrument to counter
terrorism.
The war on terrorism should not be used to target
any particular religion or culture. Today, we are living
at a time of heightened religious awareness, which in
certain instances takes on exaggerated forms and
sometimes is maliciously exploited to fuel conflicts on
ethnic, religious or cultural grounds. In recent years,
unacceptable attacks against Islam in some countries
confirm the vital necessity of joint efforts and dialogue

12

to counter such
misconceptions.

defamatory

manifestations

and

Constructive interaction between different
cultures and religions, including in the framework of
such initiatives as the culture of peace and the Alliance
of Civilizations, should continue playing a special role
in contributing to peace and mutual understanding and
thus to the efficient implementation of counterterrorism measures.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): I would
like to take this opportunity to strongly condemn the
indiscriminate violence that struck Mumbai through a
series of ugly and odious terrorist acts. On behalf of
the Government and people of the Republic of Korea, I
would also like to convey our deepest condolences to
the victims, their families, the Government of India
and its people. We wish the injured a speedy recovery.
Despite the strengthened efforts of the
international community, terrorism has continued to
plague countries across the globe and remains a great
concern to the international community. It hinders the
reconstruction and stabilization of war-torn countries
and the well-being of all people. Further, the increasing
links between terrorism and transnational crime are
also alarming. Strengthening law enforcement in
capturing and dismantling terrorist organizations and
improving the capacity of States to prevent and combat
terrorism are important elements in countering the
threat of terrorism.
Moreover, addressing the conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism would contribute to
strengthening the international response to the scourge
of terrorism as underlined in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In this regard, measures
such as the easing of socio-economic marginalization,
the promotion of dialogue among civilizations and the
integration of ethnic and religious minorities would
complement the efforts of the international community
to counter terrorism in a sustainable manner.
Strongly convinced that terrorism should be
eradicated regardless of its forms and motivations, the
Republic of Korea is fully committed to preventing and
combating acts of terrorism and its misguided
extremist ideology. To this end, the Government of the
Republic of Korea is actively participating in

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

international efforts by faithfully implementing
Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267 (1999)
and 1540 (2004). It also joins other efforts such as the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.
In order to effectively respond to terrorist threats,
comprehensive and systematic counter-terrorism efforts
are required at the global level. In this regard, the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
offers a solid basis for international counter-terrorism
cooperation. The Republic of Korea strongly supports
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the complete implementation of the four pillars of
the Strategy.
The Strategy also emphasizes coordinated joint
efforts by encouraging Member States and
international and regional organizations to support its
implementation through mobilizing resources and
expertise. The harmonization of counter-terrorism
measures and the exchange of best practices of various
regions and Member States is an important element in
the effort to cope with terrorism.
It is time now to make another serious attempt,
together with the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, to
adopt a comprehensive convention on international
terrorism that would reinforce the legal network to
prevent international terrorism. In an effort to
strengthen legal instruments, it is also essential for all
Member States to become party to the relevant
international conventions and protocols relating to
terrorism and to assist each other in doing so. In this
regard, the Republic of Korea has ratified 12 United
Nations counter-terrorism conventions and signed the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism.
The United Nations actions to counter terrorism
are continuously evolving to adapt to constantly
changing threats. The United Nations concentrates its
efforts on devising a harmonized international
framework that ensures effectiveness, efficiency and
continuous improvement. The United Nations should
keep playing a central role in these well established
mechanisms
of
international
counter-terrorism
cooperation. Greater interaction and complementary
cooperation between the Security Council and the
General Assembly should be continuously promoted to
ensure synergy in the efforts of the United Nations to
counter the threat of terrorism.

08-63845

The recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai and
frequent attacks elsewhere in the world have
demonstrated only too clearly that terrorism is an
indiscriminate affront to universal values and
civilizations. Terrorism cannot be linked to a particular
nationality, religion, civilization or culture. It is simply
a common threat we are facing, which requires
solidarity in the international community.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Philippines.
Mr. Davide (Philippines): Tomorrow we
celebrate the commemoration of the sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Only last 24 October, we
also celebrated the sixty-third anniversary of the entry
into force of the United Nations Charter. Above all
measures, these are historic milestones for the United
Nations and are events of unparalleled significance.
One of the purposes of the Charter is to maintain
international peace and security and to that end, inter
alia, to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to peace. In its
preamble, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
declares that the recognition of the inherent dignity and
of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of
the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice
and peace in the world and that disregard and contempt
for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts that
have outraged the conscience of mankind. These rights
include the rights to life, liberty and security.
There can be no doubt at all that terrorist acts are
threats to international peace and security. Hence, the
holding of this debate on the agenda item “Threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts” is certainly very timely and appropriate. Thus, the
Philippines commends and expresses its gratitude to
the President of the Security Council for organizing
this debate.
More than enough has been said and recorded in
the United Nations system on terrorism. The latest
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General under
agenda item 118 of the General Assembly at its sixtysecond session, entitled “United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy: activities of the United
Nations system in implementing the Strategy”
(A/62/898), shows us the complexity of the problems
created by international terrorism as it affects
international peace and security; the progress made

13

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

thus far in combating it; and the measures
recommended to be pursued to prevent or counter
terrorism.
In my speech at the tenth annual International
Judicial Conference, held in Strasbourg, France, in
May 2002 under the sponsorship of the Center for
Democracy, the Council of Europe and the Furth
Family Foundation, I asserted that we must resist the
temptation to attribute to terrorism some kind of
mythic magnitude that makes it larger than life. I told
the audience that terrorism is man-made; therefore, it
can be solved by men and women of resolve.
Today, I say that there is one body that is much
greater than the men and women of resolve. It is the
United Nations, with its 192 Member States. Not only
does it have the resolve, it has the will, the power, the
might and the resources to counter and solve terrorism
and to demolish, if it wishes to, every act of terrorism
in any part of the globe. With the deadly tentacles of
terrorism spreading over many places, the latest of
which was Mumbai, India, the United Nations must
now more than ever assert its power and might.
For this debate, allow me to contribute a few
thoughts on how the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, can move further forward in this
fight against terrorism from the legal and judicial
perspectives, with which I have some familiarity.
I respectfully submit, as I did at the Strasbourg
Conference I mentioned earlier, that there should now
be a universally accepted definition of terrorism and a
condemnation thereof as a crime, with a recognition of
the criminal intent of fomenting fear and terror. I find
in the report of the Secretary-General, referred to
earlier, that there is an Ad Hoc Committee, established
by General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17
December 1996, that is tasked with drafting a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
and is ably supported by the Office of Legal Affairs.
While having achieved some progress, the Committee
is finding some disagreements among Member States
regarding the scope of the convention, and attempts
will be made to resolve them in the Sixth Committee
during the sixty-third session of the General Assembly.
The convention could be the proper document for the
definition of terrorism.
At that same Conference, I also stated that the
United Nations lost its first opportunity to establish a
definition of the crime of terrorism when the Rome

14

Statute of the International Criminal Court was
deliberated upon and approved by 160 Member States.
Moreover, the Statute could even have included
terrorism as one of the crimes recognized by the Court.
I hope that the Security Council and the General
Assembly can do something to expedite the adoption of
the convention on terrorism, which is still in the
drawing board of the Ad Hoc Committee. Likewise, I
wish to reiterate here the proposal I made before the
same Strasbourg Conference for national legislatures to
enact laws defining and punishing terrorism as a crime.
It could be treated as a crime in violation of the law of
nations. This would have two legal consequences.
First, it would make applicable the doctrine of
universal jurisdiction. Secondly, it would provide for
concurrent jurisdictions between international courts
and domestic courts and allow the latter to yield
jurisdiction to international courts according to treaty
obligations.
The Philippines has already enacted a law, the
Human Security Act of 2007, defining and penalizing
two crimes: first, terrorism; and secondly, conspiracy
to commit terrorism.
Finally, allow me to state that among the strong
and effective deterrents to the commission of crimes
are the expeditious prosecution and trial of cases
against the offenders and the rendition of just, fair and
impartial judgement. Delays in the prosecution, trials
and judgement of terrorists would send wrong signals
to them and their co-conspirators. It would either
embolden them to assert their strength and make a
mockery of the weakness of the processes aligned
against them, or give them reason to claim that their
comrades in detention are deprived of due process and
then instigate an escalation in their terrorist acts.
Things would have been entirely different if, for
example, there had been expeditious prosecution and
trials and the meting of justice to terrorists involved in
the 9/11 tragedy and similar tragedies. Continuous
trials of these cases must be adopted as a standard
practice. In this regard, the United Nations must do
something.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Croatia
for holding this important meeting. We would like to

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

welcome his role in chairing the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, an auxiliary body of the Security Council.
We appreciate the concept paper that was presented by
the President as a basis for the Council’s work in
today’s meeting. We would like to thank His
Excellency the President of Croatia for his presence.
Allow me also, on behalf of His Majesty King
Abdullah Bin Al Hussein and the Government and
people of Jordan, to present our sincere condolences to
the people of India for the terrible suffering that they
have endured after the reprehensible terrorist attacks in
Mumbai. We condemn these despicable acts in the
strongest terms. We express our deep sympathy to the
bereaved families of the victims and reiterate our
solidarity with these families during this trying time.
The Mumbai terrorist acts sought to send a clear
and strong signal to people throughout the world that
terrorism is not simply a threat to international peace
and security and that it is no longer confined to
political, psychological and material damages, but that
it also seeks to make itself a crucial actor on the
international scene, to participate in defining the
security environment throughout the world and to
impose its personality and fingerprints on regional
conflicts.
We think that the message got through. This
message causes great concern to people throughout the
world. It raises essential questions in terms of the
future of combating terrorism. An important question
is: Should we take it that the Mumbai incident is a
strategic turning point, inasmuch as it pushes
extremism and evil into bilateral and regional
conflicts? Also, through these forces, is terrorism then
trying to reach its objectives with a minimum degree of
visibility, of losses and of responsibility? This message
requires a serious reply from the international
community.
This step requires a strategic transformation on
our part. Our political will and that of the international
community and international organizations must be
brought to bear on it. We must transform our vision of
terrorism and our determination to defeat it. We must
transform our reading of the magnitude, scope and
depth of the threat posed by terrorism to the
international community, human values and the
prosperity of societies. We must also bolster our
determination to establish the appropriate political,
security and social environment necessary to defeat

08-63845

terrorism. Lastly, there is a need to harmonize the
resolve of the international community, which is at the
heart of that vision.
It is illogical and unacceptable that international
terrorism can adapt, renew itself and manoeuvre while
the international community continues to be held
hostage to slow bureaucracies in combating it due to its
insufficient determination and indecisive tools. In his
concept paper, the President cited some of the serious
bureaucratic difficulties that constitute serious
obstacles in the face of the scope and dynamism of
terrorist acts and highlight our ineffectiveness to
combat them. We recognize the great strategic value of
counter-terrorism and its importance as a basis for
international efforts. However, the structure of our
global strategy must be adapted and its ability to
respond quickly must be enhanced. That is the only
way to achieve the goals of counter-terrorism at the
level of this international Organization.
The current situation therefore calls for calm and
reason, and not for tension, hasty action or misguided
decisions. The policy of escalation will only serve the
interests of terrorists, who are wagering on such a
policy. We must therefore avoid escalation. My country
supports the wise efforts that have been made to
demonstrate restraint and reason. Those efforts reflect
the will of the international community and its
determination to avoid more regional confrontations,
which undermine international peace and security and
divert counter-terrorism from its real objectives.
Jordan itself is a long-standing victim of
terrorism. We have taken pioneering steps to support
international efforts to combat terrorism and have
always been an important part of the partnership to that
end. We have signed most of the international
agreements and protocols that constitute the
international counter-terrorism regime. Jordan has also
developed a national strategy to combat terrorism that
serves as an example of the balance that must exist
between the need to provide security and protect
society, on the one hand, and the need to safeguard
human rights, civil liberties, the rule of law and social
and economic development, on the other. That sensitive
balance allows us to avert the effects of terrorism and
to achieve great harmony between the Government and
the people in combating terrorism. We are confident
that our success in combating terrorism depends on
more than just deterrence, security measures and a
professional military. Our strategic vision also

15

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

encompasses other crucial elements, such as legal,
financial, economic and social ways of combating
terrorism.
Jordan has also been a pioneer in promoting the
culture of peace. We have undertaken several
initiatives and established numerous programmes that
emphasize education about and awareness of the
dangers of terrorism in order to enable us to devise
policies to confront extremism and encourage dialogue
among religions and civilizations.
Combating terrorism is a joint international
responsibility. No single State can be successful in
combating terrorism if it isolates itself from
international efforts. We are certain that genuine
partnership and effective international cooperation in
the framework of the United Nations hold the real key
to the success of our efforts. Jordan therefore strongly
supports the central role played by the United Nations
in combating terrorism. We similarly support
strengthening the capacity of this international
Organization, including its determination to play an
effective and constructive role. We shall continue to
meet our international responsibilities in the context of
that partnership, the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and multilateral international
conventions pertaining to the danger posed by
terrorism. The Government of Jordan has always taken
a positive stance on the working methods of the
Security Council, which reflects our seriousness and
responsibility vis-à-vis the threat of terrorism. It also
reflects the importance that we attach to international
cooperation.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
country’s determination to abide by the international
partnership to combat terrorism as established by the
Security Council standards.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to commend
you, Mr. President, for convening this timely debate,
which is an eloquent expression of the importance that
your Government attaches to the fight against
terrorism. The statement delivered by the President of
Croatia, whose presence in the Chamber this morning
we appreciated very much, serves as a great
contribution to our joint consideration of this very
important matter. I should also like to thank Secretary-

16

General Ban Ki-moon for his presentation. My
delegation is grateful for his efforts to stimulate and
support multilateral cooperation against threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts.
In recent days, the world has once again been
shocked by a series of deadly terrorist acts, this time in
India. Allow me to reiterate our deep condolences and
heartfelt sympathy to the Government and people of
India and to the families of the victims.
The boldness and savagery shown in Mumbai
remind us that the international community must stand
together and work harder to prevent such events from
recurring. Those responsible for the killing and
destruction must be brought to justice without delay, so
that there can be no doubt that the lives of civilians
will be protected and the rule of law will prevail
against the criminals who wish them ill.
There is no possible justification for terrorism.
Killing innocent civilians is never acceptable. That is
why Brazil strongly condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. More than a position of successive
Governments, the repudiation of terrorism is enshrined
in the federal Constitution itself as a guiding principle
of Brazilian foreign policy.
My country is also a party to all international
conventions and protocols against terrorism, except for
the Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism, which is under consideration by the
National Congress.
Acts such as those seen in Mumbai must be met
with our resolute willingness to deepen our
cooperation, as envisaged in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism
Strategy.
The
Strategy
is
particularly relevant because it promotes responses to
terrorism that are comprehensive, coordinated and
consistent. Many of its elements make it clear that it is
an instrument of justice, peace and order and not of
vengeance, discrimination or blind attachment to the
status quo.
It is therefore crucial to combat terrorism in strict
observance of international law. Only procedures
adopted in accordance with the United Nations Charter
and other relevant treaties, in particular human rights
instruments and international humanitarian and refugee
law, can be truly successful and garner the necessary
support. Those procedures are essential to preserve the

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

moral standing of Governments fighting terrorism and
to win the battle where victory is most needed — in the
hearts and minds of those whom terrorists claim to
defend but in fact threaten, hurt and often kill.

is an obvious but often disregarded truth that those who
feel included and cared for have a stake in the
preservation of the social and political order that
supports them.

Further developing international law can only
help to fight terrorism effectively. Brazil strongly
supports the adoption of a comprehensive counterterrorism convention. We will continue to contribute to
the negotiations and efforts to achieve our common
goal. We hope that substantial results can be achieved
shortly and that a high-level conference on the matter
can be convened.

In light of the above, Mr. President, my
delegation cannot but join our voice to your
Excellency’s call for a multidimensional approach
against terrorism that does not shy away from the use
of force whenever necessary and at the same time fully
understands the absolute need to address the powerful
causes that make many choose extremism and violence.
The right combination of strict law enforcement and
broad inclusiveness will eventually lead us to success.

Another essential element of our collective
struggle is enhanced judicial cooperation and exchange
of information among States, especially among
financial and police intelligence agencies. In that
regard, the counter-terrorism committees of the
Security Council have played an outstanding role.
Their working methods have been improved in recent
years so as to make them more effective while
respecting basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms. The committees constitute a valuable tool to
ensure a coordinated response from the international
community to the threats posed by terrorist acts.
Although indispensable, repression is not enough
to put an end to terrorism. Prevention is key if we want
to rid the planet of such a scourge. We must eliminate
or at least mitigate non-material factors that may breed
terrorist acts, including political, ethnic, racial, cultural
and religious intolerance. Education for peace and
diversity has become a necessity, and a particularly
urgent one in some quarters of the globe, East and
West. But such an urgent task is to be performed by all,
everywhere and at all times. At the international level,
initiatives such as the Alliance of Civilizations are
most welcome because they help to bridge the gap
between different cultures. They promote mutual
understanding, tolerance and the broad acceptance of
different world views.
Preventing terrorism also requires addressing the
social and economic divide among and within nations.
We all know that terrorists thrive there where
underdevelopment, poverty and hopelessness make
extremism look like the only avenue open to real
change. As President Lula has forcefully advocated
since he first came to office, the international
community must take decisive action to help
Governments combat hunger and poverty worldwide. It

08-63845

The President: I
representative of Ecuador.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for placing this
open debate on the Security Council’s programme in
order to apprise us of the Council’s efforts with regard
to threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. There is no doubt that this type of public
meeting and the growing interaction of the Council and
its subsidiary bodies with non-member States are
important efforts in the common goal of the
Organization to combat terrorism.
On behalf of the Government of Ecuador, I join
other delegations in expressing our most sincere
condolences to the Government and people of India in
connection with the reprehensible attacks in Mumbai.
Ecuador attaches great importance to the role of
the United Nations in establishing a global order based
on respect for international law, the principles and
norms set out in the Charter and the observance and
promotion of human rights and international
humanitarian law. In that regard, my country supports
the efforts of the United Nations to address the serious
security problems we face — including combating
terrorism, the global drug problem and transnational
organized crime — by implementing the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We also support efforts to
strengthen cooperation with the Security Council
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1540 (2004) and 1373 (2001).
In accordance with the new Constitution of
Ecuador, adopted this year by a large majority, my
country shall undertake additional reforms in the
criminal, banking and customs areas that will facilitate

17

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

the implementation of counter-terrorism measures, in
particular the financing of terrorism. The national
Government has also been working with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on a proposed
reform to the criminal code.
At the same time, Ecuador has installed
information technology in its ports and airports and
strengthened its cooperation with international
organizations, including Interpol, to share information
on the movement of those suspected of transnational
crimes and to prevent the international trafficking of
arms, explosives, hazardous goods and chemical
precursors. The country’s security agencies are
continuously updating the consolidated list on
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated persons and
entities. Finally, with regard to transport security,
Ecuador applies international standards for the security
of air and maritime transport.
The implementation of Plan Ecuador represents
to the international community our ongoing desire to
address the problems of unconventional security issues
from a different perspective as our concrete national
and sovereign contribution to building peace in our
border regions and the Andean subregion. We have
enhanced our control operations along the border,
leading to the dismantling of more than 160
clandestine camps of irregular groups, including rest
posts and temporary drug-processing labs, and to the
capture of arms and communications equipment.
Ecuador is the largest host for Colombian
refugees in Latin America. In order to address that
situation, together with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees we have
implemented clear standards and humanitarian
procedures for processing asylum requests so as to
grant refugee status only to those who comply with the
parametres established in our national legal
instruments and international law.
In conclusion, my delegation is very interested in
the statements made in this debate by various
delegations, especially on the issue of the causes of
terrorism. We believe it necessary to stress the
importance of cooperation being aimed not only at
strengthening national counter-terrorism capacities,
which of course is critical but does not take into
account the fact that, as stated in the Strategy, the fight
against terrorism includes the fight against poverty and
social inequality. That in turn requires international

18

cooperation in the implementation of national policies
to achieve sustained economic and social development
through dialogue and inclusion.
We have spent many years and engaged in
numerous deliberations on the ways to eliminate
international terrorism. We therefore urge all States to
overcome their differences and allow progress to be
made on the relevant instruments, whose entry into
force is imperative to strengthening counter-terrorism
mechanisms.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset,
Austria would like to thank the Croatian presidency of
the Security Council for this very timely and important
initiative.
We express our solidarity and deep sympathy
with the victims of the recent terrorist attacks in
Mumbai and their families. These heinous attacks
amply demonstrate the need for a multilateral approach
and confirm the pivotal role of the United Nations at
the centre of our joint counter-terrorism efforts, as was
stressed this morning by the Secretary-General in his
statement.
Austria aligns itself with the statement of the
French presidency on behalf of the European Union. I
will thus limit my intervention to highlighting three
points to which Austria attaches particular importance.
First, respect for human rights and the rule of law
is a fundamental basis of the fight against terrorism.
Effective counter-terrorism measures and the
protection of human rights are not conflicting goals,
but complementary and mutually reinforcing. On the
one hand, the development of an effective and rule of
law-based national system of law enforcement and
criminal justice is an essential element in preventing
terrorist acts and in bringing terrorists to justice. On
the other hand, we all must ensure that any measures
taken to combat terrorism comply with our obligations
under international law, in particular human rights law,
refugee law and international humanitarian law.
We welcome the steps taken by the Security
Council and its subsidiary bodies in this regard,
including the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, under the able chairmanship of Croatia,
and its Executive Directorate in addressing human
rights aspects of counter-terrorism in the context of

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

resolution 1373 (2001), as well as the efforts of the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), ably chaired by Belgium, and its
Monitoring Team to strengthen the procedures for
listing and de-listing individuals and entities, in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
I would like to remind the Council of the report
of Austrian initiative on the Security Council and the
rule of law. As recommended in that report, it is
important that the Security Council be proactive in
further improving fair and clear procedures to protect
the rights of individuals affected by its decisions.
My second point is that, in order to succeed, our
counter-terrorism efforts require an integrated,
balanced and multidimensional approach, covering a
broad range of both hard and soft measures. For
instance, it is essential to strengthen coordination and
cooperation in combating crimes that are connected
with terrorism, such as organized crime, human
trafficking, drugs trafficking and the illicit arms trade.
At the same time, we must redouble our efforts to
address the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism and promote a culture of peace, mutual
respect and tolerance, including through dialogue
among religions and civilizations.
Combating the incitement of terrorist acts,
radicalization and recruitment of terrorists, especially
through the Internet, remains one of our key
challenges. In that regard, we stress the need for full
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). Finally, we
must further encourage active involvement of civil
society, including the media, victims’ organizations and
the private sector in the fight against terrorism.
Third, and finally, as was explicitly recognized in
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
capacity-building is a core element of the global
counter-terrorism effort. Many States lack the legal and
organizational framework to effectively combat
terrorism. Our key challenge is to support States by
providing technical assistance to strengthen their
capacity to prevent, to protect their citizens from and
to respond to, terrorist attacks. In this context, Austria
calls on the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to intensify
their very important efforts in facilitating assistance,
and on the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime — which has so far
provided technical assistance to more than 150 States —

08-63845

to further enhance its successful activities to develop
the capacity of States.
Let me say once again that Austria warmly
welcomes this open debate and the adoption of a
presidential statement today. That will send a strong
message to the world that we all stand united to
overcome the global threat of terrorism.
The President: I next give the floor to the
ambassador of New Zealand.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): New Zealand joins
other Member States in strong condemnation of the
recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai. We repeat here our
condolences to India for the tragic losses it suffered, as
well as to those countries whose nationals were also
affected.
The Mumbai attacks were a reminder that in spite
of some significant successes in recent years, the
scourge of international terrorism persists. There
continue to be too many victims of terrorism in too
many places. New Zealand remains unequivocal in our
condemnation, in the strongest possible terms, of
terrorism in all its forms.
The terrorism we face today is a global
phenomenon and as such requires a coordinated global
response. The spread of terrorist attacks and the
globalization of terrorist networks confirm that no
region or country can be complacent when it comes to
taking measures to combat terrorism. The United
Nations, through the work of the General Assembly,
the Security Council and its Committees and other
bodies, is best placed to coordinate the global response.
New Zealand supported the adoption of the
United Nations Global Strategy on Counter-Terrorism,
and we work together with other Member States,
particularly those in our region, to advance our
collective efforts to implement the Strategy.
Equally important is the need for ongoing
improvements in the implementation of the key
Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism —
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
We support the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate in this regard. Next year, we look forward
to welcoming a visit to New Zealand by officials from
the Executive Directorate to discuss implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) in New Zealand and in our
region.

19

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

There is a high level of commonality between the
principles under the four pillars of the Global Strategy
and those that guide New Zealand’s approach to
counter-terrorism domestically and within our region.
Domestically, we remain determined to take all
necessary measures to prevent and combat terrorism to
ensure that our country is neither a target nor a source
for terrorist activity. We continue to improve our
legislative, policy and operational capabilities.
Regional bodies too play a key role in coordinating
responses to terrorism. We wish to draw attention to
the statements unequivocally condemning terrorist acts
made by leaders and ministers from the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation economies at their annual
meeting in Lima last month. Leaders reiterated that
terrorist acts can never be justified or excused and
reaffirmed their collective commitment to eliminating
the threat of terrorism.
New Zealand has been actively engaged in our
region, building the capacity of partner countries to
counter the threat of terrorism. We continue to help
Pacific island countries meet the requirements of the
international counter-terrorism agenda. We have been
encouraged by the progress made in improving
counter-terrorism legislation, policy and operational
capability in the Pacific. In South-East Asia, New
Zealand continues to support a number of counterterrorism capacity-building initiatives both bilaterally
with key partners and regionally through the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
The threat of international terrorism requires a
comprehensive, multilayered and long-term response.
Complementing our wider counter-terrorism efforts,
New Zealand has also funded initiatives aimed at
addressing the conditions that are conducive to the
spread of terrorism through a programme of counterradicalization activities.
Thank you, Mr. President, for Croatia’s
leadership on this fundamental issue and for the
opportunity presented by today’s debate to reaffirm
New Zealand’s steadfast commitment to combat and
prevent terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Palihakkara (Sri Lanka): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate. We
appreciate the participation of His Excellency the
President of Croatia in this important discussion. His

20

presence, as well as renewed interest in this debate,
signifies the importance of this subject in today’s
context.
The threat to international peace and security
caused by terrorism has serious consequences for
humanity. It debases the traditional ethos on which
States and societies are founded. Most importantly, it
denies people their basic rights and fundamental
freedoms.
Terrorism has assumed international dimensions
through a mix of destructive transnational networks.
Those networks hum with activities like fundraising,
trafficking in people, drugs and illicit arms, including
weapons with possible mass-destruction capabilities.
They propagate hate literature and other forms of
transnational subversion. As a former United Nations
Secretary General once put it, the growing nexus
between these activities, including through the
dynamics of globalization, could constitute a
supranational subversive threat to international peace
and security.
The debate is also timely and topical. The world
has barely recovered from the shock of recent terrorist
attacks on innocent civilians in Mumbai, the
commercial hub of our neighbour and friend, India. As
a country that has suffered much from such terrorism,
Sri Lanka has conveyed to the Government and people
of India our sympathy and solidarity.
More terror attacks on more places in many of
our countries continue on a daily basis. The orgy of
attacks has led to the death and injury of numerous
innocent civilians. This is in addition to enormous
losses to infrastructure and economies. These types of
attacks by terrorists, whether they are from within the
region or outside — or even from within our own
countries, including mine, where one of the most
ruthless terrorist groups in the world, the so-called
Tigers, remains a threat — demonstrate the growing
transnational dimension of this scourge.
Terrorists are emboldened by such so-called
tactical successes as these and, as the SecretaryGeneral said this morning, they get carried away by the
publicity won for whichever cause they espouse. They
then become intransigent at the negotiating table and
brazenly walk out of peace talks when Governments
offer negotiable compromises as democratic solutions
at negotiations. Then they go international —
ideologically, diplomatically and financially. This is

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

exactly the situation engendered by today’s so-called
Tiger terrorism in Sri Lanka and abroad, after almost
25 years of efforts by successive elected Governments
to negotiate political solutions. This situation requires
a robust deterrent response to the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE) brand of terrorism and political
solutions to its root causes. That is Sri Lanka’s
approach to the issue under discussion.
Democracies today have become especially
vulnerable to terrorism and its international
manifestations. The basic guarantees of fundamental
rights and freedoms, as well as the political space
available to different actors in a democracy are
increasingly exploited and constrained by terrorists.
The Security Council has addressed the threat of
terrorism in its different resolutions, particularly
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001). The Council
remains preoccupied with Al-Qaida, the Taliban and
associated groups, against which specific targeted
measures have been taken through listing, naming and
shaming. Resolution 1373 (2001), on the other hand,
provides a common framework for international
cooperation in taking specific and comprehensive
measures against terrorism irrespective of the type of
perpetrator of such atrocious acts. The CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and the
Executive Directorate, as well as other multilateral
mechanisms and several international legal instruments
relevant to combating terrorism, can be synergized
through the Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Such
collective action would provide an appropriate
architecture for harnessing global efforts to combat and
eliminate this clear and present threat to peace and
security.
It is high time that we galvanized all these
mechanisms and measures into concrete actions against
individuals and entities engaged in terrorism, without
seeking to discriminate between terrorist groups on the
basis of their real or assumed cause or grievance. As
we have learned painfully over the years in different
places, from Mumbai to Karachi and from Colombo to
New York, no cause or concern justifies terrorism. The
common goal of such brutal violence is annihilation
and destruction — the antithesis of what the United
Nations and international community stand for.
Concrete actions should be taken on several
fronts.
They
should
be
multidimensional,
interconnected and coordinated. Such actions should

08-63845

range from technical surveillance of potential acts of
terrorism at the planning stages, focused on the entities
or their front organizations, to the prevention and
interdiction of illicit trafficking of people, arms,
ammunition and other offensive material. This should
be done at the supply end as well, not relying solely on
action at the receiving end, which is the case at present
in most situations. While a comprehensive legal regime
and reasonable implementation mechanisms against
terrorist fundraising and financing do exist, there is not
yet a robust and functional tracking and interdiction
system in place against the acquisition and
transportation by air or sea of offensive assets
deployable by terrorist groups that are banned
worldwide. The interdiction and non-proliferation
systems that exist for weapons of mass destruction are
either unable or unwilling to be harnessed for what is
clearly an equally dangerous threat to international
peace and security: the free movement of terrorist
hardware across frontiers, on the high seas and now by
air.
Some terrorist groups, like the Tigers in Sri
Lanka, have audaciously acquired aviation capability,
indicating their intention to become a regional hub for
weapons trafficking. There should be more determined
mutual assistance and international cooperation to
ensure that terrorist groups do not acquire such
transnational capabilities, whether through diaspora
assistance or geopolitical manipulations.
In 2006, the Security Council adopted an
important resolution with a view to making its
coverage of terrorism more inclusive. Resolution 1566
(2004) requires urgent attention and action by the
Council and other Members of the United Nations to
build upon its specific focus on individuals and groups
other than those covered by resolution 1267 (1999).
The resolution calls for the identification of specific
measures against such groups, which, in our view, also
include internationally banned groups such as the
LTTE. It is hoped that the Working Group established
under resolution 1566 (2004) will address the critical
issues with the attention they deserve.
Along with other Members of the United Nations,
Sri Lanka finds it timely to urge the Council to devote
more effort to balancing its current counter-terrorism
focus in order to provide a more comprehensive
approach to the security dimension of the terrorism
challenge. Only such an approach, which does not
discriminate among terrorist groups, will enable

21

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

Member States and the international community to take
decisive measures against the perpetrators of terrorism
in a coherent and coordinated manner.
Conceived in cold blood and executed
uncompromisingly, the ruthless attacks in India, which
we have condemned unreservedly, are a pointer to how
the agents of terror, both external and home-grown, are
fine-tuning their strategies and tactics. This
coordination reveals a dangerous trend of cooperation
among such networks at all levels — national,
subregional, regional and international — and thereby
confronts us with the expanding prospect of the
globalization of terrorism.
Collective, coherent and resolute action through
international cooperation is therefore imperative. This
is necessary so that terror groups like the LTTE do not
seek and abuse the cover of ceasefires to acquire and
operate illegal merchant fleets under flags of
convenience, as they do now, in order to transport
weapons and build commercial networks with other
terror groups such as Al-Qaida, as the London
International Institute for Strategic Studies has reported
for several years now.
Such international cooperation could have
prevented the LTTE, for example, from abusing a longstanding ceasefire to illegally acquire an aviation
capability that can threaten stability and security
abroad while undermining democratic conflictresolution processes at home. The policy and legal
regimes of Council resolutions such as 1373 (2001)
should be given more functional teeth. There is no time
more demanding than today to prove that we are equal
to that task. We therefore welcome your efforts, Sir,
and the draft presidential statement of the Council in
that regard.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the Council’s presidency this month and
thanking you for having convened this important
debate on the daunting impact of terrorism on
international security. We hope that this debate will
help revitalize and strengthen international solidarity to
combat this threat under the auspices of the United
Nations.

22

There is no need to stress the fact that terrorism
remains one of the most serious threats and challenges
that the world community is facing today. We strongly
condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Undoubtedly, the collective fight against this menace
continues to remain a high priority on the agenda of the
international community, with the United Nations at
the forefront and playing a central role in that regard.
The elimination of terrorism will be possible only
through collective and coordinated international efforts
led by the United Nations.
The recent brutal terrorist attacks in Mumbai,
which we once again strongly condemn, served as a
reminder to all that terrorists are relentless in their
vicious efforts and in resorting to their heinous
criminal and terrorist acts to inflict pain and suffering
on various peoples and to strain relations among
nations. Also, the latest atrocious terrorist attacks in
Pakistan have been equally condemned and indicate
that terrorism knows no boundaries and that terrorists
strike whenever and wherever they can and as their
vicious aims so require.
We have all acknowledged and emphasized the
important contribution that the United Nations counterterrorism mechanisms can and should make to our
collective efforts to fight terrorism. Based upon that
belief, my Government has committed itself to
cooperate with those mechanisms and in that context
has so far presented five national reports to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Apart from the numerous measures taken by the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran in line
with the implementation of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions on
terrorism, which are described in the said reports, Iran
has adopted and has put into force the anti–moneylaundering act that was subject to thorough
deliberations prior to its adoption by the Parliament.
We have also augmented and intensified practical
arrangements to ensure, among other things, the safety
and security of our borders with neighbouring
countries. Iran’s costly fight against the drug
traffickers who originate in Afghanistan is another
aspect of our serious contribution to the fight against
terrorism and its feeding grounds.
Iran has also taken serious steps in implementing
resolution 1267 (1999) and other Council resolutions
on Al-Qaida and the Taliban. As one of the first victims

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

of the Taliban’s terrorism and as a nation that has
endured the bitter results of the terrorism perpetrated
by terrorist groups such as Jundullah, that is said to be
affiliated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban, Iran has
strong interest and unwavering determination in the
fight against terrorism and in contributing to the United
Nations efforts in that important fight.

against the people under its brutal occupation, goes
unpunished or is even supported by certain Powers.
Some terrorist groups such as the Mujahedin-e-Khalq
(MKO) terrorist cult, that only live to kill innocent
people and are clear examples of terrorism, are
tolerated, sheltered or even supported by the same
Powers.

Our nation is still experiencing profound sorrow
and grief after having learned that 15 of its brave and
beloved soldiers who were abducted by the Jundullah
terrorist group have been slaughtered by the said
terrorist group in a heinous and brutal way a few days
ago. The perpetrators of that terrorist act must be
brought to justice and the cooperation of the
international community is essential in that regard.

In the course of the past three decades, the
Islamic Republic of Iran has been subjected to different
acts of terrorism by terrorist groups such as the MKO
terrorist cult. That terrorist and criminal group has long
been stationed in Iraq and has planned, financed,
supervised and perpetrated terrorist operations within
and outside Iran against the Iranian nation and peoples
of other countries. Their acts of terrorism have thus far
resulted in the killing of many Iranian civilians and
officials and have damaged private and Government
properties.

To yield the expected results, the fight against
terrorism should be genuine, non-political, nonselective and resolute. Associating any nation, religion
or culture with terrorism is a wrong — and in many
cases politically motivated — move that risks further
shattering the international consensus in fighting the
threat. Regrettably, there have been certain
unwarranted and unacceptable efforts on the part of a
few Powers aimed at hijacking the fight against
terrorism and using it as a means to pursue their own
political agendas. They have been unjustifiably using
the term “terrorism” to tarnish the image of nations
that may pursue a political outlook different from those
of the said few Powers.
That trend, if not checked and reversed, will lead
to a decline in international support for the fight
against terrorism and result in destroying the
international consensus which is indispensable for that
fight. There should be no doubt that terrorism is a
threat that comes from no specific religion or culture,
but threatens and targets all countries, religions and
cultures.
Applying double standards in fighting terrorism
and terrorist groups is yet another matter of grave
concern which negatively affects the international
community’s collective campaign against terrorism. On
the one hand, we witness that the legitimate struggle of
peoples under occupation for self-determination and
national liberation — a right enshrined in international
law and the Charter — is sometimes unfairly and
falsely equated with terrorism. On the other, the
massacre of people remaining under occupation, such
as the criminal and terrorist acts of the Israeli regime

08-63845

That notorious, callous and wicked terrorist cult
was long supported and sheltered by the regime of
Saddam Hussein. It fought against our nation alongside
the previous Iraqi regime and worked as one of the
main killing machines of Saddam Hussein against the
Iraqi people, particularly Kurds and others. Currently,
the few remaining members of that terrorist cult
continue to maintain their military capabilities as well
as their terrorist nature, structure, aims and malicious
founding principles and are still involved in various
forms of terrorism and criminal activities.
Despite its heinous terrorist and cultish nature
and in spite of all its brutal terrorist activities, many
members of that terrorist cult, which was designated a
terrorist entity by the United States and the European
Union (EU), continue to be sheltered in the United
States and Europe, plotting their malicious terrorist
plans against our nation. Undoubtedly, double
standards and selectivity in fighting terrorism as well
as political moves such as the recent decision by
certain European courts about the previous EU
decisions on this terrorist cult are unacceptable and
unwarranted.
Such behaviour is in contravention of Security
Council resolutions on terrorism and will only give rise
to an atmosphere of suspicion and mistrust in the
international fight against terrorism at a time when
solidarity among nations to fight that scourge is more
imperative than ever. We are of the strong view that
there should not be any distinction between the diverse

23

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

forms of terrorism and terrorist groups. Indeed,
terrorism should be fought with no discrimination or
exception.
Before concluding, I wish to stress that my
delegation rejects the distortions and allegations made
against my country by the representative of the Israeli
regime in the Council today. No amount of distortion,
allegations or smear campaigns will be able to cloud
the obvious fact that the Zionist regime continues to
display the most single immediate threat to regional
and global security through its war crimes and State
terrorism against the innocent Palestinians and others
in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, Sir, to congratulate you on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. Croatia’s initiative to convene this thematic
debate on global security and international terrorism is
very timely. It is all the more so at a time when the
international community has condemned the recent
terrorist attacks in the city of Mumbai, India, which
took the lives of hundreds of innocent people and
injured hundreds more.
We reiterate Colombia’s condolences to the
Government and the people of India and express our
solidarity with the victims and their relatives. Having
suffered the effects of terrorism, my country well
understands the extent of that tragedy.
The fight against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, for whatever reasons and committed by
whomever, must continue to be one of the priority
goals of the international community. Colombia
accords the highest priority to efforts aimed at agreeing
upon international instruments and mechanisms to fight
that scourge. That is why we have supported initiatives
at the hemispheric and global levels to prevent, combat
and eliminate terrorism.
My country has ratified the relevant agreements
on terrorism adopted within the framework of the
United Nations. It has also participated in defining
mandates and political commitments to prevent and
suppress terrorism, agreed upon at summits of the
Americas, the Rio Group, the Organization of
American States and the United Nations. In that regard,
I would like to underline my country’s recent

24

ratification of the Inter-American Convention against
Terrorism.
Strengthening cooperation and assistance among
States and international organizations is a fundamental
aspect in the fight against terrorism. The Government
of Colombia believes that this fight demands a
cooperative approach through bilateral, regional and
subregional instruments that help to address the
manifestations of that scourge. The fight against
international terrorism can be effective only if all
countries are equally committed and progress in
implementing their international obligations. We
cannot relent in our efforts to eradicate that threat. As
long as the security of our citizens and institutions is
under siege from that phenomenon, the progress
achieved in various areas will be weak and vulnerable.
In that regard, the need for policies that include
comprehensive action against money-laundering and
the global drug problem as sources that feed terrorism
is increasingly evident. The resolute will of all States
to stop providing safe haven to members of terrorist
groups and to promote the exchange of intelligence
conducive to dismantling the existing networks is also
required.
My delegation considers it appropriate that
initiatives aimed at strengthening the capacity of
Member States to implement strategies to tackle that
problem, particularly through technical assistance
mechanisms, are a priority of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. The formation of
five groups to deal with cross-sectional assistance in
the areas of finance control, arms trafficking, border
control, legal issues and other matters provided for in
Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) is a step in the
right direction. So, too, is the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s focus on assessing the efficacy of
measures adopted by States and on identifying
capacities, resources and infrastructure that could be
improved.
Recently, through those mechanisms, my country
had the opportunity to offer technical assistance for
financial analysis as a tool to address moneylaundering. That offer was welcomed and has been
channelled, for example, into cooperation with
Jamaica, through financing provided by the InterAmerican Committee against Terrorism. Also with the
Committee’s support, Colombia has hosted regional

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

events on such issues as port security management,
travel document administration and cybercrime.
The adoption of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy set a new and decisive
milestone, as it provided the international system with
a comprehensive perspective in the fight against that
scourge. It also allowed a definite course to be marked
out to strengthen international cooperation and to
tackle the various forms of terrorism and the activities
from which it feeds.
My delegation supports the negotiation and
adoption of the comprehensive convention on
international terrorism as a complement to the Global
Strategy. It is necessary to strengthen efforts to
complete the negotiation of that important instrument.
I would also like to highlight the progress
achieved in the implementation of resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). That progress
should encourage an additional effort by the Security
Council and the General Assembly to strengthen
coordination and coherence in the criteria, mechanisms
and efforts of the Organization in the fight against
terrorism.
At the national level, the defence and democratic
security policy, implemented by the Government of
Colombia, has achieved results that are widely
recognized internationally. Thanks to that policy, my
country is now able to better defend the democratic
system and the rule of law, guarantee the security and
freedom of the people, protect human rights and
promote economic and social development.
Colombia has been carrying out measures and
actions against terrorism within the framework of a
State policy that engages the different entities and
institutions, in accordance with the international
agreements to which Colombia is a party. It is clear
that the isolated actions of States or international
institutions are not enough to address the threat of
terrorism. The continued commitment of all States and
relevant actors is therefore indispensable, particularly
in matters pertaining to crimes closely related to
terrorism, such as the global drug problem, moneylaundering and the illicit traffic in arms, among other
things, which demand a joint, coordinated and
sustained effort.
Conscious of that, Colombia wishes to reiterate
the need to strengthen cooperation in that area,

08-63845

including at the bilateral, regional and global levels.
The responsibility, willing and commitment of all
States are essential for the efforts of the international
community to be truly effective in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Albania.
Mr. Neritani (Albania): Let me join others, Sir,
in congratulating you on assuming the current
presidency of the Security Council and for organizing
this open exchange on very important issues related to
global
terrorism,
international
security
and
strengthening joint international efforts in combating
this growing threat. Albania fully aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of France on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to add a
few comments in my national capacity.
Terrorism continues to evolve, while effectively
and increasingly posing an asymmetrical threat to our
common fundamental values. Combined with other
serious threats to international peace and security, it
continues to demand our proactive capacity for a
stronger and more coordinated response. A few days
ago, terrorism struck the heart of Mumbai, India. I join
other representatives in condemning that cowardly act
and extend our full solidarity to the Indian people and
Government and the families of all the victims.
Terrorism is never justifiable on any grounds. It
is a global threat that requires a global and
comprehensive response. Addressing this evolving
threat effectively requires full-spectrum political will
and a capacity to implement commitments on the
ground. Relevant institutional awareness and policylevel engagements are part of the same equation. The
nature of this phenomenon and our common drive
towards a shared objective requires participation with
and an inclusive policy towards non-governmental
organizations and civil society. Our national
Government’s home-grown strategy, which is
characterized by a developed sense of ownership and
responsibility, continues to be a key factor in
addressing and fulfilling our obligations.
Albania continues to actively participate in the
war against terrorism. In coordination with relevant
members of the international community, we are doing
our best to strengthen institutional efficiency with an
emphasis on creating systems of good governance, an
accountable civil society and a competitive economy.
These fronts represent challenges that must be faced

25

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

and require serious engagement in order to obtain
tangible, effective results. All actors will have to
continue their respective work in this regard.
Maintaining a shared level of political will be
high on the agenda. Building necessary trust and
information-sharing are a few elements of our regional
cooperation. In this framework, a holistic approach is
necessary and helpful. Terrorism is transnational and
demands transnational readiness and response.
Building compatible institutional capacities, promptly
complying with international obligations, having
positive and forward-looking foreign policy objectives
and effectively implementing a common constructive
and moderating behaviour are key parameters in our
regional cooperation, as established by some actors.
The western Balkans can offer a more participatory
contribution to international peace and security.
Tangible progress towards integration into EuroAtlantic structures can only take place by our joining
with and sharing relevant values and principles.
Although regional cooperation is very useful, the
United Nations has a unique role to play. The current
setting of international treaties gives rise to the duty of
joining and implementing them. Albania has ratified
most of the United Nations counter-terrorism
instruments and protocols and is doing its best to
implement them. The United Nations, together with
other international institutions and countries, is helping
in this regard, for which we are very grateful. We will
continue our combined efforts in the future for the
benefit of our common objectives.
The tendency to increase the number of various
bodies with the praiseworthy intentions of addressing
and tackling this multidimensional scourge has created
a situation that may need to be rectified. A culture of
cooperation and a rationale applicable towards
establishing respective roles of players despite actual
and/or potential vested interests can be helpful in
generating the potential synergies without duplicating
efforts and creating conflicts of interest.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our firm
commitment to actively participate in the fight against
terrorism. We will continue our efforts and cooperation
with the international community in actively and
successfully implementing the United Nations Strategy
and
complying
with
other
resolutions
and
recommendations of relevant bodies.

26

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): Terrorism is a grave threat
to international peace and security. We welcome the
opportunity to speak today on this important issue and
thank the Croatian delegation, and in particular the
President of Croatia, for the idea of organizing this
debate, which aims at renewing the Council’s
commitment to fighting terrorism.
At the outset, I would like to express, on behalf
of all Canadians, our deepest sympathies and profound
condolences to the families of those killed and injured
in the recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai. Canada
stands with India and the entire international
community in condemning these attacks in the
strongest possible terms. We call on all States to assist
in bringing those responsible to justice.
The Mumbai attacks serve as a reminder that
terrorism is an evolving and multifaceted global threat —
one which has the potential to affect all Member States.
Among those killed in the attacks were nationals of
many countries, including Canadians. A terrorist attack
on any country is a threat to international peace and
stability. The global effects of such attacks underscore
the importance of strong international cooperation
against terrorism. Multilateral action, in particular
through the United Nations, is critical if we are to
counter this threat successfully.
In particular, Canada strongly encourages all
United Nations Member States to work towards
implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions against terrorism, including resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Canada is
in full compliance with these and other terrorismrelated Security Council resolutions. Canada also
encourages Member States to ratify and implement
effectively the relevant international counter-terrorism
conventions and protocols, which form the basis for
international efforts in this area. We support continued
efforts by Member States to work constructively
towards the conclusion of a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism.
Canada also welcomed the 2006 adoption of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
This document and its successful review this year show
the ability of Member States to collaborate and achieve
consensus on pressing international issues. Following
on this agreement, however, Canada strongly urges all

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

Member States to work towards implementation of the
Strategy.
Since 2005, Canada has demonstrated its
commitment to a global response to terrorism through
its Counter-Terrorism Capacity-Building Assistance
Programme. Through this programme, Canada provides
$13 million annually to address training, equipment,
technical, legal and other security assistance and
expertise aspects of the response to terrorist activity, in
full compliance with the rule of law, including taking
account of human rights.
(spoke in French)
Canada believes that protection of human rights
and respect for the rule of law must be at the centre of
both international and national counter-terrorism
efforts. Measures against terrorism consistent with
international law, in particular international human
rights law and refugee and humanitarian law, are
critical to the functioning of democratic institutions
and the maintenance of peace and security. Strong
protections for human rights, including freedom of
association and freedom of thought, belief, opinion and
expression, are integral to successfully countering the
threat of terrorism.
In conclusion, Canada remains strongly
committed to the global fight against terrorism, and
encourages the Security Council, as well as other
United Nations institutions, to renew its efforts to
broaden international consensus on appropriate
measures to combat this threat.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, on behalf of my delegation, I wish to
express to you, Mr. President, our sincere
congratulations and our thanks for having taken the
initiative to organize this debate on this question,
which is so crucial for the international community,
namely, threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts.
Terrorism is no doubt one of the most serious
threats we in the international community currently
face given the fact that it attacks not only the
foundations of human security but also the principles
and values of tolerance, openness and peaceful
coexistence and, in the end, our very humanity. The
savage attacks that occurred in several places in the

08-63845

city of Mumbai that took the lives of many innocent
people have shown that the war on terrorism, despite
the exceptional efforts that have been made
internationally, is far from being won. Thus, I wish
here to renew to the people and the Government of
India our most sincere condolences.
The scope and intensity of the terrorist threat that
we see in diverse, complex and new ways should
prompt us to recognize that the individual actions of
States, no matter how much human and material
wherewithal are invested, cannot compensate for the
impact of a sustained collective and effective
commitment with much solidarity aimed at thwarting a
real cross-border danger that is likely to emerge in any
country and to evolve in any society without
distinction as to religion, race, culture, development
level or geographical position. In this regard, my
delegation, believing that terrorism is the negation of
all religious, ethical or human values, expresses its
total rejection of any attempt, whatever its source, to
associate terrorism with a religion, race, culture or
ethnic or racial group.
For Member States, the United Nations represents
the legitimate, universal and appropriate framework for
forging and strengthening a collective response to
terrorism. Member States have benefited from this
multilateral framework to develop a legislative
framework structuring their common action against
terrorism.
It is in that framework that we should focus our
common commitment to finalizing as soon as possible
the draft comprehensive convention on international
terrorism, which would complete the legal arsenal that
presently exists. My delegation continues to attach
great importance to concluding the comprehensive
convention and remains ready to contribute to ongoing
consultations to overcome the obstacles that are
preventing its successful conclusion.
These efforts should be based on the positive
climate and constructive spirit that we recently saw in
the review meeting of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy held in September. It is
now up to Member States to develop the Strategy
individually and collectively and to strive for its
effective and comprehensive implementation at the
national, regional and international levels. Morocco
emphasizes the need for close, concerted and
coordinated international cooperation to combat

27

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

terrorism that brings together political commitment,
legal frameworks and operational action.
The Kingdom of Morocco has suffered from this
scourge and once again reiterates its full and
unequivocal condemnation of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. We expressed this position the very
day when, in 1979, the initiative was taken to inscribe
the issue of counter-terrorism on the agenda of the
General Assembly.
Morocco unequivocally condemns terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations because it is one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security
and threatens the most fundamental human rights —
the right to life.
My country shares the concerns of the
international community regarding terrorism and has
acted for many years now in the framework of
international efforts to fight this scourge. For example,
we have adopted an integrated legal arsenal in keeping
with the requirements of the rule of law and in
harmony with international commitments assumed by
Morocco.
My country is determined to build its national
capacities in a preventative sense, strengthened by the
mobilization of all components of its population and by
their support for the counter-terrorism efforts
undertaken by the Government authorities. That said —
and we cannot say it enough — national efforts, no
matter how strenuous, are insufficient unless
accompanied by proactive and effective regional and
international cooperation.
In this context, my country will spare no effort to
contribute to all initiatives in support of collective
actions in this area. In that respect, by way of
illustration, the Fifth Conference of Justice Ministers
of Francophone African countries was held in Rabat
from 12 to 16 May 2008 to ratify and implement
universal instruments against terrorism, with the
effective assistance of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
In this same spirit of mobilizing against all forms
of terrorism, in 2006 my country held the inaugural
meeting of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism. In October 2008, we also hosted the second
anniversary of the launching of the Initiative, which
now has 75 member States.

28

In conclusion, my country reiterates its absolute
and total condemnation of all forms of terrorism and its
commitment to participating in implementing global,
concerted
action
to
strengthen
international
cooperation in this area. The counter-terrorism efforts
of the international community cannot be fully realized
unless they operate in a global and multidimensional
framework that attacks the underlying causes of
terrorism through the resolution of regional and
international conflicts, the strengthening of our
commitment against underdevelopment, and the
promotion of values of dialogue among cultures,
religions and civilizations. Thus, only an approach
combining the security and causal dimensions of this
phenomenon will overcome this scourge.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): My delegation
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate of the Security Council on the threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts. I believe that this debate provides an excellent
opportunity for Member States to revitalize their
solidarity and contribute ideas to strengthen the leading
role of the United Nations in conducting global antiterrorism efforts.
Let me take this opportunity to affirm our
solidarity with the Government of India and to convey
our heartfelt condolences to the families of victims of
the recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai and our deepest
sympathies to those injured and affected in any way by
the carnage that resulted from those cowardly acts.
We reiterate our categorical condemnation of
those terrorist acts and all other acts of terrorism,
irrespective of its motivation and objectives, in all its
forms and manifestations, including State terrorism.
The terrorist attack in Mumbai clearly demonstrates
again how terrorism directly threatens regional peace
and international security.
International terrorism by its very nature is
borderless. Terrorist groups, in fact, make use of
advances
in
technology,
transportation
and
globalization to exploit the weak links in transborder
situations to plan, raise funds and eventually mount
their asymmetric attacks, more frequently now on
civilian targets. Therefore, we cannot overemphasize
the need for the international community to intensify
cooperation and for the United Nations to provide a

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

stronger leading role to narrow down and eventually
obliterate the space for these terrorist activities.
In this regard, my delegation is encouraged by the
improvements in the work methods under the United
Nations counter-terrorism regimes, especially those of
the subsidiary bodies established pursuant to Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
We welcome the adoption of resolution 1822 (2008)
and the short-term goal of the 1267 Committee to make
the Consolidated List a living document while, at the
same time, responding to calls by the general
membership for the listing and de-listing process to
guarantee more stringent criteria for due process,
including the human rights of terrorist suspects.
My delegation also welcomes the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in completing the
Preliminary Implementation Assessment of all Member
States, while avoiding putting too much of a reporting
burden on the Member States.
Nevertheless, the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council for counter-terrorism need to
rigorously evaluate their effectiveness and to
constantly improve ways to facilitate the effective
implementation of resolutions. We should avoid a
situation in which Member States are turned off by the
requirements of the subsidiary bodies or, much worse,
in which the subsidiary bodies work on their own, in a
total disconnect from the general membership of the
United Nations.
We continue to be confronted almost daily by
news of some form of terrorist acts involving greater
numbers of civilian casualties. My delegation regrets
that the international community is still struggling to
adopt a universally accepted definition of terrorism
when there is agreement that we cannot accept or
tolerate these terrorist acts. To use the analogy of the
six blind men and the elephant, while we address the
same enemy, we fail to agree on how to define it. We
feel that this is important because without this
definition, we are unable to address this scourge
comprehensively. As a result of our inability to agree in
this regard, international counter-terrorism cooperation
is compromised by narrow national perceptions and
conflicting political expediencies. Agreement on a
universal definition should help to create full solidarity
behind comprehensive international action against
terrorism.

08-63845

My delegation also wishes to re-emphasize its
strong conviction that all the best efforts and resources
expended to wage war on terrorism would be futile if
the environment that breeds terrorism is left
unchecked. As a country that has gone through this
experience, particularly during the communist
insurgency, Malaysia remains convinced that the best
way to fight terrorism is to address its root causes. No
prison or detention camp would be big enough if
terrorist recruitment continues to thrive in
environments of utter despair and indignity in
situations of colonization, foreign occupation, the
wrongful seizure of land and destruction of homes,
illegal settlement, ethnic cleansing, abject poverty or
lack of hope for protection and redress.
In the same vein, attributing terrorism to a
particular religion or nationality is a misguided effort,
as no religion propagates terrorism and no nationality
is predisposed to it. My delegation calls on the
international community to reject any attempt to link
Islam and Muslims to terrorism.
Mr. President, we welcome the identification of a
new direction, as reflected in your concept paper for
this debate (S/2008/738), to the effect that religions are
victims of terrorism and socio-economic handicaps are
indeed a factor favouring the spread of terrorism. We
definitely have a new challenge confronting us: to
mend the atmosphere of mistrust, serious infringement
of human rights and civilizational and cultural division
caused by terrorism and counter-terrorism actions.
Furthermore, the United Nations should definitely take
a firm lead in future counter-terrorism efforts both
within the Security Council and within the General
Assembly.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm
Malaysia’s commitment to lending its fullest
cooperation to all States and the United Nations in the
fight against terrorism. Malaysia believes that
terrorism can be eliminated only through full
cooperation and solidarity among all members of the
international community in a comprehensive counterterrorism effort.
The President: I now call on the representative
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of

29

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I welcome the fact that the Council has
considered it important to convene a debate on so
essential a topic as that before us today: threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts. Undoubtedly, that is an issue that can be analysed
from various perspectives and in various ways.
However, if there is one thing on which all peoples and
nearly all Governments throughout the world have
agreed, it is that without justice there can be no peace,
and without peace there can be no international
security.
When the Government of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela revised its constitution in 1999, we set
out in its preamble the overall guidelines for our legal
and political conduct in the international arena. They
promote peaceful cooperation among nations and
encourage and strengthen Latin American integration
in accordance with the principle of non-intervention
and the self-determination of peoples, the universal and
indivisible
guarantee
of human
rights,
the
democratization of international society, nuclear
disarmament, ecological balance and environmental
resources as the common and inalienable heritage of
humankind.
Those guidelines have guided the course of our
nation over the past nine years, during which we have
been subjected to various kinds of international threats.
These have included organizing internal conspiracies in
order to overthrow the Government and weakening
democracy by spreading violence and attempting to
promote chaos in order to destabilize our society so
that we will be declared an unviable State, a failed
State, with all the consequences that that could have
for our sovereignty, our territorial integrity and our
very existence as a nation.
In that context, a serious terrorist act was
committed in Venezuela. It involved the assassination
of Prosecutor Danilo Anderson, who was investigating
the very people who had been involved in the coup
d’état against President Hugo Chávez Frías. As a
result, President Chávez Frías has denounced in
various international forums those Governments that
claim they defend peace and fight terrorism, while they
attack other States and promote terrorism against them.
The terrible and deplorable events of
11 September 2001 aroused global indignation, and
Venezuela clearly condemned them. However, they

30

gave rise to a policy that has various aspects. First, it
changed the fight against terrorism into an excuse to
attack and invade other countries. Secondly, it led to
the systematic use of terror and human rights violations
as a way to punish others for reasons linked to racial,
cultural and religious discrimination, which has
affected Muslim citizens in particular, as if it were a
clash of civilizations, which cannot be true. What we
are seeing in today’s world is, on the contrary, a
meeting among various cultures and a profound and
promising process of racial mixing. Despite the fact
that such a positive process is under way, what has
been imposed is ethnic cleansing, giving rise to
conflicts that loom over the global political arena and
pose a serious threat to peace.
In the name of the supposed defence of national
and international security, constitutional rights are
being de-legitimized and violated, and legal statutes
and norms of international coexistence are being
flouted. Countries are being invaded, which has killed
tens of thousands, including women, the elderly,
children and entire villages. The cultural, economic
and ecological heritage and physical infrastructures are
being destroyed in a mad spree that surpasses any other
atrocity in history.
We cannot fight terrorism — which Venezuela
has always condemned — through State terrorism,
whose deadly aggression is masked with the
description “collateral damage”, when what is involved
is families who have been bombed when they were
walking on a beach, having parties or simply staying
peacefully at home. We must denounce and condemn
those atrocities and demand that the aggressors be
stopped.
We repudiate the recent attacks in Mumbai. We
express our solidarity with the people and the
Government of India and hope that the ongoing
investigations will lead to the identification and
punishment of those responsible.
We condemn impunity. That is why we wish to
recall that, here in the United States, the dangerous
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles — who is responsible for
cruel acts, including blowing up a Cuban aircraft — is
at liberty and protected by the authorities. Impunity is
a lack of justice and is just as deadly as terrorist acts.
Today, we are experiencing different kinds of
threats to peace. One of them could be the terrible
global inequality, in which 5 per cent of the world’s

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

population consumes 25 per cent of all world’s energy
resources and the rich, who constitute 16 per cent of
the population — basically, the United States, Europe
and Japan — consume 80 per cent of the world’s
goods.
Moreover, we should warn that the present
international financial system has shown that it
generates serious disturbances of the peace, since its
actions have increased unemployment, poverty and
injustice. That generates violence of all sorts and
creates a threat of chaos and terror, because without
justice there can be no peace.
Another aspect that is a serious threat to peace
has to do with environmental issues. The planet is
being killed through pollution, the destruction of
biological diversity, global warming and the ruin of
seas, rivers and other sources of water, all of which
constitutes a severe threat to mankind and the loss of
the planet’s productivity. That intensifies hunger, above
all in women and children, which is a real act of terror.
We can in no way believe that it is necessary for a
human being to die in order to achieve peace. We
believe in consensual agreements that are reached in a
peaceful, fair and equitable manner. We think it is
possible to settle disputes and conflicts via dialogue
and negotiations, with respect for international law and
for especially human rights.
We once again call for disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation as a condition for the security of all
nations. So too we recognize the right of all countries
to carry out whatever research they deem necessary for
the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
The practice of terror has no justification and
States have the obligation to put an end to torture,
detentions without trial, special military tribunals,
clandestine prisons, kidnappings and other affronts to
human dignity.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Today the United
Nations has gathered to debate threats to international
peace and security. It is fitting that the President of
Croatia, His Excellency Mr. Stjepan Mesić, is presiding
over this discussion. Croatia has suffered enormous
trauma and has been devastated by the threats to its
peace and security. I express my felicitations to His
Excellency for not only presiding over this debate, but
for also giving us, in his first address, the benefit of his
experience in this matter.

08-63845

Today, as we discuss this important issue, we are
troubled by two very tragic events that resulted in the
indiscriminate killing of innocent civilians in Mumbai,
India, and a few days later in Peshawar, Pakistan.
These horrific devastations were thousands of miles
apart, yet they have a discernible imprint of common
purpose. They remind us of the common threat posed
by terrorism and of our common birth and destiny.
I condemn these incidents and condole with all
concerned. The President of Pakistan asked me to
convey to the Council the pain in India as he perceives
it:
“We can identify with India’s pain. I am
especially sympathetic. I feel this pain every time
I look into the eyes of my children.”
Today, in the New York Times, the President of
Pakistan has stated to the world his intent that Pakistan
is committed to the pursuit, arrest, trial and punishment
of anyone involved in those heinous attacks. Pakistan
will take action against non-State actors found within
our territory, treating them as criminals, terrorists and
murderers. Not only are the terrorists not linked to the
Government of Pakistan in any way, we too are their
targets and we too continue to be their victims. The
President then goes on to say very empathetically, “But
we caution against hasty judgments and inflammatory
statements”.
The words of the President have today been
converted from commitment to action. The New York
Times has carried an article describing “Pakistan raids
militants linked to Mumbai attacks”, in which I
specifically quote the Army Information Department of
Pakistan as saying, “We have started intelligence-led
operations against banned militant outfits and
organizations today”. That is a very important
statement, as it shows that all arms of the Pakistani
Government are moving in coordination and cohesion
towards punishment of those who seek, in any way, to
destroy the peace of our neighbours and of our own
country.
So Pakistan has cast the proverbial first stone. I
was a little surprised by the strong denouncement by
my friends in India at the Security Council today, but
then I view it under the domestic political
considerations of the moment. But I do ask, is it
warranted? Is there anything that we are not willing to
do with you, within reason? The President of Pakistan
clearly stated to India and the world that “the best

31

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

response to the Mumbai carnage is to coordinate to
counteracting the scourge of terrorism”. I think this is a
very important offer. The world must act to strengthen
Pakistan’s economy and democracy, help us build civil
society and provide us with the law enforcement and
counter-terrorism capacities that will enable us to fight
the terrorist activity effectively. He further goes on to
say that India and Pakistan and the rest of the world
must work together to track down the terrorists who
caused mayhem in Mumbai, attacked New York,
London, Madrid and also destroyed the Marriot Hotel
in Islamabad in September.
We did not wish to raise any issues, but by
jumping to conclusions, I would request that my
friends in India recall that when the Friendship
Samjhauta Express — I do not want to raise this, but I
am just giving this as an example — was burned down,
with Muslim passengers killed on their way to
Pakistan, fingers were pointed hastily at Pakistan.
Later it was proved that an Indian Army colonel was
involved.
Similarly — not a point I would have raised
today, but under the circumstances — with regard to
Kashmir, Pakistan, despite its domestic situation, is
exercising restraint in international forums, and that is
how we would have liked to have seen the aftermath of
the Mumbai incident as well. We are all aware that the
Kashmir situation is the root cause of all the problems
between India and Pakistan. Would it not be a good
time to do away with the root cause by pledging to
resolve it, not just with words but with deeds and
actions, as we have done today in Pakistan, and get that
problem away from us all?
How should we proceed? I would say, let us
recommend to each other to stop all negative
campaigns against each other, that India must help
resolve even the religious aspect. Some of those here
may not be aware that in the Northwestern frontier
province, where that matter has taken root in a very
deep way, there is a very strong quarter of society led
entirely by the mullahs. These mullahs owe their
obeisance to the mullahs in Deoband, India. I do not
say this as a criticism or to point fingers — I have a
very good suggestion.
What I would like to say is that if senior clerics
from Deoband, who wield great influence in the NorthWest Frontier territories of Pakistan and in the
Federally Administered Tribal Areas, would come to

32

Pakistan, get together and, in their tremendous
knowledge of religion, offer a fatwa in Pakistan against
the suicide bombings and the killing of Muslims that
are happening in Pakistan and even in India, I think it
would have a very important effect in the North-West
Frontier province. In fact, the most powerful politician
from that province happens to be Maulana Fazul-urRehman, who also owes his obeisance to Deoband.
So we can help each other, we can be with each
other, and we can use each other’s facilities — the last
idea being perhaps the most important, and which has
not yet even been considered.
I would also like to give the Council a few
glimpses of measures being undertaken today in
Pakistan.
First, the Government of Pakistan has already
initiated investigations on its own pertaining to the
allegations of the involvement of persons and entities
in the Mumbai attacks.
Secondly, after the designation of Jamaat-udDawa under resolution 1267 (1999), the Government,
on receiving communication from the Security
Council, shall proscribe Jamaat-ud-Dawa and take
other consequential actions, as required, including the
freezing of assets. A plan is being prepared to ensure
effective Government supervision, as required by this
body and others of the various welfare organizations.
An intelligence-led operation, strongly supported by
law enforcement agencies, is already under way to
arrest the individuals alleged to be involved in the
Mumbai attacks. No training camps for Lashkar-eTayyiba or any entity of this nature shall be allowed on
the territory of Pakistan.
The aforementioned measures, which are in
process, constitute further proof of Pakistan’s
determination to take action and not to allow its
territory to be used for terrorism. The Pakistan
Government’s ability and capacity to take strong
measures requires the understanding and full support of
its friends, the United Nations and its Security Council.
In addition to our proposal of a joint commission and
investigations, we have now proposed that India
receive the highest possible level delegation from
Pakistan to sort out these affairs and ensure that
matters are further improved in the future.
But now let me come to the real focus of this
debate. I feel that our object is to improve and

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

strengthen international cooperation and coordination
in the fight against terrorism. In the broader fight
against terrorism, the pre-eminence of operational
measures can never be challenged. However, to ensure
the total defeat of terrorists, we need to formulate
comprehensive strategies.
We believe that a simplistic approach to resolving
intricate problems will create more problems. The first
and foremost need of the time is that we promote
international harmony, in which this Council can play
an exceedingly important role. We must reject efforts
aimed at creating new divisions, clashes and schisms.
The human thirst for justice, however misperceived it
may be, can be better quenched through political
means than through force.
We must therefore promote political solutions to
long-standing unresolved conflicts; here I would cite
the situations in Kashmir and Palestine. Though these
conflicts are unique in nature, they present similar
challenges and opportunities. We should be encouraged
by the dividends of the political solution of the
Northern Ireland issue achieved through the Good
Friday Agreement and follow in the same direction.
I would like to underscore the need to strengthen
democracies and to create an all-inclusive environment
of support to fight the menace of terrorism. It helps to
isolate those who promote their cause through force
instead of debate and dialogue. It promotes the sense of
social participation and mainstreams the fringe
elements. The sinister terrorist masterminds take pains
to identify and sabotage nascent friendships. If we
succumb to their designs and actions, they repeat their
actions. If you get closer after the destructive actions,
they are discouraged. So the need is to get closer. A
consistent pattern of response based on divisions will
not only expose our weaknesses, but encourage the
evil. We need to stand united in the hour of crisis,
taking that stance as an important element of our
counter-terrorism strategy, to further cement the
relationships aimed at fighting this menace.
For the long-term resolution of international
terrorism and security issues, we need to look into all
root causes of international terrorism and securityrelated matters. These issues have been covered in the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which was unanimously adopted by the General
Assembly. We need to implement the Strategy in a
balanced and comprehensive way.

08-63845

Last but not least, we have to sincerely and
effectively address the capacity-building needs of the
partner countries. A partnership in which we are
reluctant to share critical equipment and technologies
will lack trust and amount to disarming those fighting
against terrorists. This could not only result in
undesired casualties, but would also prolong the war.
The President: I give the floor
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

to

the

Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First of all, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council this month. I would also like to commend
you for holding this important meeting. It takes place
following the terrorist incidents in Mumbai, India,
which resulted in the death and injury of many
innocent civilians. My country was one of the first to
condemn those attacks through the President of the
Republic, Bashar Al-Assad, who also expressed his
condolences on behalf the Syrian people to the
fraternal people and Government of India.
The representative of Israel has once again used
the venue of the Security Council to falsify facts about
the terrorist acts that have been organized and carried
out by her State for decades now. The representative of
Israel thought that, through attacks against my country,
she could distract attention from the problems of
violence and terrorism in our region.
The essential fact here is that Israel is occupying
Arab territories and committing crimes against
humanity. These acts have been carried out by
successive Israeli Governments against the defenceless
Palestinian people. Everyone knows that Israel is
imposing an unfair embargo against Gaza and has
adopted a slow-kill policy against more than
1.5 million Palestinians there. Israel has folded its arms
when confronted with the terrorist acts of Israeli
settlers committed against Palestinians in Hebron. The
intervention by the representative of Israel cannot
change the terrible past of terrorism — the archives,
encyclopaedias and museums are filled with facts
about ethnic cleansing, war crimes and genocide
committed by Israel in the course of its bloody history
against Palestinians, Syrians, Lebanese, Egyptians,
Jordanians and nationals of other countries.
Israel introduced State terrorism in the region.
The terrorist gangs are well known to everyone. They
include Shtren, Irgun, Stern Gang, Haganah and

33

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

Balmakh, which have killed thousands of Palestinians
and evicted millions of them from their land. Israel
assassinated United Nations special envoy Count
Bernadotte. By hijacking a Syrian civilian aircraft in
1954, Israel committed the first act of air piracy in
history. Israel carried out political assassinations in
Beirut in 1968, killing unarmed civilian intellectuals.
In the 1980s, it carried out attacks against heads of
Palestinian municipalities, using booby-trapped cars.
Israel bombed the American intelligence vessel, USS
Liberty, during the 1967 war, after it had intercepted
orders for the mass execution of Egyptian prisoners in
the Sinai. In 1971, Israel shot down a Libyan civilian
plane.
Israel attacked the headquarters of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in southern
Lebanon, killing 106 civilians who had taken refuge in
the United Nations building. In 2006, Israel attacked
observer positions in the areas of Maroun Al-Ras and
Al-Khiam. Let us not forget the report issued by the
Canadian Army, which investigated a terrorist crime
that had led to the deaths of a Canadian commander
and three Austrian, Chinese and Finnish observers.
That report revealed that Israel had deliberately
attacked their position. There were also other
suspicious operations against peacekeeping forces in
southern Lebanon.
A Belgian commander, killed on 5 September
2008, was the most recent victim of Israeli attacks in
our region. He was killed during a demining operation
to remove mines planted by Israel in southern
Lebanon. Israel continues to refuse to provide maps of
where it has planted mines and cluster bombs in
Lebanon, which have caused the deaths of hundreds of
Lebanese, including dozens of women and children,
despite repeated calls by the Security Council and the
United Nations to provide such maps.
That is the reality of the terrorist State of Israel,
whose representative has unsuccessfully attempted to
detract attention from its terrorist nature. The
representative of Israel has also labelled Palestinian
refugee organizations as terrorist groups — refugees
whom the State of Israel has forced into exile from
their lands and homes for decades. Those refugees are
attempting to regain their rights and to have recourse to
international legality through international resolutions.
Arab States, including Syria, have hosted those
brotherly refugees, providing them with the support
they need while they wait to return to their country,

34

Palestine. They have done so in line with resolutions of
international legality, especially General Assembly
resolution 194 (III), on the Palestinians’ right of return.
Like the majority of States, Syria has supported
the right of peoples to freedom and self-determination.
For many years, Syria condemned the odious apartheid
regime in South Africa, whose main partner was Israel.
Let us not forget Israel’s terrorism against the
rights of the Syrian people in the occupied Syrian
Golan. That State terrorism has been condemned
annually by the United Nations in most of its Main
Committees, as well as by the yearly vote on and
adoption of resolutions condemning Israel’s occupation
of the Golan and its annexation of it in 1981. The
United Nations has likewise condemned the repression
of Syrian citizens by Israeli occupying authorities.
Israel’s practices are tantamount to collective
punishment and war crimes, and run counter to
international law.
Had Israel not pursued its occupation in the
Palestinian, Syrian Golan and Lebanese territories for
many decades, we would not be witnessing the
legitimate acts of resistance that Israel and those who
protect it deem to be terrorism. Had influential
countries in the United Nations not continued to
support Israel’s crimes in our region, international
cooperation and efforts to combat terrorism would have
been more effective, useful and productive.
Ms. Willson (United States of America): The
allegations that we have heard this afternoon
concerning the case of Luis Posada Carriles and the
five Cubans convicted of spying in the United States
are not new. In almost every recent Security Council
debate on counter-terrorism, those cases have been
raised. They were raised today and they were raised
less than a month ago, during the Council’s debate on
12 November on the work of its counter-terrorism
committees. At that time, the United States gave a
detailed description of the background and legal steps
that had been taken by the Government of the United
States with regard to those cases. Rather than repeat
that discussion, I refer interested delegations to the
verbatim record of the 12 November response, which is
available in document S/PV.6015.
The President: The representative of Cuba has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Benitez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I
have asked for the floor to respond to the statement
that has just been made by the representative of the
United States. Given that the Council’s debate today
has been lengthy and at times intense, I shall be brief.
We understand that it is not pleasant for the
delegation of the United States for uncomfortable
truths about the behaviour of its Government to be
introduced in the Security Council. However, that
cannot prevent those truths from being stated and
repeated. It is to no avail for them to attempt
repeatedly to cover up the obvious. The reality evident
to everyone is that the Government of the United States
has gone to truly shameful extremes to protect the most
famous terrorist in the Western Hemisphere.
The decision to allow Posada Carriles to go free,
who continues to maintain contacts in Miami with
terrorist elements and the extreme right, is the clearest
illustration of the duplistic morality of the current
Government of the United States. It is also a complete
refutation of its supposed fight against terrorism. The
Government of the United States expects us passively
to accept its hypocritical call to do as it says and not as
it does.
The case of Luis Posada Carriles is undoubtedly
the best known example, but of course it is hardly the
only one. In Miami and other cities of the United
States, funds are provided and used to finance terrorist
activities with complete impunity. Bank accounts are
openly and regularly used to finance terrorism.
Terrorists are recruited, while weapons are purchased
and territory is provided to those who finance, plan and
commit terrorist acts against Cuba.
Cuba once again asks the Security Council to
assess the ample and detailed information provided by
our country and to take appropriate action. That would
contribute to the efforts to end the impunity enjoyed by
those who plan and commit terrorist activities against
Cuba from the territory of the United States. Cuba
hopes that justice will be done sooner rather than later.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of India, who has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Doraiswami (India): We have listened
carefully to the statement made by the Ambassador of
Pakistan. The issue at hand is that of terrorism, and the
use of territory controlled by Pakistan, by terrorist

08-63845

groups based in Pakistan, to perpetrate acts of terror in
India. Pakistan should focus its attention on taking
action against the criminals who perpetrate, aid, abet,
finance or otherwise support terrorism, rather than
bringing before this Council extraneous issues relating
to the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
who has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We listened to the
statement of the representative of the United States
concerning the case of Luis Posada Carriles. It is a
very simple case. Mr. Posada Carriles has declared his
responsibility for terrorist acts, as reflected even in the
United States press. Furthermore, Mr. Posada Carriles
is a fugitive from Venezuelan justice and Venezuela has
requested the United States to extradite him. Those
requests should be heard.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has also
announced its readiness to enter into dialogue with the
Government of the United States at the very highest
level in order to normalize our relations. That is
necessary immediately if we are to find a way to solve
all these issues through dialogue and direct
discussions. There is only one condition to that end:
respect for the sovereignty of the Government and
people of Venezuela. With that single condition
satisfied, along with respect for the sovereignty of all
peoples, I am convinced that we will find a path to
peace, dialogue and understanding.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.
I take this opportunity to thank all members of
the Council for their cooperation in drafting the text of
the presidential statement that I shall shortly read out. I
also thank all those who participated in the debate for
their constructive contributions. I believe I am correct
in saying that this meeting has brought us closer to the
consensus that is so necessary in the global struggle
against terrorism, which poses a threat to everyone,
everywhere and at all times.
Following
consultations
among
Council
members, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, underlining that
peace and security in the world are indivisible

35

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

and taking into account the interconnection and
interdependence of the world, reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of their motivations, whenever and by
whomsoever committed. It further reaffirms its
determination to combat threats to international
peace and security caused by acts of terrorism by
all possible means in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.
“The Security Council welcomes recent
statements by intergovernmental organizations
condemning all forms of terrorism, including
suicide bombing and hostage-taking, which build
upon the universal condemnation by the
international community of unlawful acts of
terrorism, including against civilians, that cannot
be justified or excused under any circumstances
or pursuant to any political, philosophical,
ideological, racial, ethnic, religious or other
consideration, and reaffirms the need for Member
States to work together urgently to prevent and
suppress such acts.
“The Security Council emphasizes the
central role of the United Nations in the global
struggle against terrorism.
“The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of all its resolutions and statements
on terrorism, in particular resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005), and stresses the need for
their full implementation.
“The Security Council renews its call on
States to become parties as soon as possible to all
relevant international conventions and protocols
relating to terrorism and to implement those they
are party to.
“The Security Council believes that terrorist
safe havens continue to be a significant concern
and reaffirms the need for States to strengthen
cooperation in order to find, deny safe haven and
bring to justice, on the basis of the principle of
extradite or prosecute, any person who supports,
facilitates, participates or attempts to participate
in the financing, planning, preparation or
commission of terrorist acts or provides safe
havens.

36

“The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of the work of the committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) and continues its
support and guidance to the committees.
“The
Security
Council
particularly
expresses its support for and commitment to
contributing to the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(A/60/288) of 8 September 2006 and welcomes
the adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution 62/272, which reaffirmed this Strategy
and its four pillars and called for its
implementation in an integrated manner and in all
its aspects.
“The Security Council emphasizes that
enhancing dialogue and broadening the
understanding among civilizations, in an effort to
prevent the indiscriminate targeting of different
religions and cultures, and addressing unresolved
regional conflicts and the full range of global
issues, including development issues, will
contribute to international cooperation, which by
itself is necessary to sustain the broadest possible
fight against terrorism.
“The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the incitement of terrorist acts
and repudiates attempts at the justification or
glorification of terrorist acts that may incite
further terrorist acts. It reaffirms the importance
of countering radicalization and extremism that
may lead to terrorism and preventing exploitation
of young people by violent extremists.
“The Security Council, reaffirming that the
promotion and protection of human rights for all
and the rule of law are essential to an effective
counter-terrorism strategy and that effective
counter-terrorism measures and the protection of
human rights are complementary and mutually
reinforcing, reminds States that they must ensure
that any measures taken to combat terrorism
comply with all their obligations under
international law, in particular international
human rights, refugee and humanitarian law.
“The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of technical assistance aimed at
increasing the capabilities of Member States in

08-63845

S/PV.6034 (Resumption 1)

the fight against terrorism by addressing their
counter-terrorism needs.
“The Security Council believes that the
strengthening of mutual trust among Member
States of the United Nations will facilitate the
creation of conditions for a successful fight
against terrorism, and that success in that fight
will positively reinforce peace and security in the
world.
“The Security Council, deeply concerned
with the continuous terrorist attacks around the
world, calls on all Member States of the United
Nations to renew the degree of solidarity
manifested immediately after the tragic event of
11 September 2001, and to redouble efforts to

08-63845

tackle global terrorism, dedicating significant
attention to bringing to justice the perpetrators,
facilitators and masterminds of terrorist acts
while expressing deep compassion with all
victims of terrorism.
“The Security Council will continue to
follow developments in order to organize as
efficiently as possible its efforts in combating
terrorism.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/45.
The Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

37
