S/2021/1099

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 December 2021
English
Original: French

Letter dated 28 December 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In accordance with paragraph 15 of Security Council resolution 2559 (2020),
I have the honour to submit an assessment of lessons learned from the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
The attached report (see annex) provides a summary of the findings of research
jointly commissioned and overseen by the African Union and the United Nations.
I should be grateful if you would bring the attached document to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

21-19835 (E)

180122

*2119835*

210122

S/2021/1099

Annex
[Original: English]

Summary report on lessons learned from the experience of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
1.
On 22 December 2020, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2559 (2020), by which it decided to terminate the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) by the end of 2020. That decision
concluded the 13-year deployment of UNAMID in Darfur as the first, and thus far
only, hybrid peacekeeping mission, which had begun on 31 July 2007 with the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1769 (2007) and the transfer of the
mandate from the African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) to UNAMID on
31 December 2007. In its resolution 2559 (2020), the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to provide it with an assessment of the lessons learned from the
experience of UNAMID.
2.
The present report builds on a comprehensive desk review of existing literature
and internal documents as well as interviews with Sudanese and international
stakeholders and current and former African Union and United Nations officials. The
study was jointly conceptualized and overseen by the United Nations and the African
Union under the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. The present summary report outlines the findings
and lessons learned in relation to the methods, achievements and challenges of
UNAMID in its core mandated areas and cross-cutting functions, as defined in its
revised mandate pursuant to Security Council resolution 2148 (2014), and in relation
to the unique hybrid mission model.
Context for the deployment of the Operation and the trajectory of its mandate
3.
In February 2003, violent conflict erupted in the Darfur region of the Sudan. To
address the crisis, AMIS was deployed to Darfur after the signing of the N’djamena
humanitarian ceasefire agreement of 2004. Initially a small observer mission, it s
mandate was extended to include the protection of civilians and its footprint expanded
to about 7,000 personnel. The Mission faced mounting operational challenges and
increasing concerns over a lack of financial sustainability, leading to calls for a
transition from AMIS to a United Nations peacekeeping operation. The deployment
of a hybrid African Union-United Nations mission emerged as a compromise after
extensive political negotiations and following the refusal of the Government of the
Sudan to consent to an expansion of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan into
Darfur.
4.
On 31 December 2007, UNAMID assumed authority from AMIS, with an initial
mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations to cover (a) support
to the peace process and good offices, including monitoring and various
implementation support roles; (b) security, including the monitoring and reporting of
violations of the peace agreement, the protection of civilians, without prejudice to the
responsibility of the Government of the Sudan, and the disarmament and
disengagement of armed groups; (c) the rule of law, governance and human rights;
and (d) facilitation of the provision of humanitarian assistance and access.
5.
Through its resolution 2148 (2014), the Security Council streamlined the
mandate of UNAMID around three strategic priorities: (a) the protection of civilians,
the facilitation of humanitarian access and the safety and security of humanitarian
actors; (b) mediation between the Government of the Sudan and the non -signatory
armed groups on the basis of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur; and (c) support
2/15

21-19835

S/2021/1099

to the mediation of community conflict, including through measures to address its
root causes, in conjunction with the United Nations country team. Furthermore, in
2014, the Council first signalled its intention to initiate a gradual drawdown of
UNAMID by requesting recommendations on a future mandate and an exit strategy.
Through Council resolution 2363 (2017), the mission was mandated to adopt a
“two-pronged approach” with a focus on peacekeeping in the Jebel Marra area to
address active fighting while calling for a whole-of-system approach to Darfur in
order to support community stabilization and peacebuilding efforts in more stable
areas of the region. Following a progressive reduction in the size and footprint of
UNAMID to about 6,100 uniformed personnel by the end of 2020 , the Council
terminated the mission’s mandate through its resolution 2559 (2020), effective
31 December 2020, while authorizing a six-month period for the final drawdown of
the mission to be completed by 30 June 2021 and requesting the Secretary-General to
ensure a phased, sequenced and efficient transition from UNAMID to the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), as well
as close coordination and cooperation, and the sharing o f information and analysis to
maximize synergies, leverage resources and prevent duplication of effort.
Achievements and contextual challenges
6.
During its 13-year presence in Darfur, UNAMID reduced violence and helped
to protect civilians. Through its presence, constructive engagement with civil society
and local institutions and challenging engagement with the national government,
UNAMID reduced threats to civilians, provided a safe environment for hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons and served as a deterrent to large-scale
human rights violations. The mission worked with local communities to transform
drivers of conflict and generate local peace dividends and developed the capacity of
national and Darfuri institutions and actors in the areas of policing, the rule of law,
justice and corrections, with achievements in raising awareness of human rights and
protection issues. The mission’s work to capacitate and support civil society, and
particularly Darfuri women, to become involved in the peace process and to become
stakeholders on the national political scene remains one of the mission’s enduring
contributions.
7.
The operations of UNAMID must be considered in the light of the contextual
challenges faced by the mission throughout its deployment. The present study found
that the general context and political conditions under which UNAMID was created
had a significant bearing on its ability to deliver its mandate, particularly in its initial
years. Accompanied by a forceful public campaign for stronger intervention in Darfur,
the African Union and the United Nations invested considerable effort in deploying a
peacekeeping mission capable of stabilizing the ongoing conflict, stopping atrocities
against civilians and helping to alleviate the catastrophic humanitarian situation. To
achieve those aims, both institutions had to make considerable concessions to obtain
the formal consent of the Government of the Sudan, led by the President, Omer
Al-Bashir, which had been agreed with the Government during the high-level
consultation on Darfur, held in Addis Ababa in November 2006. Furthermore, the
deployment of UNAMID occurred in the context of considerable divisions within the
Security Council. These issues which established the context for the implementation
of the mission’s mandate for most of its lifespan. UNAMID was confronted with
obstruction by the host Government at various times, which adversely affected the
mission’s room for manoeuvre to address the conflict dynamics.
8.
In addition, and compounded by the constraints imposed by the Government of
the Sudan, UNAMID faced significant challenges in its early years with respect to the
equipment and training of some of its contingents, aggravated by seve re gaps in the
availability of critical enablers and mobility assets. In the face of continued fighting
21-19835

3/15

S/2021/1099

and frequent deadly attacks against both civilians and the mission itself, the
challenges affected the ability of UNAMID to maintain a credible posture and
implement its protection mandate, although UNAMID peacekeepers demonstrated
bravery and courage throughout the mission’s lifespan.
9.
On the political front, the role of UNAMID was mostly limited to a supporting
function for the high-level mediation efforts both before and during the mission’s
deployment, particularly through the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel. The fragmentation of armed groups and the intransigence of key parties at
crucial junctures posed further challenges to the missi on’s role, with the result that
successive Darfur peace agreements – notably the Darfur Peace Agreement of 2006
and the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur of 2011 – did not involve major parties
to the conflict and thus were incomplete. This factor complica ted the ability of
UNAMID to carry out its mandated good offices function and support the
implementation of the provisions of a peace accord.
10. While the events unfolding in Darfur were the manifestation of a multifaceted,
country-wide crisis, the initial mandate of UNAMID did not address the political
economy and centre-periphery dynamics, economic marginalization and
underdevelopment, compounded by transnational dimensions and the impact of
environmental stresses related to climate change and the overu se of scarce natural
resources such as water, pasture and farmland. The streamlining of the UNAMID
mandate in 2014 and the mission’s efforts to devise more effective and innovative
tools to address local conflicts helped to address some of the attendant co nflict drivers
more effectively, albeit with limited long-term sustainability.
11. In relation to the hybrid mission model and the evolving partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations, the present study found that the limitations
of UNAMID were not linked to its hybrid nature but were determined mainly by the
context in which the mission operated and its relations with the host Government.
UNAMID was born out of a political compromise for which no template or precedent
existed. In reviewing its hybrid set-up, it is therefore important to consider the
inherent and considerable challenges in fusing the strategic visions, objectives, and
distinct cultures and working methods of the two organizations. Initially, the
operationalization of UNAMID was affected by insufficient clarity regarding roles,
disparate levels of experience and capacity, and – according to some people – an
initial lack of trust between the organizations and their respective councils. Over time
and through the committed work of officials in both organizations as well as Member
States in the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council, the
collaboration on UNAMID improved, allowing both institutions to leverage their
respective comparative strengths – such as protecting civilians and supporting
high-level and local mediation processes – in an increasingly synergetic manner. The
UNAMID experience therefore constituted an important building block for the
evolution of the broader African Union-United Nations partnership on peace and
security.
Lessons learned and good practices from the Operation’s core mandated areas
and cross-cutting functions
Protection of civilians
12. UNAMID had a protection-of-civilians mandate throughout its deployment. The
overall experience of UNAMID in the protection of civilians exemplifies the
operational dilemmas and challenges faced in peacekeeping settings with limited host
Government consent, characterized by a lack of collaboration or active obstruction
by state institutions and armed groups. Under public pressure to deploy and act to
stop further atrocity crimes, UNAMID struggled, especially in its early years, to
4/15

21-19835

S/2021/1099

effectively implement its protection-of-civilians mandate, particularly when
measured against the expectations among the Darfuri population as to what the
presence of an African Union-United Nations peacekeeping operation could
accomplish. Despite these challenges, the mission’s presence saved countless civilian
lives. Through its engagement with national and local institutions and civil society, it
succeeded in defusing tensions and de-escalating conflicts, thereby minimizing
incidents of violence and their negative effects on the c ivilian population.
13. UNAMID worked assiduously to promote protection through dialogue and
engagement, but its efforts were affected by its lack of access to relevant political
actors at strategic levels within the central Government. The mission was abl e to
engage with subnational actors, traditional and religious actors and some armed
groups, and leveraged the acceptance of its national staff among the population to
create entry points and foster relationships. Dialogue and engagement with traditional
and local leaders, and the promotion of peaceful coexistence, helped to reduce
conflicts within and between communities. As a core part of its protection efforts,
UNAMID focused on educating and building the capacities of communities
throughout Darfur on issues of human rights, addressing conflict-related sexual
violence and women’s rights, and non-violent means of conflict resolution. UNAMID
contributed to improving the human rights culture and language and helped to
mainstream human rights into the Doha peace process. Across Darfur, the
establishment of 54 women protection networks, including training to enable women
to act as first responders to prevent conflict escalation, and of community alert
networks, to enhance community-led early warning and response efforts, were
important and effective achievements of UNAMID. Child Protection Officers
operated in four Darfur states, conducting deep field visits to monitor and report on
allegations of violations against children and engage in dialogue with parties t o the
conflict. UNAMID also established over 1,800 community-based child protection
committees to foster greater prevention of and response to violations against children
and to reinforce information and local ownership.
14. As a core mission task, UNAMID also conducted monitoring, reporting and
fact-finding with regard to human rights violations across the region, but it often
encountered challenges, including a lack of information-sharing, access and visa
denials by the Government of the Sudan, and significant access restrictions imposed
by armed opposition movements. From 2015, the collaboration of UNAMID with
special procedures of the Human Rights Council became increasingly effective in
raising specific concerns, such as impunity of perpetrators of attacks against civilians.
15. The presence of UNAMID across Darfur helped to provide physical protection
to tens of thousands of vulnerable civilians and had an undeniable deterrent effect. At
the same time, especially in the early stages, UNAMID often strug gled to effectively
and proactively implement physical protection tasks. This was partly due to limited
capacities and capabilities relative to the size and inaccessibility of the area of
operations and to measures of the Al-Bashir administration that obstructed the
mission’s efforts. These issues were compounded, in the initial years, by limited
experience with the protection-of-civilians concept and its application and by
unevenness in how the rules of engagement were interpreted and translated into actio n
by different contingents, which undermined the mission’s effectiveness and
credibility early on. In addition, given the frequent hostile attacks against the mission
that had claimed the lives of 64 UNAMID peacekeepers over the years, the mission
was compelled to dedicate resources to the protection of its own personnel, premises
and assets and to adopt a more static posture. As a result, internally displaced persons
frequently moved towards, and settled near, bases and team sites of the mission so as
to benefit from its protection. Progressively, the stricter enforcement of performance
standards, better equipment and training for troops and police, and standardized
21-19835

5/15

S/2021/1099

guidelines for UNAMID military components on the physical protection of civilians
helped the mission to adopt a more proactive stance. Innovative patrol methods such
as farming, market and firewood escorts proved critical in reducing rapes and assaults
on women and supporting the livelihood needs of communities. From 2010,
UNAMID was able to mobilize whole-of-mission efforts involving the mission’s
formed police units, military contingents and civilian personnel to stabilize numerous
crisis situations in camps such as Kalma, Hamadiya and Hasahisa, as well as in Thur
and Nertiti, to defuse tensions, protect civilians under imminent threat and allow for
the provision of humanitarian assistance to populations.
16. UNAMID worked to establish a protective environment by increasing the
sustainability of protection measures through various approaches, in cluding
advocacy, the promotion of legal frameworks, and governance support. Despite a
challenging political environment, successive Joint Special Representatives and
UNAMID personnel worked to build relationships in the central Government and at
the state level, making it increasingly possible, particularly in the second half of the
mission’s life cycle, to engage and cooperate with relevant institutions. For example,
an effective collaboration was established with the Ministry of Social Affairs to
prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based violence across Darfur through the
development of policies and programmes such as the national action plan of the Sudan
for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security, which was first operationalized in Darfur. In addition, the joint
advocacy efforts of UNAMID, the Special Representative of the Secretary -General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and other partners co ntributed to the signing, in 2020,
of a framework of cooperation between the transitional Government of the Sudan and
the United Nations on conflict-related sexual violence.
17. UNAMID supported the states and communities to avert conflicts between
herders and farmers through peace campaigns ahead of the cattle migration. For
example, its sensitization and capacity-building efforts helped to encourage
traditional praise singers, who typically chanted to mobilize for war, to use their skills
and place in society to advocate peaceful coexistence. The mission’s efforts to
enhance a protective environment continued during its transition and final drawdown,
for example through the programmatic state liaison functions. The experience of
UNAMID illustrates that it is essential for a peacekeeping mission to engage
constructively with national and local institutions as well as civil society actors in
fostering a protective environment for the protection of civilians, even – or
especially – amid a challenging relationship with the host Government. It further
highlights the importance of civil society engagement in shaping a protective
environment, including by ensuring that women’s experiences and expertise inform
protection efforts and strategies.
Rule of law
18. Amid the profound breakdown of law and order, widespread criminality and
impunity across Darfur, and the limited footprint of state rule-of-law institutions
outside the three state capitals of El Fasher, Nyala and El Geneina, UNAMID support
to police, justice and corrections institutions was a critical part of its mandate. The
mission made significant investments in supporting state rule-of-law institutions and
capacities over the years, but their impact in terms of reversing long -standing
challenges and underresourcing remained limited. The experience of UNAMID
underscores the lesson that capacity-building to re-establish the rule of law requires
the ownership and engagement of a committed host Government in order to have a
lasting impact, along with the need for national strategies to guide such efforts. The
geographical limitation of the mandate of UNAMID to Darfur proved to be an added

6/15

21-19835

S/2021/1099

challenge in terms of securing the engagement and collaboration of the central
Government.
19. The mission did, however, manage to innovate, for example in its work towards
re-establishing the criminal justice chain to enhance a protective environment, with a
focus on rehabilitating and strengthening rural courts and promoting accountability,
particularly in areas where armed conflict had subsided, in order to consolidate peace
gains. UNAMID support to corrections institutions helped to bring about an
improvement in prison conditions, and the establishment of a five-year strategic plan
for Darfur prisons, the foundation of the Office of Public Prosecution independent of
the Ministry of Justice and the development of standard operating procedures for
prison management are part of the mission’s legacy. Following its support for
strengthening the rule of law in Darfur, UNAMID was able to engage the armed
movements to recognize the state criminal justice system and disband parallel penal
structures. The mission’s efforts towards greater gender sensitivity and women’s
inclusion in the rule-of-law chain have helped to raise awareness among law
enforcement bodies regarding the factors that contribute to sexual and gender-based
violence.
20. On policing, the capacity-building efforts of UNAMID for the Sudan Police
Force helped to increase public trust in the institution, but significant challenges
remained amid insufficient public investment in the Force presence across rural areas
of Darfur. United Nations police supported the capacity-building of Sudan Police
Force personnel, for example by establishing police training centres in each Darfur
state to ensure continuous and decentralized police training. At the same time,
UNAMID capacity-building efforts sometimes lacked long-term impact, for example
when police officers were rotated out of Darfur soon after receiving training.
Meanwhile, the mission’s community policing approach, through the establishment
of community policing centres and security committees and the development of
community policing volunteers, helped to build confidence, reduced crime and
promoted traditional systems of conflict resolution. Capacity-building efforts
conducted in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme were
focused on general policing practices, investigations and human rights, and
community engagements and awareness campaigns. These measures led to a
considerable increase in the reporting of cases of sexual violence and child abuse,
which suggests that similar efforts should continue to foster community -level
stability.
Mediation between the Government of the Sudan and non-signatory
armed movements
21. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1769 (2007), the initial mandate of
UNAMID foresaw support to the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreeme nt and
subsequent agreements, assistance to the political process with a view to ensuring
inclusivity and support to the African Union-United Nations joint mediation in its
efforts to broaden and deepen commitment to the peace process. Over the course of
the mission’s deployment, the successive peace agreements did not offer a
comprehensive basis for a political settlement. Nevertheless, important contributions
were made, and key lessons learned were identified.
22. The mission was deployed at a time when high-level mediation efforts,
including by the African Union and the United Nations, to resolve the Darfur crisis
had already been under way for some time. The leadership of the mission did not play
a role in these efforts for the first four years of UNAMID deployment, as the mission’s
efforts were focused on addressing immediate protection needs and facilitating
humanitarian assistance across a vast geographical area under its responsibility. Over
much of the first half of the life cycle of the mission, it s political role and leverage in
21-19835

7/15

S/2021/1099

the mediation process remained limited amid a challenging political environment and
other ongoing high-level mediation efforts, including the broader Sudanese political
process supported by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel. After the
roles of Joint Special Representative and Joint Chief Mediator were combined in
2012, concerted efforts were made in 2014 and 2015 to better synchronize initiatives
and clarify the complementary roles of UNAMID and the Panel. Th is experience
highlighted the need for a deliberate, mutually agreed framework for strategic and
regular coordination between the mission and the lead mediation team, in order to
ensure continuous information exchange and maximum harmonization of efforts.
23. Former senior mission leaders consulted for the present study have said that
more consistent strategic guidance from the African Union and United Nations
headquarters related to high-level mediation could have facilitated efforts to pursue a
coherent political strategy and avoid creating openings that allowed the parties to the
conflict to exploit contradictions for parochial gains. This observation points to the
need, in future collaborative arrangements, for the two institutions to establish clear
coordination mechanisms in order to ensure streamlined mediation efforts. The
example of UNAMID also demonstrated the importance of empowering a mission to
play an effective political convening role, even if in a supporting function, in order
to influence the political process and foster coherence in peacemaking and mediation
efforts, particularly where there is no comprehensive peace agreement. Moreover,
when numerous envoys from Member States and international organizations are
involved in the mediation process, effective coordination becomes even more critical.
24. UNAMID provided extensive support to the African Union-United Nations Joint
Mediation Support Team in empowering and enabling Darfuri civil society at various
stages. For example, it supported the Darfur-Darfur Dialogue and Consultation
following the signing of the Darfur Peace Agreement and conducted an extensive
range of preparatory workshops with civil society actors, including women -only
consultations, in the lead-up to the signing of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
and most recently by supporting the participation of women representatives in the
civil society track of the Juba peace talks, thus helping to facilitate the inclusion of
women as signatories in the talks as well as the incor poration of gender provisions
into the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, including commitments to strengthen
women’s participation at all levels of decision-making. Six women leaders from
Darfur were signatories to the protocols of the Agreement, a cu lmination of longstanding efforts of UNAMID to mobilize Darfuri women. This shows that a public
political strategy to enable civil society actors, and particularly women and youth
networks, to engage with the peace process can serve as an important comple mentary
source of influence to the high-level negotiations between the belligerent parties.
25. Lastly, the experience of UNAMID specifically highlighted the positive impact
of mobilizing and building capacity towards the full, equal and meaningful
participation of both women and young people in peacemaking processes. Its
advocacy towards the greater inclusion of women in local governance institutions and
structures and its contributions towards a gradual but discernible shift in traditional
societal norms and discourse around gender will remain an important legacy in
Darfur. A key lesson to draw from this experience is the need for missions to prioritize
women’s participation as a political imperative, including at the senior mission
leadership level, in order to engage tradition-based institutions and their leaders in an
ongoing and constructive dialogue among themselves and with local women leaders.
Overall, the mission’s impact in terms of supporting Darfuri civil society was
described by one Sudanese observer as the “untold success story” of UNAMID.

8/15

21-19835

S/2021/1099

Mediation of community conflict, including through measures to address
root causes
26. Support to the mediation of community-level conflict was established as a
dedicated priority in the mission’s revised mandate pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2148 (2014). It also included the targeting of the root causes of conflict
which, as assessed at the time by UNAMID, included the loss or severe disrupt ion of
traditional livelihoods, weakened traditional dispute resolution mechanisms,
impunity and weak rule of law, fragile or absent State administrations in rural areas,
the prevalence of arms and armed militias, a lack of trust between and within
communities, the instrumentalization of social divisions and cycles of retaliatory
violence. These drivers were further exacerbated by long-term demographic and
climate change, including urbanization and drought. These intercommunal tensions
were fuelled by the competition for diminishing natural resources, including land for
agrarian use in particular, access to water and livestock maintenance – dynamics that
led the former Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, to refer to the Darfur crisis as a
climate-related conflict.
27. UNAMID activities to address local-level conflict included the brokering of
local peace agreements and support for inter-ethnic dialogue, local dispute resolution
mechanisms and institutions, assistance to local authorities and native
administrations, and the conduct of targeted patrols along migration routes. For
example, UNAMID supported local communities in engaging with the peaceful
coexistence committees and agricultural and crop protection committees composed
of communal leaders who actively promote dialogue and reconciliation processes. In
some instances, these committees were instrumental in quelling the escalation of
intercommunal tension and violence. The mission made specific efforts to increase
the ability of women to participate in mediation and negotiation activities, including
by establishing a women’s mediation network and by supporting the inclusion of
women in ajaweed mediation councils and their active participation in resolving
intertribal conflict, thus enabling women to become visible and forceful agents of
peace in Darfur. However, the mission drew criticism at times for issues such as weak
follow-up on local peace agreements that it had helped to broker or slowness when
required to provide rapid support to interventions by Sudanese mediators in response
to local conflict, highlighting the need for peacekeeping missions to provide
consistent and continued capacity for local conflict management.
28. Programmatic innovations were spearheaded to advance protection and
prevention priorities that have provided valuable lessons and good practices for other
peacekeeping operations. Quick-impact projects were a central tool in the mission’s
repertoire for reducing community-level tensions over resources, for example by
drilling and maintaining wells and boreholes, although UNAMID faced periodic
criticism for insufficient coordination with local stakeholders or the United Nations
country team in the planning and execution of such projects. Furthermore, the
community-based labour-intensive projects – designed on the basis of the community
violence reduction modality – were aimed at providing vocational training and
temporary employment for young people at risk of being recruited into armed groups.
Building on the community-based labour-intensive projects, the community
stabilization projects were aimed at providing local communities with support to
improve the security and stability of the situation on the ground, mainly in the
conflict-affected Jebel Marra region. The community stabilization project initiative
was innovative in the way in which it integrated different programmatic tools in a
mutually reinforcing way and in its focus on improving the living conditions and
providing a tangible sense of the peace dividends for vulnera ble groups, such as
young people, women and children. The community participation dimension of these
projects created platforms for collaborative engagement between community
21-19835

9/15

S/2021/1099

members. The experience of UNAMID points to the importance of consulting and
engaging the host community at the outset in relation to the design and
implementation of programmatic interventions ranging from quick -impact projects to
community stabilization projects. The provision of active support, capacity -building
and training to local authorities as well as the capacity-building of informal and
formal community-based mechanisms can be an impactful contribution to local
conflict management and has helped to enhance both service delivery and local
confidence in these institutions.
29. UNAMID was also mandated to support the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of signatories to peace agreements with the Government of the Sudan
from 2010 to 2019, which contributed to the disarmament and demobilization of
around 11,000 ex-combatants from the armed groups that had signed the Darfur Peace
Agreement and the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The mission provided
support to the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission,
as well as to the Darfur Security Arrangements Implementation Commission.
However, the absence of an inclusive peace agreement meant that conditions for a
comprehensive disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme were not
in place. The mission had only partial oversight of the full sp ectrum of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and its operational role remained limited to
supporting demobilization. Meanwhile, the government-led disarmament efforts
lacked transparency, and further-reaching reintegration assistance would have
required additional funding for the United Nations country team. Operational
successes included the establishment of joint task forces for the coordination of
international stakeholders that proved to be an effective practice in overseeing the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes. The
experience of UNAMID highlights that, for traditional disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration to succeed, key preconditions need to be in place, notably an
inclusive political framework, the engagement of the parties, and sufficient and
sustainable voluntary funding for reintegration assistance. It also points to the
importance of the mission having a clearly defined oversight role in the entire
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, and to the need to establish
robust verification mechanisms to mitigate against the abuse of the process, along
with the focused training of personnel to maintain planning and project management
standards.
30. Overall, the experience of UNAMID in addressing local and intercommunal
violence shows that, despite the many constraints faced by the mission, its activities
had a positive effect in mediating local conflicts, reducing violence and delivering
local peace dividends, although the sustainability of those efforts in addressing
structural root causes remains modest. This observation highlights that peacekeeping
missions have the capacity to bring about positive change at the local level, especially
when different programmatic tools are complementary and follow an integrated
approach. However, the long-term durability of such efforts remains tenuous in the
absence of a broader, nationally owned strategy that addresses the root causes of
violence. The example of UNAMID also points to the critical importance of missions
undertaking gender-focused responsive conflict analyses as well as political economy
analyses to uncover opportunities to address gender-specific conflict triggers as well
as key peace drivers, and to integrate such analysis into mission planning efforts and
strategies, including transition planning.
United Nations integration and transition
31. The non-integrated nature of the mission and the United Nations country team,
particularly in the early years of the deployment of UN AMID, prevented more
systematic information-sharing, joint analysis and a collective United Nations
10/15

21-19835

S/2021/1099

approach to protection and other critical interventions. The lack of the co -location of
the mission and the United Nations country team and the absence of s tanding
mechanisms for integrated assessment and planning was a barrier to United Nations
coordination. At the same time, UNAMID worked increasingly closely with
protection partners and played an important role in creating an enabling environment
for humanitarian and United Nations country team operations in Darfur, including
logistics and accommodation, escort and transport services, and the sharing of
information on developments in remote parts of Darfur where relief agencies had no
direct access. Persistent efforts by senior UNAMID and United Nations county team
leaders helped to improve information-sharing and collaboration, for example
through discussing and coordinating protection issues through the Joint Protection
Group.
32. Emerging discussions around the eventual exit of UNAMID from Darfur, from
2014 onward, gradually elevated the need for closer collaboration between UNAMID
and the United Nations country team on transition planning and programmatic
delivery around common peacebuilding objectives. Building on the gains made by
UNAMID on the issue of women and peace and security, a gender-responsive conflict
analysis informed the mission’s transition strategy, and gender equality issues were
reflected in all key transition planning documents, thus ma intaining a strong focus on
that thematic area until after the closure of UNAMID. This effort could serve as a
model for other transitions and reconfigurations of United Nations presences.
33. In 2018, the African Union and the United Nations jointly defin ed a whole-ofsystem approach to the transition and drawdown of UNAMID, which introduced the
concept of state liaison functions. The functions emerged as a key programmatic
transition tool, enabling UNAMID and the United Nations country team to foster a
more integrated approach in the areas of human rights, the rule of law, resilience and
livelihoods, and service delivery for internally displaced persons. By utilizing
programmatic funding from the assessed peacekeeping budget and allowing United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes to capitalize on the expert knowledge of the
mission’s 90 co-located personnel, the state liaison function proved to be an important
innovation that helped to nurture a close programmatic collaboration between the
mission and the United Nations country team around critical interventions to avoid
conflict relapse, while enabling United Nations agencies to increase their presence
and capacity in Darfur. For example, 40 United Nations police personnel with
expertise in different policing areas were embedded into agencies, funds and
programmes to strengthen joint protection efforts, facilitate a progressive transfer of
UNAMID institutional memory and support the joint development of early warning
mechanisms. In addition, UNAMID protection-of-civilians staff in state liaison
functions guided the protection of vulnerable groups such as internally displaced
persons and returnees, monitored protection hotspots and supported United Nations
agency partners in the planning and coordination of community reconciliation efforts.
34. Administrative hurdles posed challenges to the implementation of the state
liaison functions, and the unsustainability of state liaison function projects following
the closure of UNAMID might have been prevented by more focused, consolidated
resource mobilization efforts, for example for critical protection -related projects.
Nevertheless, the functions served as an important proof of concept, and the lessons
generated from this experience will inform other transition contexts. For example, the
experience in the Sudan suggests that a programmatic transition tool such as the state
liaison functions can also be beneficial in advancing, and fostering coherence in, other
transition tracks such as the security and political process. Another lesson was that,
while the functions were adequate as a transition modality in more stable parts of
Darfur to replace a fully fledged UNAMID presence, additional mission capacity for
early warning and analysis should have been retained lon ger in areas with recurring
21-19835

11/15

S/2021/1099

outbreaks of violence, such as West Darfur. Lastly, it is worth noting that Security
Council resolution 2559 (2020) helped to facilitate an orderly finalization of
programmatic tasks beyond the termination of the mandate, by calling on UNAMID
and the country team to jointly oversee the completion of residual programmatic
activities that had been delayed owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic.
The unique hybrid mission model of the Operation
35. The establishment of UNAMID as a hybrid operation between the African
Union and the United Nations was unique in peacekeeping history, brought about by
a specific political context that necessitated this novel form of partnership. At a time
when the relationship between the two organizations was evolving towards a more
pronounced degree of convergence on peace and security in Africa, the UNAMID
experiment represented a bold step towards an unprecedented level of inter institutional collaboration, including through the establishment of joint coordination
mechanisms and structures.
36. A key strength of the hybrid nature of the mission was that both the United
Nations and African Union were able to play to their relative strengths and build on
their respective comparative advantages. At the same time, the novelty of the hybrid
model entailed a lack of clarity as to how it would be operationalized. Initial stages
of its implementation required both organizations to align p ositions, operationalize
strategies and harmonize processes. The hybrid mission model has, over the years,
elicited divided assessments of its effectiveness and suitability, with some arguing
that it was an important innovation that created new ways in which intergovernmental
organizations could work together to achieve shared outcomes, and others hold that
UNAMID was a compromise that emerged from the specific demands of the Darfur
conflict at the time, and which – given the considerable operational and political
obstacles that it faced throughout – should not be replicated in similar form again.
37. In practice, and in line with Security Council resolution 1769 (2007), the
hybridity of UNAMID was translated into a unified command and control structure
and backstopping provided by the United Nations. The mission was financed through
the United Nations peacekeeping budget and was subject to the administrative rules
and regulations of the United Nations. Administratively, the agreement to apply the
rules and regulations of the United Nations to all aspects of mission management
proved to be a pragmatic and necessary arrangement. However, according to some
observers, additional efforts could have helped to ensure greater African Union
involvement in operational backstopping processes and decisions, and future
collaborative arrangements could also benefit from the closer involvement, at the
mission level, of substantive personnel of both parent organizations to allow the
mission to better leverage the strengths of the organizations in sensitive mandate
areas.
38. Although constrained in its role in the daily operations of UNAMID, the African
Union served as the main interlocutor with the Government of the Suda n, including
in addressing various operational challenges faced by the mission. Furthermore, the
African Union played a pivotal role in strategic matters, notably in the selection
process for senior mission leadership. The Joint Special Representatives and Deputy
Joint Special Representatives were appointed through a consensual, if not always
easy, process between both organizations, and the Force Commander was selected by
the African Union in consultation with the United Nations, in line with the host
Government’s condition that the mission have a predominantly “African character”.

12/15

21-19835

S/2021/1099

Coordination and alignment between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council
39. The hybrid mission was the first instance of both organizations sharing an
operational mandate for a specific country situation. Achieving the necessary
alignment on a common vision and political direction between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council proved challenging because of
diverging views among the membership of the Councils. The experience of UNAMID
illustrates the importance of maintaining an inclusive and collaborative mandating
process for hybrid and other operational partnership arrangements. Significant
background work had to be undertaken by the two administrations and individual
Council members to align the perspectives and approaches of their mandating
Councils in order to ensure unity of purpose. Over time, e stablished routines and
positive alignment effects set in, for example through annual meetings and direct
liaison between members of both Councils, the harmonizing of mandate cycles and
the cross-referencing of statements and decisions by the Councils. One outcome of
the hybrid mission has been the development and strengthening of the degree of
coordination between the Councils, which has helped to lay the groundwork for future
partnerships.
Methods of collaboration between the two administrations
40. Similarly to the challenges observed at the intergovernmental level, the creation
of UNAMID also compelled the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission to embark on an arrangement for which no precedents, predefined
decision-making methods or administrative processes existed. Former senior mission
leaders reported sometimes having to balance divergent political positions between
the United Nations and the African Union on crucial issues, including on fundamental
questions related to peacekeeping and interventions. Another frequently repeated
point was that, despite having a dual reporting line, senior UNAMID leaders reported
receiving closer oversight from Headquarters. The Joint Support and Coordination
Mechanism in Addis Ababa was one effort to ensure more pronounced harmonization
between the two organizations and to enhance African Union oversight of UNAMID,
but some considered it not to have reached its full potential. Overall, the challenges
related to the joint oversight of UNAMID illustrated the effects of imbalances in
headquarters backstopping capacities between the two organizations. For similar
mission arrangements in the future, a joint coordination mechanism that is more
effectively embedded into, and shared by, both headquarter s should be considered.
Other modalities, such as staff exchanges, should also be explored to enhance
coordination.
41. The experience of UNAMID also revealed that, given the different processes
and working modalities of different organizations, it is nec essary to invest in
sustained efforts to achieve strategic alignment and the clarification of roles in an
operational partnership arrangement. One specific such effort that contributed to the
stronger harmonization of positions and strengthened working relations was the
holding of regular joint strategic assessments. These were considered by many to be
an important practice in building mutual trust as well as a shared analysis and strategic
outlook; it is recommended that this practice be maintained for sim ilar operational
partnerships.
42. The experience of UNAMID further underscores the need for mandating
authorities to clearly articulate their interpretation of the partnership, particularly in
the context of a hybrid arrangement. On the basis of the manda te, the leadership of
the organizations should endeavour to provide clear joint guidance to mission leaders
on the scope and parameters of their functions. A central coordinating mechanism that

21-19835

13/15

S/2021/1099

meets regularly should serve as a framework for cooperative le adership and
management of the mission.
Concluding observations
43. At the outset of the deployment of UNAMID, virtually none of the essential
minimum conditions for peacekeeping were in place in Darfur: there was hardly a
peace to keep. UNAMID was seen by many armed actors as an unwelcome and
unwanted guest – the result of a negotiated compromise between the Government of
the Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations, perceived as an obstacle to a
potential military victory. The Al-Bashir administration persistently tried to limit and
undermine the mission’s effectiveness, and often succeeded. Despite its authorized
size of nearly 25,000 uniformed and civilian peacekeepers, the operational capacities
and capabilities of UNAMID to implement its mandate across Darfur often remained
limited, as a result of which the mission was frequently exposed to criticism. Yet its
presence undoubtedly saved countless lives, strengthened a protective environment
and helped to build or reinforce capacities among com munities and institutions.
44. The experience of UNAMID underscores that key criteria need to be in place
for peacekeeping to be effective – such as the reliable consent of the host Government
and the main parties to the conflict to the mission’s presence, their commitment and
collaboration in implementing the terms of a ceasefire or peace agreement and, most
importantly, their will to choose peace over continued violence.
45. Equally, the example of UNAMID shows that collaborative mission
arrangements involving two organizations can be mutually beneficial and maximize
a mission’s impact, as long as such an arrangement is built on a clear mutual
understanding of comparative advantages and of roles and responsibilities. In addition,
the presence of an agreed set of procedures for joint analysis and decision-making,
well-capacitated and, where possible, integrated support structures and, crucially, a
willingness among all partners to invest, in good faith, in the collaboration can lead
to positive outcomes. A number of the lessons learned from the unique hybrid mission
model of UNAMID can serve to inform other collaborative mission arrangements
beyond the context of the African Union-United Nations partnership.
46. In the eyes of many practitioners involved in the early years of the mission, it
was an experiment whose high transaction costs often outweighed the benefits of a
hybrid model. However, many of those consulted for the present study who took a
broader view of the 13-year deployment of UNAMID pointed out that the relationship
between the two organizations evolved significantly over time, allowing both sides to
understand each other better, align processes, build mutual trust and leverage each
other’s strengths. Thus, UNAMID paved the way for a much closer and more robust
African Union-United Nations partnership in peace and security today. The
limitations of UNAMID resulted primarily from the contextual, political and
operational challenges, many of which can also be found in other peace opera tions
contexts, rather than being unique to, or caused by, the hybrid nature of the mission.
47. On the basis of the lessons learned from the UNAMID model and the views
shared by many of the experts interviewed for the study, future mission partnerships
should be guided by the following considerations:
(a) The context and need. The context should determine the nature and
modalities of the partnership that are best suited to facilitate the end of violent conflict
and to address the urgent needs of the affected population – form should follow
function. This was the case with UNAMID, whose hybrid mission model was
designed to meet the requirements of a unique political context. Thus, the question as
to whether the hybrid mission model is appropriate for other mission partnerships
depends on a close assessment of the respective context. Nevertheless, the experience
14/15

21-19835

S/2021/1099

of UNAMID revealed a number of broader lessons, outlined in the present report,
with relevance for different partnership arrangements;
(b) The primacy of politics. The operation must be firmly anchored in a
mutually agreed political strategy, in support of – or in preparation for – an inclusive
peace agreement. While it can serve as a forceful catalyst for action, international
public pressure alone should not guide the deployment of a peace operation if the
political conditions for its success are absent;
(c) Clarity of roles, responsibilities and expectations. Clarity regarding
these factors should be provided from the outset so as to minimize ambiguities
between the partners;
(d) A balanced partnership. The partnership should be based on, and
effectively leverage, the complementary mandates and comparative strengths of the
partner organizations while recognizing different capacities and resources. Strong
coordination at the strategic and working levels is critical to ensure alignment.

21-19835

15/15
