S/PV.9340

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9340

th meeting
Tuesday, 6 June 2023, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ecuador . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-16114 (E)
*2316114*

S/PV.9340

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Latvia, Poland and Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
chance to speak on this particularly tragic day.
We have all seen the terrifying pictures of the
catastrophe unfolding in Ukraine’s Kherson region as we
speak. The destruction of the Kakhovka hydroelectric
power plant dam is one of the most significant incidents
of damage to civilian infrastructure since the start of
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. The
sheer magnitude of the catastrophe will only become
fully realized in the coming days, but it is already clear
that it will have grave and far-reaching consequences
for thousands of people in southern Ukraine — on both
sides of the front line — through the loss of homes,
food, safe water and livelihoods.
The Kakhovka Reservoir, which is formed by the
dam, is a lifeline in the region and a critical water
source for millions of people, not only in Kherson but
also in Zaporizhzhya and Dnipro oblasts. Ukrainian
authorities report that at least 40 settlements are
already flooded or partially flooded in Kherson oblast,
and that number is expected to rise in the coming days.
Severe impact is also expected in areas controlled by
the Russian Federation where humanitarians — my
colleagues — are still struggling to gain access.
The United Nations and humanitarian organizations
have already stepped up operations today to try to
2/15

06/06/2023

address the impacts of this event. An emergency
response is under way to provide urgent assistance to
more than 16,000 affected people. That support includes
drinking water, cash assistance and psychosocial
support. Those efforts, which are a complement
separate from and in addition to the Government of
Ukraine’s response, include the sending of additional
equipment such as power generators, mobile waterfilter equipment and transportation for water trucking,
with water being such a key issue resulting from this
devastation. Multidisciplinary mobile teams have also
been deployed to train and bus stations across the oblast
to support those seeking evacuation. Cities in the west
are preparing to receive those evacuees — families
facing tragedy.
When I last briefed the Security Council on
the situation in Ukraine just three weeks ago (see
S/PV.9321), I highlighted the civilian death and
suffering being caused by the conflict on both sides
of the front line. I mentioned the loss of health care,
water, electricity and heating for thousands of people
and the massive numbers of those forcibly displaced.
Today’s news means the plight of people in Ukraine
is set to get even worse than the picture we had of it
then. Immediate humanitarian needs are expected to
grow as floodwaters move over the coming days and as
assessments of the situation and the response continue.
The Kakhovka dam is a key source of agricultural
irrigation in southern Kherson and the Crimean
peninsula. The sustained flooding displayed on our
screens today will disrupt farming activities, damage
livestock and fisheries and bring about widespread
longer-term consequences. This is a massive blow to
a food-production sector that, as we know, is already
significantly damaged.
We are particularly concerned about the risks of
mine and explosive ordnance contamination, as fastmoving water shifts projectiles to areas previously
assessed as safe, thereby putting people in further and
unpredictable danger. At least 30 per cent of Ukraine’s
territory is mine-contaminated, according to the
Ukrainian authorities, with Kherson oblast being the
most affected in the country. The destruction of the
dam may also, of course, negatively affect electricity
generation. In addition, any uncontrolled decrease in the
water level of the Kakhovka reservoir may negatively
affect the safety of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant downstream. Our colleagues at the International
Atomic Energy Agency are closely monitoring the
23-16114

06/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

situation. As of this time, no immediate threat has
been reported.
The United Nations has no access to independent
information on the circumstances that led to the
destruction in the hydroelectric power plant and dam.
Yet international humanitarian law is very clear:
installations containing dangerous forces, such as
dams, must receive special protection precisely because
their destruction can cause severe loss for the civilian
population. Constant care must therefore be taken to
spare civilians and civilian infrastructure throughout
all types of military operations. The damage caused
by the dam’s destruction means that life will become
intolerably harder for those already suffering from the
conflict. The consequences of not being able to deliver
assistance to the millions of people affected by the
flooding in those areas are potentially catastrophic and,
as yet, unmeasured.

S/PV.9340

Ukraine had openly declared its readiness to destroy
the dam to gain a military advantage as early as last
year. A 29 December 2022 article from The Washington
Post — listen closely — states,
“Major General Kovalchuk considered flooding the
river. ‘The Ukrainians’, he said, ‘even conducted a
test strike with HIMARS launchers on one of the
floodgates at the Nova Kakhovka dam, making
three holes in the metal to see if the Dnipro’s water
could be raised enough to stymie Russian crossings
but not flood nearby villages. ‘The test was a
success’, Kovalchuk said. But the step remained a
last resort. He held off.”

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

We have warned the international community and
the United Nations leadership about that threat. At
the end of October 2022, we circulated, as an official
document of the Security Council, a note from the
Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation on
the Kyiv regime’s plans to destroy the Kakhovka
hydroelectric power plant. We regret that our appeals
to the Secretary-General to do everything possible to
prevent this horrendous crime were not duly taken into
account. This time, with its sense of total impunity
and the encouragement of its Western backers, the
Kyiv regime decided to carry out its terrorist plan. It
is becoming increasingly difficult to convince anyone
that the Ukrainian conflict is supposedly the result of
Russia’s so-called unprovoked aggression. Only the
United States and its closest allies today continue to
deny the fact that Ukraine’s Western sponsors have
long and purposefully prepared Ukraine for war with
Russia since the unconstitutional Maidan coup, while
egregiously ignoring the nine-year war of the Maidan
Government with its Russian-speaking populations in
the east and south-east of the country, which killed
thousands of civilians and ending which was the
primary purpose of Russia’s special military operation
in Ukraine.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On the night of 6 June, the Kyiv regime
committed the unthinkable crime of breaching the
dam of the Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant,
which resulted in the uncontrolled release of water
downstream on the Dnipro River. Settlements have
been flooded. Thousands of people are in need of
evacuation, which has already begun. Agriculture in
the region and the ecosystem of the Dnipro estuary
have suffered enormous damage. I would like to
underscore that the leadership of the Armed Forces of

We
are
already
seeing
a
coordinated
information — or rather, disinformation — campaign.
We are hearing statements from the West and, of
course, Kyiv. And we are sure to hear today in this
Chamber that the Kakhovka hydroelectric dam was
brought down by Russia. Such statements follow the
same flawed logic that attribute to Russia the shelling
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and the
destruction of the Nord Stream pipelines. Drawing
such “conclusions” reeks of schizophrenia, perhaps
not even latent schizophrenia. Kyiv’s deliberate act of

We stand ready to do everything we can to
ensure we reach all those who have been affected
and need assistance, but that will neither be easy nor
straightforward. We are extremely concerned about the
people in the affected areas that we are currently unable
to reach, and we are operationally ready, at any time, to
move with inter-agency convoys and aid personnel into
Russian-controlled areas as well as those affected by
today’s events.
The people of Ukraine have shown extraordinary
resilience. Our urgent humanitarian task is to continue
to help them to survive — and then to be safe and to
have a future — and we will do so in our terms to the
best of our ability. And we of course stand ready to
keep the Council abreast of any developments.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.

23-161143/15

S/PV.9340

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

sabotage against this critical piece of infrastructure
is extremely dangerous and can, in fact, be classified
as a war crime or terrorism. Attacks on installations
containing dangerous forces are expressly prohibited
under international humanitarian law, with the specific
mention of dams in article 56 of Protocol Additional I
to the Geneva Conventions of 1977.
Kyiv’s sabotage has two obvious goals.
The first is to draw maximum attention to itself in
order to create favourable opportunities to regroup the
units of the Ukrainian Armed Forces and continue the
much-publicized and so-called counteroffensive, which
is clearly becoming bogged down and failing to achieve
Kyiv’s set goals. According to information obtained
by our Ministry of Defence, Kyiv has begun building
up defensive positions on the right bank of the Dnipro
River, which indicates that the Ukrainian forces intend
to change to a defensive posture.
The second goal of today’s attack is to inflict
maximum humanitarian damage on the population
of vast territories, which inevitably results from the
destruction of a major water and energy infrastructure
facility. The authorities of the Kherson region of
the Russian Federation are currently evacuating the
population from flood-prone areas. The explosion at the
hydroelectric plant has already led to an environmental
disaster. Dozens of settlements located downstream of
the Dnipro River have been flooded. The water level
in the Kakhovka reservoir and the North Crimean
Canal, which supplies water to the Crimean peninsula,
is dropping. In other words, Kyiv has once again set
out to take revenge on the Crimean people for choosing
Russia by depriving them of water. We are also not
ruling out an implicit attempt at provocations involving
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
At the same time, the Kyiv authorities have
significantly increased the release of water from the
Dnepropetrovsk hydroelectric power plant, which is
leading to even more flooding in the territories and
indicates that the sabotage was premeditated in order to
inflict the most severe consequences on the population
of the region. In our view, the criminal Kyiv regime
and its Western sponsors that are persistently stoking it
with weapons bear full responsibility for the unfolding
tragedy. This act can be seen as a continuation of
the systematic tactic that the Kyiv regime has used
since 2014, which consists of striking purely civilian
targets for the sole purpose of intimidating the civilian
4/15

06/06/2023

population. That is explicitly prohibited by Article 51
of the same Protocol Additional. The use of terrorist
methods has already become an official tactic of the
Kyiv regime, which openly brags about it. It has bombed
the Crimean Bridge, assassinated Daria Dugina and
Vladlen Tatarskiyand and attempted to assassinate
Zakhar Prilepin. The Chief of Military Intelligence
of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, Kirill Budanov, has
publicly announced plans for the further terrorist
extermination of Russians. And Western delegations
have not uttered a word condemning those actions.
The Kyiv regime has good teachers, who, are inter
alia, responsible for the Nord Stream pipeline explosion
and targeted strikes on the Al-Tabqa dam in Syria.
The West is used to having others do its dirty work.
But in this case, hiding behind Kyiv’s dysfunctional
regime will not work. We know perfectly well who is
actually planning, preparing and authorizing sabotage
on this scale. It is deeply puzzling that the Secretariat
repeatedly refuses to condemn the Kyiv’s regime’s
attacks by citing a lack of information, as, for example,
with regard to the shelling of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant by the Armed Forces of Ukraine despite
its obvious source. At the same time, the Secretariat’s
leadership does not hesitate to reiterate politicized
conclusions that all such crimes are allegedly the result
of Russia’s actions in Ukraine. That is an unacceptable
deviation from the principle of objectivity and
impartiality by which the Secretariat leadership should
be guided, according to Article 100 of the Charter of
the United Nations.
We call on the Secretary-General to finally provide
an objective assessment of and condemn the terrorist
actions of the Kyiv regime. We urge for establishing
all the circumstances behind the barbaric attack on the
Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant. We cannot allow
for the repetition of the Bucha tragedy or the bombing
of the Nord Stream pipelines.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his briefing.
Here we are once again with dreadful news
coming from Ukraine. A huge hydroelectric dam in
the temporarily Russian-controlled part of southern
Ukraine was blown up, unleashing a significant amount
of water, now flowing freely through the dam and the
hydroelectric power plant. You do not need to be a
scientist to be able to anticipate its huge consequences.
Estimating the damage caused to, and the destruction of,
23-16114

06/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

civilian property will require time, and experts already
warn that it will definitely have extensive, negative and
long-term ecological and environmental consequences,
not only for Ukraine but for neighbouring countries
and regions as well. Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
has already given us an initial grim picture, not to
mention that, as a result, the cooling procedures at the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant may be seriously
affected, as well.
Ukraine has directly accused Russia of the
destruction. We just heard Russia claiming the opposite.
As the Secretary-General stated earlier this morning,
the United Nations has not been able to independently
verify the facts but has clearly established that this
is yet another catastrophic consequence of Russia’
aggression in Ukraine. As we all know, there are two
parallel wars going on — Russia’s war of choice, which
is killing civilians, committing crimes and destroying
an entire country, and its propaganda war, which it is
waging in trying to fool the world through a totally
biased and intentionally distorted narrative despite the
serious recurrent issue of credibility.
Let us have a closer look.
How many times did we hear in January and
February last year that Russia had no intention of
attacking Ukraine, until it shamelessly did? How many
times have we heard, including in this Chamber, that
everything happening since February 2022 is solely
and entirely the fault of Ukraine, which, we know, it
is not?
How many times have we heard that the
despicable crimes committed in Bucha were staged?
The Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on Ukraine and other credible reports have
concluded otherwise.
Did we not hear endlessly that Russia never
attacked civilians? The 20,000 Ukrainians killed or
wounded and those millions uprooted from their homes
were an exception.

S/PV.9340

Minister claimed that Russia is defending itself from a
war launched by Ukraine. One hundred and forty-three
countries of the United Nations just do not buy it.
The world scientific community is still waiting for
proof of the biolaboratories producing combat birds
and armed mosquitoes and of the spread of pathogens
using migratory birds and bats. They are nowhere to be
seen. Everyone remembers the high alerts issued on the
non-existent Ukrainian dirty bombs and so on.
Therefore, the simple question we have is: why
would then the destruction of the dam be otherwise
when we have witnessed, day and night, that Russia
has not spared any effort in inflicting as much damage
as possible to the civilian and critical infrastructure
in Ukraine?
Did they not do everything to destroy power
installations last winter to leave entire cities without
electricity and heating, with the deliberate intention of
forcing into submission civilians, families, women and
children, girls, the elderly, the disabled and everyone
actually or of leading them to freeze to death? What
is there to say about the 2,600 schools and more than
1,250 health facilities destroyed or damaged already?
This is not about who speaks first; this is not about
who speaks louder. This is about truth, rules, laws
and accountability. And the international law is clear:
deliberate attacks on critical civilian infrastructure
amount to war crimes. The perpetrators directly or
indirectly involved in such acts must be held accountable.
Whoever thinks that such acts, like others before
it, despite their dire consequences, will affect the spirit
of Ukrainians and deter them from fighting to defend
and liberate their country should think twice, because,
in all this, Ukraine is right, and Russia is wrong. That
is why the international community will continue to
help Ukraine and its people to defend themselves, their
freedom and their dignity.

Did they not say that Russia never forcefully
deported children to give them up for adoption in
Russia? The Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on Ukraine and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe’s Moscow Mechanism have
proved otherwise and reached different conclusions.

There is only one way to put an end to the
consequences of this war and that is the complete
withdrawal of all Russian troops from the internationally
recognized border of Ukraine and engaging in sincere
talks on finding solutions through diplomacy. Anything
else would be perpetuating what we have seen so
far — madness.

The world witnessed in disbelief a room full of
people laughing in New Delhi when the Russian Foreign

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his briefing.

23-161145/15

S/PV.9340

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Today we have seen yet another tragic outcome of
Russia’s unprovoked, full-scale invasion of Ukraine.
It is deeply alarming and concerning that the Nova
Kakhovka dam, a crucial hydroelectric plant on the
Dnipro River, was destroyed. Its destruction has
caused devastating floods and impacted the lives and
livelihoods of tens of thousands of Ukrainian civilians
along the river. We are in close touch with Ukrainian
authorities on providing assistance to the many civilians
displaced and forced to flee their homes for safety. And
we will continue to work with humanitarian partners on
the ground to provide assistance.
We regret the Council must meet on an urgent
basis to discuss the destruction of the dam, which
is yet another casualty in Russia’s brutal, full-scale
invasion of Ukraine. I want to make absolutely clear:
it was Russia that started this war, it was Russia that
occupied this area of Ukraine and it was Russian forces
that took over the dam illegally last year and have been
occupying ever since.
To be clear, deliberate attacks on civilian objects
are prohibited by the law of war. As a party to Protocol
II Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949, Russia
has an obligation not to attack works or installations
containing “dangerous forces, namely dams,” if such
attack may cause the release of dangerous forces and
severe losses among the civilian population (Part IV,
article 15).
The international community is again confronted
with the devastation, immeasurable human toll and
catastrophic damage to Ukraine’s critical infrastructure
caused by Russia’s illegal war.
The dam’s destruction risks massive ecological
devastation, as Ukraine’s already badly damaged
critical infrastructure must once again absorb a
devastating blow. Those downstream are under flood
risk. The water supply to southern Ukraine, including
Crimea, is at risk. Agricultural lands will likely also
be impacted, further disrupting food production and
impacting global food security.
The dam’s destruction undermines the stability of
Ukraine’s power supply and could create additional
challenges to maintaining safety in and around the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. Although we
understand the dam’s destruction poses no immediate
risk to the nuclear safety of the plant in the short
term, we reiterate the call of the Director-General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA):
6/15

06/06/2023

Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant’s cooling pond, which
draws water from the dam’s reservoir, must maintain
its integrity and access to water, which is essential
for cooling the reactors and their spent fuel. We call
on Russia to reconnect the sensors that automatically
report data to Ukraine’s civilian regulators and to
allow the IAEA to ensure the international community
has reliable information on any radioactivity around
the plant.
While investigations are under way, I will say
again: the latest humanitarian, agricultural, energy and
environmental crisis would not even exist had Russia
not launched its brutal war against Ukraine. Russia’s
full-scale invasion continues to put innocent lives at
risk and decimates the infrastructure, livelihoods and
safety of the Ukrainian people.
The United States will continue to work with the
international community to hold Russia to account for
its aggression. We will continue to support Ukraine to
defend itself in the face of the Kremlin’s brutality. The
way forward is clear: Russia must withdraw its troops
from Ukraine’s internationally recognized borders. It
must end this war, and it must end the untold human
suffering it has wrought.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I am grateful to
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his briefing.
The destruction of the Nova Kakhovka dam is
truly an abhorrent act. The United Kingdom stands in
solidarity with Ukraine and the thousands of Ukrainians
who are tonight evacuating their homes or facing
terrible damage to their livelihoods or water supply.
We stand ready to support Ukraine and all those
affected by this catastrophe. And we are already
working with humanitarian partners on the ground to
supply aid. The United Kingdom has helped support
them to pre-position supplies in case of an emergency
like this.
As we have heard, this act has put thousands of
civilians in danger and is causing severe environmental
damage to the surrounding area. Flooding threatens to
contaminate water supplies and vital natural habitats.
Vast swathes of agricultural land and electricity
supplies are also at risk. This in turn threatens food
production and the international food trade.
This is the latest of many tragic consequences of
President Putin’s war, which will bring further terrible
suffering to the people of Ukraine.
23-16114

06/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We have seen Russia indiscriminately attack
civilians and critical civilian infrastructure time and
time again in this war. If Russia proves to be responsible,
it would be a new low in its conduct of this brutal war.
We will continue to carefully assess the evidence
in the coming days. But let me repeat what we have
said throughout: now is the time for President Putin
to withdraw all his forces from Ukraine’s sovereign
territory and bring his war of aggression to an end.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I too welcome the urgent convening of this meeting,
and I welcome the briefing by Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
We express our strongest condemnation of the
destruction of the Nova Kakhovka dam in the Kherson
region of Ukraine, which, according to the International
Committee of the Red Cross, is one of the most
significant pieces of damage to critical infrastructure
in Ukraine since the beginning of Russia’s military
aggression in February 2022.
The impact of such destruction has alarming
ecological, economic and humanitarian consequences.
The devastation, the loss of homes, the disruption of
vital health services and the large-scale evacuations
are deplorable. We are also concerned about how long
the impact of this destruction on people and their
livelihoods will last. We regret that this is happening
when only a fortnight ago we held a meeting in the
Council on the protection of civilians (see S/PV.9327),
in the context of the fifth anniversary of resolution 2417
(2018).
With more than 700 critical infrastructure facilities
damaged or destroyed by the war, lives and access to
basic services continue to be jeopardized, affecting
women and children in particular.
We reiterate the centrality of accountability to
ensure that no attack on civilian infrastructure goes
unpunished. We recall that the parties must comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law and that dams must be afforded special protection
at all times because of the risk to the population if they
are damaged.
We regret that the mitigation and response
capacities in the dam area are adversely affected due to
the de facto interim administrative situation resulting
from the invasion and military occupation. We support

S/PV.9340

the call of Secretary-General António Guterres for safe
and unimpeded humanitarian access so as to facilitate
a timely response.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners for vital assistance, including
safe drinking water. We also express our appreciation
for the immediate reaction of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency with regard
to the safety implications of this destruction for the
safety of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and
support his determination to visit the plant next week,
as already planned, in order to continue his efforts to
prevent a nuclear disaster.
We urge the Security Council to support and equip
the Secretary-General with all the tools necessary to
intensify his efforts in key areas related to this war.
Finally, we reiterate Russia’s obligation to withdraw
its occupation troops from Ukraine.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
The partial destruction last night of the Nova
Kakhovka dam, in the Kherson region, is a particularly
serious act. It illustrates once again the disastrous
consequences of Russian aggression, particularly on
Ukrainian civilian infrastructure. None of this would
have happened if Russian troops had not invaded
Ukraine and if Russia had respected the Charter of the
United Nations.
France is deeply concerned about the humanitarian,
environmental and economic impact of this disaster.
Massive flooding has been reported in dozens of
localities. Thousands of Ukrainians have had to be
evacuated. France is ready to respond to requests from
the Ukrainian authorities to help the people affected.
The destruction of the dam further increases
the threat to the safety and security systems of the
Zaporizhzhya power plant. France expresses its full
support for the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in his efforts to preserve the
integrity of the site.
France once again calls on Russia to completely,
immediately and unconditionally withdraw its armed
forces from all Ukrainian territory. That is the only
way to avoid further tragedies of this kind.
Russia will be held to account for the crimes
committed in Ukraine. It will have to pay for the

23-161147/15

S/PV.9340

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

long-term reconstruction of Ukraine. That is why, in
Reykjavik, the Council of Europe responded to the call
from the General Assembly and Ukraine by creating a
register to document that damage. This is an important
step. We call on all States to join it.
We will continue to stand by the Ukrainian people
in the fight they have been waging for over 15 months
to exercise their right to self-defence and preserve their
territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I also thank Under SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for his briefing.
We are seeing an ongoing catastrophe at the Nova
Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant. According to the
United Nations, it has already caused at least 16,000
people to lose their homes, with safe and clean drinking
water supplies at risk for many more. The effects
will likely be long-lasting. We express our deepest
sympathies to all those affected by this catastrophe for
their loss and suffering.
We take note that the International Atomic Energy
Agency assesses that there is no immediate risk to
the safety of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
Nevertheless, it is particularly regrettable that this
incident occurred just after last week’s discussion in this
Chamber on nuclear safety in Ukraine (see S/PV.9334).
We are seriously concerned about what is described
in today’s letter from Ukraine to the President of the
Security Council as the process of assessing the
situation on the ground continues. What is clear is
that this would not have happened if Russia had not
launched its aggression against Ukraine in the first
place. We recall the statement of the Secretary-General
today that this is another devastating consequence of
the Russian aggression against Ukraine.
We once again urge Russia to stop its ongoing
aggression and immediately, completely and
unconditionally withdraw its troops and military
equipment from the entire internationally recognized
territory of Ukraine. Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine constitutes a flagrant violation of international
law, in particular the Charter of the United Nations.
There must be no impunity for war crimes and other
atrocities, including attacks against civilians and
critical civilian infrastructure.
Our support for Ukraine will not waver. We are
renewing our commitment to provide the financial,
8/15

06/06/2023

humanitarian, military and diplomatic support Ukraine
requires for as long as it takes.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I too thank UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for his briefing.
My delegation is deeply alarmed by emerging
reports of extensive damage to the Nova Kakhovka
hydroelectric power plant and its consequential
flooding of several settlements in the Kherson region.
We are particularly concerned by the further disruptions
to the lives of civilians in the region and those that
rely on the dam for energy and water supply. We are
equally concerned about the immediate and longterm ecological and economic fallouts, as well as the
possible risks to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
It is important that the circumstances surrounding
the damage to the dam are independently verified to
prevent future occurrences and ensure accountability
where necessary. We urge restraint by the parties from
further actions that could risk the safety and security
of other highly sensitive infrastructure, which, if
compromised, could bring catastrophic consequences
for the people of Ukraine and beyond. We further
urge the parties to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law requiring conflicting
parties to ensure distinction, necessity, proportionality
and humanity.
As we understand from the unfolding situation,
many people are likely to be displaced by the flooding.
We therefore welcome the immediate deployment
of humanitarian support by the United Nations in
coordination with the Government of Ukraine, as
indicated by the Secretary-General. In this regard, we
reiterate the call for humanitarian access to all affected
settlements and communities.
It is important to acknowledge that this unfortunate
development is taking place in the context of the
Russian Federation’s unjustified aggression against
Ukraine, and without an end to the war, all other critical
infrastructure in Ukraine remains at risk of accidental
or deliberate damage. We re-echo the appeals for peace
and the immediate cessation of hostilities through the
Russian Federation’s unconditional withdrawal of its
troops from the internationally recognized borders
of Ukraine.
Finally, it is my delegation’s expectation that
the Council will be provided with more clarity on
the situation.
23-16114

06/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9340

Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I would also like to thank the DeputySecretary-General for his enlightening briefing.

long. We continue to encourage initiatives aimed at
bringing the parties to the negotiating table to achieve
peace and peaceful coexistence.

It was exactly one week ago today that the Security
Council met in this Chamber to discuss the imminent
risk to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant following
its disconnection from the national power grid (see
S/PV.9334). In his briefing to Council members, the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) called for restraint and de-escalation
on the part of the belligerents and presented the five
principles for guaranteeing nuclear safety and security.

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for his briefing.

Despite repeated calls from Council members
and the international community as a whole for a
cessation of hostilities, and in particular for a halt
to military activity in and around the nuclear power
plant, the fighting continues, and with it attacks on
strategic infrastructure. The attack on the Kakhovka
hydroelectric dam, located in the Kherson region, is
an act that adds to the uncertainty surrounding the
safety and security of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant, which draws part of the energy it uses to cool its
reactors from the dam. We welcome the responsiveness
of IAEA experts, whose presence on site enabled a team
to be deployed immediately. We hope that the situation
can be dealt with as quickly as possible to contain the
potential risks.
We are deeply concerned by this attack on civilian
infrastructure and fear the potential consequences for
civilian populations, economic activity in the region
and the environment, as the Deputy-Secretary-General
has so aptly described just now. As we speak, over
16,000 civilians are being evacuated from the affected
areas. These thousands of disaster victims add to
the millions of people in humanitarian need, which
makes the humanitarian situation in the country even
more complex.
My country reiterates that nuclear power plants and
hydroelectric installations are civilian infrastructure
protected by international humanitarian law. The
belligerents must comply with this law and refrain
from any attack on this essential infrastructure. We
also reiterate our support for the IAEA and recognize
its leading role in maintaining the safety and security of
nuclear facilities. We also urge the parties to cooperate
fully with the IAEA.
We reiterate our call for dialogue to find a
diplomatic solution to this war, which has gone on too

Brazil extends its solidarity to the people affected
by the collapse of the dam at the Kakhovka hydroelectric
power plant. In view of the seriousness of the incident
and its potential consequences, we consider evacuation
efforts in the areas downstream of the Dnipro River
to be a priority and urge the parties to the conflict
in Ukraine to facilitate access for rescue teams and
humanitarian workers.
We express our concern about the risks that the
incident poses to the safety of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant. Even though the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) considers that there is
no immediate danger, the possibility that the rupture
of the dam might affect the supply of water for cooling
reactors and nuclear waste is a reminder of how close
we may be to a nuclear catastrophe. We encourage
parties to refrain from actions that could lead to this
scenario and to increase their engagement with the
IAEA to ensure the safety of nuclear facilities.
We also regret the environmental damage to the
lower Dnipro and the surrounding area. The recovery
of the affected region may require years of effort.
We consider it essential to investigate the incident
and hold those involved accountable. More important,
however, is to bear in mind that the rupture of the dam
would not have occurred if Russia and Ukraine were at
peace. Prolonged hostilities are likely to lead to further
tragedies in future. We echo the Secretary-General’s
call for an end to violence, a just peace and respect for
international humanitarian law.
In recent weeks, several Member States have
approached the parties in attempts to engage them in
the pursuit of a peaceful solution to the conflict. We
hope that these initiatives will result in the resumption
of dialogue and the cessation of hostilities, so that
reconstruction can finally begin. This is the wish of
the vast majority of the States Members of the United
Nations. It is also in line with our obligations under the
United Nations Charter and the needs of the civilian
population of Ukraine.

23-161149/15

S/PV.9340

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for his briefing.
Switzerland is gravely concerned by the destruction
of the Nova Kakhovka dam. The developments of
the last few hours further increase the burden on a
population suffering from Russia’s military aggression
against Ukraine. The extent of the damage is still
difficult to determine, but it is already certain that we
are facing — in the words of the Secretary-General — a
humanitarian, economic and ecological catastrophe. It
deserves our full attention.
The images reaching us from the city of Kherson
and other towns and villages along the Dnipro River
are frightening. At this very moment, large-scale
evacuations are under way on both sides of the
frontline. Thousands of people are likely to be affected.
In addition to the devastating short-term consequences
in southern Ukraine, we must be prepared for serious
long-term consequences.
Switzerland is concerned about the risks that
massive flooding could pose to the environment, as
well as to energy and food security, including water
supplies. This event is a sad example of the links
between water and civil protection that the Security
Council has addressed in the past.
Finally, the cooling system at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant could be affected. We are continuing
to closely follow the assessments of the International
Atomic Energy Agency on this subject.
In this crisis situation, the protection of the
civilian population must be the priority. We express
our full support for the immediate response by the
United Nations and humanitarian partners, which, in
coordination with the Government of Ukraine, are
doing their utmost to provide essential aid, in particular
to guarantee the supply of drinking water. Switzerland
calls for rapid and unimpeded access for humanitarian
aid to be guaranteed throughout the territory of Ukraine.
Given the urgency and gravity of the situation,
we reiterate that attacks on civilian infrastructure are
unacceptable. They must stop immediately. Whether
the Nova Kakhovka dam is considered a civilian facility
or a military objective, it is protected under the rules
of international humanitarian law. Violations of those
rules cannot be tolerated. Those responsible must be
identified and held to account.
10/15

06/06/2023

We also reiterate our call for full respect for
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations. And we call on Russia to immediately de-escalate
the situation and to withdraw its troops from Ukraine’s
territory without delay. Failure to respect international
law in general, and international humanitarian law and
human rights in particular, undermines the foundation
of international security — the security of us all. We
must never forget that.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I too thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his sobering briefing.
Malta is seriously concerned about the latest
developments and strongly condemns the attack on
the Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant dam. This
is another attack against Ukrainian civilian critical
infrastructure, and yet another flagrant violation of
international law and international humanitarian law.
The resulting flooding from the destruction of
the dam has caused catastrophic damage. It has put
at risk the lives of civilians, further aggravating the
humanitarian situation in the country. As we heard from
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths, reaching those in
need of assistance will not be easy or straightforward.
Thousands of people are at risk. People living in
low-lying parts of the city of Kherson, less than 50
miles downstream, have been warned to evacuate as
quickly as possible and to seek shelter on higher ground.
Eight villages have been completely flooded, with more
expected to flood as we speak. At least 16,000 people
have lost their homes, with safe and clean drinking
water supplies in jeopardy for thousands more.
This attack has also brought with it irreversible
environmental consequences. The river has now been
contaminated with 150 tons of industrial lubricant.
Furthermore, dropping water levels in the dam affect
access to one of the main critical cooling sources for
the reactors at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
and put at risk the proper functioning of the plant’s
safety and security systems. That violates, in every way
possible, the International Atomic Energy Agency’s
five principles for ensuring nuclear security and safety.
We emphasize that civilians and civilian
infrastructure are not and must not be targets.
Intentionally targeting them constitutes a war crime.
Malta stresses its determination to make sure that the
perpetrators of such crimes are held accountable in
line with international law. Accountability must be our
23-16114

06/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

priority, and perpetrators must know that justice will
ultimately prevail.
In the meantime, Malta will continue to support
all efforts to address the consequences of Russia’s
aggression. We once again urge Russia to immediately
cease all hostilities and unconditionally, completely
and immediately withdraw all its forces and military
equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. We continue
to express our unequivocal support for Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and deplore any
behaviour that seeks to escalate the conflict further.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I thank the
presidency for promptly convening this briefing to the
Security Council at the request of both the Russian
Federation and Ukraine. I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for his update on this
worrisome situation. I acknowledge the participation
in today’s meeting of the permanent representative
of Ukraine.
While there are still conflicting accounts on the
attribution and the apportionment of blame, and indeed
of the causes of the damage to the hydro dam, there should
be no reservation in condemning it if it is confirmed
that it was due to a deliberate act of sabotage. As people
scramble to contain the humanitarian and ecological
fallout of the damage, the sad reality is that this act, if
proven to be deliberate and premeditated, adds another
reckless dimension to the steadily escalatory trend of
this conflict. It comes as there is no end in sight to the
hostilities after 16 months of conflict and amid reports
of increased battlefield activity. Mozambique warns of
the global repercussions of the looming environmental
disaster, particularly to populations and ecosystems in
the immediate vicinity of the incident, but also to an
already strained global food and grain supply chain.
The deliberate weaponization and targeting of
civilian infrastructure in time of war is a violation
of international humanitarian law, as repeatedly
stated in various products of the Council and relevant
international treaties, such as Protocol Additional I to
the Geneva Conventions of 1977, which
“prohibits [the use of] methods of warfare that
are intended, or may be expected, to cause
widespread, long-term and severe damage to the
natural environment”

S/PV.9340

Parties must know that they should be accountable
for those acts. Mozambique recognizes the importance
of both parties calling the Council’s attention to the
ongoing emergency. However, we remain steadfast in
our appeals to them to resume direct negotiations aimed
at finding a lasting solution consistent with the Charter
of the United Nations. Mozambique warned last week
against the risk of misunderstandings, miscalculation
and collateral damage being ever-present in this
conflict among erstwhile neighbours and brothers (see
S/PV.9334).
In conclusion, we strongly reiterate our call for
the immediate cessation of hostilities and the return
to direct negotiations between the parties as a matter
of urgency.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to start by thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this emergency meeting. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for his briefing.
The protection of civilians and critical civilian
infrastructure in armed conflict is an important
principle enshrined in international humanitarian law.
We express our grave concern about the destruction of
the dam at the Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant. We
are deeply concerned about the resulting humanitarian,
economic and ecological consequences. We call on
all the parties to the conflict to abide by international
humanitarian law and to do their utmost to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure.
The collapse of the dam has caused major flooding.
A great number of people are in urgent need of
evacuation, and tens of thousands more people may face
difficulties in accessing drinking water. We support the
active efforts by the United Nations and humanitarian
agencies to assist to the best of their abilities in the
evacuation of the affected population, followed by
further assistance.
The Kakhovka reservoir is also a major source
of cooling water for the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant. We note that the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency has confirmed
that the incident has not yet posed any safety risk to the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. However, the water
in the reservoir continues to recede, and it may not
be possible to continue pumping water to the nuclear
power plant in the future. China reiterates that, in the
event of a nuclear disaster, no one is immune. We call
for maximum restraint and to refrain from words and

23-1611411/15

S/PV.9340

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

deeds that could escalate confrontation and lead to
miscalculation, as well as for maintaining the safety
and security of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
China is concerned about the protraction or even
further escalation of the crisis in Ukraine. What has
just happened reminds us once again that anything
can happen in a conflict situation. As long as the
flames of war rage on, it will only bring about greater
suffering and more disasters, creating more grave and
unpredictable risks.
The parties concerned should submit to good sense,
exercise restraint and resume peace talks as soon as
possible. The international community should spare
no effort with a greater sense of urgency to create
favourable conditions for promoting dialogue and
negotiations and restoring peace. No party, especially
countries with important influence, should fuel the
fire and escalate tensions, much less try to profit from
expanded crises to advance their own strategic agenda.
China will continue to stand on the side of peace
and, alongside concerned partners, make unremitting
efforts to promote peace talks and achieve a political
settlement of the Ukrainian crisis.
The President: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of the United
Arab Emirates.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for his valuable briefing today.
The destruction of parts of the Nova Kakhovka
hydroelectric power plant and dam has led to large-scale
flooding from the reservoir with wide-ranging and
serious consequences.
The Nova Kakhovka Reservoir was so large locals
referred to it as the “Kakhovka Sea”, and it provided
water for drinking, industrial activities and agriculture.
The reservoir is also the source of the water required to
cool the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
The destruction of the dam has created an
ecological, humanitarian and nuclear safety risk.
International humanitarian law could not be clearer
about the need to protect dams in times of conflict.
Like nuclear power plants, dams are afforded special
protection against attack, even if there is a military
objective, owing to the dangerous forces contained
therein and the risks to civilian populations.
12/15

06/06/2023

We further recall the fundamental principles of
necessity, proportionality and distinction and note
that the destruction of part of the dam has led to
significant damage to other civilian infrastructure
owing to flooding. The Council also reaffirmed, in
resolution 2417 (2018), the need to spare from harm
the means of food production such as farms, many of
which have been destroyed by the flooding. All parties
must comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
The destruction of the dam also increases the
risk of an unimaginable nuclear accident. The Nova
Kakhovka Reservoir played a crucial role in cooling
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. According to
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the
plant is now relying on the backup cooling pool for that
critical function.
Since the start of the war, the world has narrowly
avoided nuclear disaster more than once. That act has
only further increased the risks. As an immediate step,
we encourage all parties to work with the IAEA to
ensure that the cooling mechanism is functioning and
that there are appropriate backup systems in place.
We also urge all parties to cooperate with the IAEA
to de-escalate the situation in the area of the plant and
ensure its long-term, safe functioning.
The humanitarian consequences of the destruction
of the dam are significant. Already 16,000 people,
including thousands of children, are reported to have
been forced to evacuate their homes and evacuations
continue, including in parts of Kherson city. Those
evacuations are particularly challenging for the elderly.
We have heard from Under-Secretary Griffiths that 40
villages are already submerged or partially submerged,
with more at risk. The town of Nova Kakhovka is already
submerged. There are reports of water contamination
and civilian water systems being damaged. The United
Nations is providing emergency drinking water and
purification tablets to affected people.
Conflict and challenges to the export of Ukrainian
grain have impacted global food security. Floods have
damaged farmland, and there are reports that farm
animals that could not be evacuated have drowned. The
damage to a productive farming region puts further
strain on an already challenged global food system.
We call upon all parties to ensure the safety of those
that have been displaced and enable humanitarian
23-16114

06/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9340

organizations to provide assistance to those impacted
by the flooding.

plant would acknowledge responsibility for today’s
technological disaster.

The United Arab Emirates reiterates that the
cessation of hostilities throughout Ukraine is the only
certain way to prevent further harm to the civilian
population and prevent a nuclear disaster. We call for
de-escalation and dialogue to drive the conflict towards
a peaceful, sustainable solution in line with the Charter
of the United Nations, and we stand willing to support
any serious effort to that end.

Let me note that Russia has been controlling the
dam and the entire Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant
for more than a year. It is physically impossible to blow
it up somehow from the outside by shelling. It was
mined by the Russian occupiers, and they blew it up.
About to bite the dust on the front, here in the Security
Council Chamber, Russia is floundering again in the
mud of lies.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

It speaks volumes that one week before the Kakhovka
hydroelectric power plant was blown up, on 30 May,
the Russian Government adopted a decision envisaging
that technical investigations would not be carried out
into accidents at hazardous production facilities and
hydraulic facilities that occurred as a result of “military
operations, sabotage and acts of terrorism”.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr. President,
as well as the members of the Security Council and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.
I also recognize the representative of Putin’s terrorist
regime in the permanent seat of the Soviet Union.
My delegation requested this urgent meeting of the
Security Council as that regime has detonated a bomb
of mass environmental destruction, which has led to
the largest man-made disaster in Europe in decades.
On the night of 6 June, the Russian Federation blew
up the dam of the Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant,
which is located in the temporarily occupied territory
of the Kherson region. That was a terrorist act against
Ukrainian critical infrastructure aimed at causing as
many civilian casualties and as much destruction as
possible. By resorting to scorched-Earth tactics, or in
this case to flooded-Earth tactics, the Russian occupiers
have effectively recognized that the captured territory
does not belong to them, and they are not able to hold
those lands.

The explosion of the dam of the Nova Kakhovka
hydroelectric power plant is an act of ecological and
technological terrorism — the biggest technological
disaster in Europe in recent decades and yet another
example of Russia’s genocide against Ukrainians.
This is the Kremlin’s response to countries calling for
peace talks with the Russian Federation. Through its
actions, Russia has just reconfirmed that it is not at all
interested in de-escalation or peace. It must be stopped
and rendered harmless rather than appeased. That is
why Russia’s defeat — a defeat that we will ensure,
anyway — will be the most significant contribution to
the security of our region and the entire world.

The terrorist attack on the Kakhovka hydroelectric
power plant was previously discussed intensely at the
level of the occupation forces in the Kherson region,
propagandists on Russian television and the Russian
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, which indicates that
it was planned well in advance. The letter circulated
by Putin’s Envoy last October was an element of that
ground-setting strategy.

The dam that the Russian Federation blew up held
more than 18 million cubic metres of water. As a result
of the Russian terrorist act, the upper part of the dam,
which is the sixth stage of the Dnipro cascade, was
partially destroyed. Notably, 11 of 28 sections of the
dam were destroyed. As of noon, New York time, there
has been an increase in the water level of 3.24 metres
on the Dnipro River, near Kherson. According to the
current scenario, the maximum extent of the flooded
territory will occur within three to five days. The left
bank of the Dnipro River coastline will suffer 8 times
more than the right bank.

The Russian statement today was therefore
predictably deceitful. We have observed the same
technique of blaming the victim for one’s own
crimes. There was little chance that the country
which desperately denied its war crimes in Mariupol,
Bucha, Izyum and at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power

Additionally, places such as Oleshky and Hola
Prystan may end up under water. Partial flooding may
also affect Oleksandrivka, Shyroka Balka, Sofiivka,
Vynohradne and other settlements. The level of water
that can flood those areas may vary and, depending
on the degree of dam destruction, it could reach 1.5

23-1611413/15

S/PV.9340

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

06/06/2023

metres or more. The local authorities have organized
the evacuation of residents from those settlements to
other parts of Ukraine. On the Government-controlled
territory of Ukraine, 17 settlements are planned to be
evacuated, with more than 17,000 people.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.

On the occupied territory of the left bank, 20
settlements are subject to evacuation, with approximately
25,000 people. It is a matter of concern that the Russian
occupiers are not organizing the evacuation of civilians,
although they have withdrawn their troops. We urge
the United Nations, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other international organizations to send
humanitarian missions to the left bank of the Dnipro
River to help local residents affected by the flooding.

We thank Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for his briefing.

The Ukrainian authorities are also ensuring the
provision of humanitarian assistance to the local
population — mostly drinking water, food and other
necessities. It is already clear that the destruction of the
dam will deprive or severely worsen the water supply
to Crimea and the Kherson region and significantly
complicate the situation in the Dnipropetrovsk and
Zaporizhzhya regions.
The reduction of the water level in the Nova
Kakhovka reservoir will lead to a decrease in its level
in all water intakes in surrounding regions, particularly
the Nova Kakhovka canal, which supplies water to
the occupied Berdiansk and most settlements in the
Zaporizhzhya region.
Due to the decrease in the water level in the Nova
Kakhovka reservoir, there is also a danger of an incident
at another critical infrastructure facility occupied by
Russia — the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. As of
now, there is no immediate threat to power plant. The
situation is complex but under control.
We call on the international community to
resolutely condemn the Russian terrorist attack
on the Nova Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant.
The technological crime of the Russian Federation
confirms the high relevance of the peace formula of
the President of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskyy. We
call on international partners to join its implementation
as soon as possible, in particular with regard to the
points on countering ecocide and ensuring nuclear and
energy security. Russia will have to compensate those
affected for its crime and its consequences for people,
infrastructure and the environment.
14/15

Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I speak on behalf of
the Baltic States — Estonia, Lithuania and my own
country, Latvia.
Martin

Just two weeks ago, we gathered here for the annual
Security Council open debate on the protection of
civilians (see S/PV.9327). Nevertheless, we are here to
today, sadly, to condemn in the strongest terms another
deliberate attack on civilians and civilian infrastructure
by the Russian Federation — namely, the destruction
of the Nova Kakhovka dam, in the Kherson region of
Ukraine. It is another piece in the chain of war crimes
committed by Russia.
The Nova Kakhovka dam has been under the
occupation of the Russian Federation since it started the
unjustified and unprovoked aggression against Ukraine.
Russia has a track record of violating international
humanitarian law and committing countless war
crimes, including attacks against civilians and
critical civilian infrastructure. This irresponsible and
barbaric act of the destruction of the Nova Kakhovka
dam has prompted the displacement of thousands of
civilians, creating another humanitarian crisis and an
environmental disaster of proportions still to be fully
revealed. Indeed, we might be witnessing an ecocide.
As a direct consequence of Russia’s attack today,
at least 17,000 people have already lost their homes,
and there will be many more to come. Safe and clean
drinking water supplies are at risk for the whole region.
Newly planted crops have been destroyed. It is the
most vulnerable groups, including children, women,
disabled persons and the elderly, who are suffering and
will continue to suffer the most from the consequences
of this illegal war. This is another war crime that cannot
go unanswered. Attacks against civilians and critical
civilian infrastructure must stop now.
We are also concerned about the potential
hazardous consequences for energy security, food
security and nuclear safety, which may go beyond
Ukraine’s borders. To quote President Zelenskyy,
Russia has detonated a bomb of mass environmental
destruction. This act further complicates the already
dire situation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant,
which is illegally occupied by Russia, with complete
23-16114

06/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

disregard for the nuclear safety concerns expressed
numerous times by the international community. The
destruction of the dam has led to a significant reduction
in the level of the reservoir used to supply cooling water
to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. Russia must
immediately return control of the plant to Ukraine,
which would allow for effective crisis management
efforts, with full involvement of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
Against that backdrop, we commend the
humanitarians who are providing life-saving assistance
to people in need. It is crucial to maintain safe and
secure humanitarian access. As stressed in the today
by High Representative Josep Borrell Fontelles and
Commissioner for Crisis Management Janez Lenarčič,
the European Union (EU) is ready to provide immediate
assistance to Ukrainian authorities and address any
immediate needs, including food and drinking water.
The Emergency Response Coordination Centre of
the European Commission is actively monitoring the
situation and in close contact with the State Emergency
Service of Ukraine. Ukraine can request assistance
under the EU Civil Protection Mechanism.
Dams like the Dnipro dam, in Nova Kahkovka,
are protected by the laws of war and the Geneva
Conventions. Destroying it is considered a grave
violation of article 56 of Protocol Additional I and would
amount to a war crime. The international community
simply must not allow the Russian Federation to cause
yet another disaster with catastrophic consequences.
Russia must bear responsibility for the devastating
consequences for thousands of innocent civilians and
civilian infrastructure. We need to make every effort
to ensure accountability. Launching the Council of
Europe’s International Register of Damage Caused
by the Aggression of the Russian Federation against
Ukraine is a concrete step in this direction. Importantly,
we need to prosecute Russia’s leadership for their
crime of aggression at the special tribunal for the crime
of aggression.
The sooner Russia realizes it has lost the war, the
better. It is a choice that Russia can make not to make
things worse before it is too late. We call on Russia
today to withdraw its troops from Ukraine and stop this
criminal war now.
The President: now I give the floor to the
representative of Poland.

S/PV.9340

Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Allow me to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this urgent
meeting, and to thank Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for his briefing.
The issue at hand is of particular importance for
Poland, a country that is an immediate neighbour
of Ukraine. The consequences of the ongoing war,
including humanitarian, emergency and environmental
disasters, also affect my country as a witness of
the sufferings of the Ukrainian people and a hub of
international humanitarian assistance.
Poland strongly condemns the blowing up of the dam
spanning the Dnipro River in Nova Kakhovka, which
was yet another outrageous act of Russian barbarity on
occupied territory of Ukraine, a grave violation of basic
norms of humanitarian and environmental protection
law and an apparent war crime. This act poses a direct
threat to the lives of civilians living along the Dnipro
banks downstream from the dam and to the operation
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. It also brings
the prospect of an environmental disaster, which would
have unprecedented consequences on a regional scale,
which in turn would reverberate across Europe. The
attack intensifies material losses and will result in
further forced displacements of the local population
on a mass scale. It is in clear violation of all of our
efforts to highlight the importance of climate-andsecurity nexus, nuclear safety, protection of civilians
in armed conflicts, including women and children, and
protection of critical infrastructure. All of these topics
have been or are in the Security Council‘s programme
of work in recent months.
Poland will make every effort to hold Russia
accountable before the international community and
punish the perpetrators of this criminal act. We will
insist on it through relevant international institutional
and legal mechanisms, including humanitarian and
environmental ones.
As we have repeated many times in this Chamber
and beyond, in order to stop the various threats and
risks discussed by the Security Council, Russia
must immediately stop its war of aggression, and
Ukraine deserves every assistance needed. We call on
Security Council members and the broad international
community to stand by their values and the norms of
international law. That will lead us to a just peace.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

23-1611415/15
