S/PV.9124

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9124th meeting

Tuesday, 6 September 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-58139 (E)
*2258139*

S/PV.9124

Threats to international peace and security

the way forward. Any action that might endanger the
physical integrity, safety or security of the nuclear plant
is unacceptable. All efforts to re-establish the plant as
purely civilian infrastructure are vital.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Germany and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Rafael
Mariano Grossi, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this briefing on
developments in and around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant in southern Ukraine. I want to salute the
courageous efforts of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and the mission led by Director
General Grossi. Allow me to also thank the parties for
their cooperation. I will leave it to Director General
Grossi to provide an overview of what he and his team
observed during their stay.
The Secretariat proudly supported the IAEA in its
critical mission to ensure the safe operation of the plant.
I want to personally thank all the colleagues assisting
their mission, especially the 13 United Nations support
and security professionals who played an essential
role in allowing for the successful deployment of the
IAEA mission.
(spoke in English)
I remain gravely concerned about the situation
in and around the Zaporizhzhya plant, including
reports of recent shelling. Let us tell it like it is. Any
damage — intentional or not — to Europe’s largest
nuclear power plant in Zaporizhzhya or to any other
nuclear facility in Ukraine could spell catastrophe,
not only for the immediate vicinity but for the region
and beyond. All steps must be taken to avoid such a
scenario. Common sense and cooperation must guide
2/18

06/09/2022

As a first step, Russian and Ukrainian forces must
commit not to engage in any military activity towards
or from the plant site. The Zaporizhzhya facility and
its surroundings must not be a target or platform for
military operations.
As a second step, an agreement on a demilitarized
perimeter should be secured. Specifically, that would
include a commitment by Russian forces to withdraw
all military personnel and equipment from that
perimeter and a commitment by Ukrainian forces not
to move into it. Operators at the plant must be able to
carry out their responsibilities, and communications
must be maintained. Now is the time to urgently agree
on concrete measures to ensure the safety of the area.
Regrettably, last month, the tenth Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons fell victim to
the war in Ukraine. The outcome document sought to
address the issue of the safety and security of nuclear
power plants in armed conflict zones, including in
Ukraine. But the Conference failed to reach consensus
to utilize the opportunity to strengthen the Treaty. I
appeal to all States to use every avenue of dialogue and
diplomacy to make progress on those critical issues.
Looking ahead, I trust that the IAEA experts now
deployed to Zaporizhzhya will be able to carry out their
work without hindrance and contribute to ensuring
lasting nuclear safety and security at the plant. All of
us have a stake in the success of their critical mission.
Let us commit to do everything we can to support
them. And let us resolve to continue working for peace
in line with international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his opening remarks.
I now give floor to Mr. Grossi.
Mr. Grossi (spoke in French): It is a pleasure to
speak before the Security Council for the third time this
year on the situation in Ukraine, and a special pleasure
to do so under the French presidency.
22-58139

06/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

(spoke in English)
I also want to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence among us today. In his remarks, he referred to
the remarkable work that the United Nations provided
through its personnel to our important mission in
accompanying its members for a few days and sharing
some very tense moments. I could see their heroic
dedication and devotion to the cause of the United
Nations. I thank the Secretary-General once again.
We will continue, I hope, working together to bring
stability to the nuclear facilities in Ukraine.
Today Council members may have seen that I
issued a comprehensive report emanating from the
mission I had the honour to lead last week in Ukraine
and the visit to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
The mission was the result of the painstaking work of
almost six months, during which time strenuous efforts
were deployed to try to do just that: to be there with
our inspectors and draw up a comprehensive report of
the situation to corroborate some of the facts that we
have been observing for the past six months. It was
our intention to not stop there, but also provide very
concrete recommendations based on what we saw at
the plant.
The first important safety pillar that exists at any
nuclear facility is not to violate its physical integrity.
Unfortunately, as I had the opportunity to say in my
briefing on 11 August (see S/PV.9109), under the
Chinese presidency, that has happened, and that
continues to happen. Wittingly or unwittingly, the
physical attacks and the hits that the facility has taken
that I could personally see and assess together with my
experts are simply unacceptable. We are playing with
fire, and something catastrophic could happen. That is
why, in our report, we propose the establishment of a
nuclear safety and security protection zone, limited to
the perimeter and the plant itself. I will return to this
point later.
The second pillar, which is important, states
that all safety and security systems and equipment
should operate normally and unhindered and be fully
functional. We know and we observed that the operators
at the plant were operating under extremely challenging
circumstances, with the presence of military equipment
and vehicles in its various areas. In that regard, our
concrete recommendation is that the military vehicles
and equipment that are currently present inside nuclear
plant buildings on the site be removed so as not to

S/PV.9124

interfere with the normal operation of the nuclear safety
and security system.
The third pillar states that the members of the
operating staff must be able to perform their duties
without undue pressure or difficult circumstances. As
Council members know, that has been addressed time
and again during the crisis, especially since the nuclear
power plant was occupied in March. We were able to
work together alongside the experts, and we came to the
conclusion, which is in a specific recommendation of
my report, that the operator should be allowed to return
to exercising its clear and routine line of responsibilities
and authority and that an appropriate work environment
must be re-established, including with proper family
support for the staff.
The fourth pillar refers to the off-site power supply.
I have also referred to that in the past, and, as everyone
knows, that is crucially important in the sense that a
nuclear power plant without any external power supply
may lose crucial functionalities, including the cooling
of its reactors and spent fuel. Without that, we could
have a very serious nuclear accident. With regard to
this pillar, the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) recommends that the off-site power supply line
redundancy be re-established and be made available at
all times. For that to be possible, all military activities
that may affect the power supply systems must be
stopped immediately.
The fifth pillar states that there must be uninterrupted
logistical supply chains and transportation to and from
the site. As the Secretary-General rightly reminded us,
we must keep in mind that, as the biggest in Europe,
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant is a large
industrial site requiring a constant flow of spare parts
and other equipment. That situation is currently being
abnormally disrupted in the context of the conflict. In
that regard, our concrete recommendation is that all
the parties should commit and contribute to ensuring
effective supply chains. Accordingly, we would like to
recall that, through the IAEA assistance and support
programmes that we have provided, for example, in
Chornobyl a flow of supplies has been significantly
re-established, and a similar mechanism could be put
in place in Zaporizhzhya.
The sixth pillar refers to the functioning of the
radiation monitoring systems in order to ascertain
the situation and whether there is radiation in
the atmosphere. We have networks of monitoring

22-581393/18

S/PV.9124

Threats to international peace and security

equipment that have been affected. The concrete sixth
recommendation in our report indicates that the site
should continue ensuring that functionality, including
by drills and exercises that the IAEA can help ensure.
The seventh and last pillar states that there must
be continued and reliable communications with
the Ukrainian regulator and others. We have seen
repeatedly that those lines of communication have been
interrupted. In its seventh recommendation, the IAEA
therefore recommends that, in line with each one of the
seven safety and security pillars, reliable and redundant
communication means and channels be secured at
all times.
The historic mission that took place last week
provided us and the international community with
a precious instrument in the presence of an IAEA
assessment and monitoring mission that could provide
us all today with a comprehensive report that provides a
neutral, impartial and technical reading of the situation.
Moreover, what is also of enormous value is the
fact that IAEA inspectors have remained at the site. At
present, through the IAEA, the United Nations and the
international community have the capacity to obtain a
direct and immediate evaluation of the situation on the
ground as it develops. Such a fact is unprecedented. In
the past, when IAEA inspectors visited places that had
undergone difficult circumstances, such as Chornobyl
and Fukushima, or armed conflict, such as in Iraq, it
was always after the fact. It was always to pick up the
pieces and to remediate what had already happened. In
this case, we have the historical and ethical imperative
to prevent something from happening. By having
established a presence and by agreeing to a special
safety and security protection zone, we have the
opportunity to prevent an incident from happening.
As is stated in the report, we are ready to consult
quickly with the parties. Such a measure can be
considered an interim measure in the hope that other,
more comprehensive measures of a more effective
nature in the context of the conflict — which is not in
the remit of the IAEA, of course — can be agreed upon.
Nonetheless, it is something that can be done now. We
have the inspectors already deployed there and they are
doing their work. We can agree on a very simple but
incredibly necessary protective mechanism to avoid
what is happening now, as we speak — the shelling of a
nuclear power plant.
4/18

06/09/2022

Let us seize this opportunity so fundamental for
peace and security and to protect the populations of
Ukraine and beyond.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Grossi
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Secretary-General Guterres and the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), Mr. Rafael Grossi, for their briefings.
We commend Mr. Grossi on his decision to carry
out the Agency’s mission at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant, which constitutes a responsible and
courageous step on the part of the IAEA leadership
and confirms the Agency’s global role in the field of
nuclear energy. We are pleased that the visit allowed
the Director General and his team to personally assess
the situation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
and ensure that the pillars of nuclear safety and security
they formulated are being strictly observed by us.
It is important that the Director General, as we
heard at his briefing in Vienna on 2 September, was able
to see for himself that, thanks to the well-established
cooperation between its personnel and the Russian
armed forces guarding the plant, it is functioning
normally overall and there are no internal threats to its
security. He had an excellent opportunity to observe
that the only threat to the plant derives from the shelling
and sabotage by the Armed Forces of Ukraine. We see
a confirmation of that in his conclusion, voiced at the
briefing I mentioned, that the Agency’s greatest concern
is the physical safety and integrity of the station, the
threat to which has increased due to shelling in August.
We regret that, in the Director General’s report on
the implementation of IAEA safeguards in Ukraine
from April to September this year — which appeared
just a couple of hours ago — the source of the shelling
is not directly indicated. We understand his position as
the head of the international regulator, but in the current
situation it is extremely important to be clear and direct.
Perhaps if the document were devoted exclusively to
the results of his visit to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant, his conclusions could have been clearer
and less ambiguous. We will need additional time to
study the document, so I will not dwell on it in detail. I
would simply ask the Director General to please clarify
22-58139

06/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

what military equipment he saw during his visit to the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
We are not sitting idly by and allowing the reckless
actions of the Kyiv regime to be hushed up. Last month,
we twice convened a meeting of the Security Council
on the issue (see S/PV.9109 and S/PV.9114). We tried to
get through to our Western colleagues by explaining
that the shelling poses a genuine threat of a nuclear
disaster at the largest nuclear power plant in Europe.
We urged Western delegations to think about the
possible consequences for the peoples of the continent
and to rein in their protégés in Kyiv. Unfortunately,
they did not heed our calls. With the tacit consent of its
Western backers, the Kyiv regime continued to shell the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. It continues to do so
today, but I will elaborate on that later.
We welcome the decision of the IAEA leadership
to establish a permanent Agency presence at the power
plant. This qualitatively changes the state of affairs, as
the IAEA can now independently assess the situation
in real time, given that two inspectors are at the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant on a permanent basis.
We stand ready to lend them all possible assistance in
their work.
I would like to underscore that, from the very
beginning, we have consistently supported the IAEA’s
efforts to ensure the nuclear safety and security of
Ukraine’s nuclear facilities. The Russian side has done
everything in its power to ensure that Mr. Grossi and
his team were able to safely reach the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, carry out their work and return to
Vienna. That fact was noted by the representative of the
Secretary-General, who underscored that the Russian
Federation had done everything necessary to ensure
the safety of the IAEA inspectors who visited the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. We would be glad to
hear the Director General’s assessment on how satisfied
the IAEA is with its interaction with the Russian side,
in particular in terms of ensuring the proper level of
mission security.
Unfortunately, as we feared, the Ukrainian side,
having realized that it cannot use the IAEA’s visit
to the power plant for its propaganda purposes, did
everything it could to disrupt it. On 1 September, when
the Agency’s mission was due to arrive, the Armed
Forces of Ukraine opened massive artillery fire on
the power plant and the city of Enerhodar from 5 a.m.
onwards. They continued to shell the Zaporizhzhya

S/PV.9124

nuclear power plant until the very last minute, when
the IAEA team was already on its way to the power
plant. Ukrainian artillery shelled the territory of
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, as well as the
township of Vasylivka, where the IAEA mission was
due to meet with Russian specialists, and their route
of movement to Enerhodar. Four shells exploded at a
distance of 400 metres from the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant’s Unit 1. The actions of the Armed Forces
of Ukraine directly threatened the life and safety of the
Agency inspectors.
But the Kyiv regime did not stop there. It resorted
to a heinous provocation, attempting to seize the
station by force right before the arrival of the IAEA
mission. At 6 a.m. on 1 September, Armed Forces of
Ukraine combat sabotage groups were directed towards
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant through the
Kakhovka Reservoir in order to capture the station.
In other words, in order to create the impression
that the Armed Forces of Ukraine were successful,
which is of course necessary for the Zelenskyy regime
to beg for more Western arms, active hostilities were
launched around the power plant, which could lead to
critical damage to its integrity. Were that operation to
have succeeded and the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant fallen under the control of the Kyiv authorities,
the Director General of the IAEA, Mr. Grossi, and
mission experts would have become human shields for
Ukrainian saboteurs.
Those provocations were halted thanks to the
effective actions of Russia’s armed forces and its
National Guard, as well as the vigilance of the local
population. As a result, the meeting of representatives
of the Russian Federation with the IAEA team took
place at noon, four hours later than the scheduled
time. We commend the courage of the Agency’s
representatives and their readiness to work literally
under Ukrainian fire.
We would like to ask the Director General how
the attempt of the Armed Forces of Ukraine to disrupt
the Agency’s visit by landing saboteurs with the aim
of forcibly seizing the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant affected the work of the mission. What are his
comments on the actions of the Ukrainian side in the
context of threats to the physical security of the power
plant and the safety of the Agency’s personnel? I would
like to address a similar question to the SecretaryGeneral. United Nations Department for Safety and

22-581395/18

S/PV.9124

Threats to international peace and security

Security employees were part of the IAEA mission and
directly involved in ensuring its safety and security.
It was their duty to assess the situation and be aware
of any potential risks to it. What does his staff have
to say about the risks created for the mission by the
Ukrainian side?
Kyiv did not even bother to hide its disappointment
with the outcomes of the IAEA visit to Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant. Vladimir Zelenskyy’s adviser
Mykhailo Podolyak in particular said that “all these
mediation missions look extremely inefficient and
extremely cowardly, extremely unprofessional.”
According to him, they have never been ready to work
in extreme conditions, and that applies not only to the
IAEA but also to the United Nations. In the description of
the Ukrainian functionary, international organizations
“look untrustworthy from the very outset.” Mr. Podolyak
also doubted that the IAEA mission was able to carry
out a comprehensive examination in two hours.
And, feeling powerless and enraged, Kyiv decided
not to abandon its dangerous plans. Despite the
continued presence of the IAEA at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plan, on 2 September the Kyiv regime
undertook yet another unsuccessful attempt to capture
the plant. But that attempt was foiled by the Russian
armed forces, the Kyiv regime has continued to attack
the plant on a daily basis since then. On 3 September,
the armed forces of Ukraine used eight drones with
suspended munitions. However, thanks to our Russian
armed forces, the drones nearing the station were
blocked. After that, they were forced to drop their
grenades in deserted areas more than 1.5 kilometres away
from the station’s security perimeter. On 4 September,
the Ukrainian forces used an unmanned combat aerial
vehicle to strike. As a result of the action of the Russian
armed forces, the Ukrainian drone lost control and
crashed one kilometre away from the nuclear power
plant. On 5 September, the Ukrainians again shelled
the nuclear power plant. One of those three shells hit
the roof of Special Building 1, which contains the fuel
assembly and solid radioactive waste. According to the
information of our Minister of Defence, the shelling of
the plant and Enerhodar is conducted from the other
side of the Kakhovka Reservoir, namely, from the towns
of Nikopol, Marhanets, Maryevka, which are under the
control of the Ukrainian armed forces.
As a result of the Ukrainian attacks, five out of
seven power lines of the Zaporizhzhya facility were
damaged. We call on Security Council members and the
6/18

06/09/2022

United Nations leadership to strongly condemn those
acts of provocation by the Kyiv regime. They are aimed
not only against the staff of the station but also against
international civil servants — IAEA staff. The Armed
Forces of Ukraine also keep using the population of
Enerhodar as a human target. Just today, five incidents
of artillery shelling occurred there. We know that the
citizens appealed collectively to the Director General,
asking him to put an end to those acts of provocation by
the Kyiv regime. That was covered very widely in mass
media. The Director General responded that he would
do everything in his power. We would like to ask him
to provide details on that. What are his thoughts on his
interaction with the people of Enerhodar?
We will continue to do everything we can to ensure
the safe operation of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant. Its standard technical personnel, with the support
of Russian specialists, are ensuring its functioning.
So far, the radiation situation of the plant is normal.
However, should the provocation by the Kyiv regime
continue, no one will be immunte to the potential
more serious consequences. The responsibility for that
lies fully with Kyiv, its Western backers and all other
members of the Security Council that have not yet
found the courage to call things by their proper name,
or to call on Kyiv to stop its reckless acts against the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, which creates a real
threat to international peace and security. We expect
that Security Council members will have enough
courage today to do that, in order to prevent a potential
radiation disaster.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Secretary-General Guterres and Director General
Grossi. We appreciate their continued support to ensure
the operational safety and security of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant despite Russia’s ongoing attacks
and refusal to silence its guns and withdraw from
Ukraine so that this situation can be resolved peacefully
and diplomatically.
First, let us commend the parties involved in
facilitating the visit of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) team. The visit allowed them to carry out
their important ongoing work despite the increasingly
dangerous situation within the Zaporizhzhya facility.
The United States welcomes the technical report of
the IAEA mission to the Zaporizhzhya facility. We
support continued, unhindered and safe IAEA access
to the facility. To that end, it is essential that Russia
allow Ukrainian operators to implement any and all
22-58139

06/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

measures the IAEA team and Ukrainian operators
deem important for the safe and secure operation of the
plant to decrease the risk of a nuclear incident.
This is a matter of international nuclear safety and
security. The potential danger here is enormous. It
concerns us all. And so once again, we support Ukraine’s
call for the demilitarization of the area surrounding
the Zaporizhzhya facility. And we demand Russia’s
immediate withdrawal from Ukraine’s sovereign
territory. Despite Russia’s song and dance here today
to avoid acknowledging responsibility for its actions,
Russia has no right to expose the world to unnecessary
risk and the possibility of nuclear catastrophe. Worse,
this is a situation entirely of Russia’s making. The
current danger at Zaporizhzhya is a result of Russia’s
unprovoked and unlawful invasion of Ukraine. And
specifically, it is a result of Russia’s premeditated
seizure of this plant on 4 March. The international
community called for Russia to avoid the nuclear plant.
Instead, Russian troops struck and seized the facility,
jeopardizing the IAEA’s seven pillars of nuclear safety
and security. Russia continues to conduct military
operations around the plant. For every day that Russia
controls the plant, the risk of a nuclear incident increases.
Over the weekend, shelling once again led to
the disconnection of an external power line, putting
at risk the plant’s operations. While we understand
that the plant is currently generating enough power
to operate its cooling systems, Russia’s continued
military presence in the area will continue to put the
plant — and the entire region — in serious danger. We
continue to urge Russia to end all military operations
at or near Ukraine’s nuclear facilities and to return full
control to Ukraine. The IAEA’s report instead details
conditions that drastically increase the stress and
duress on the operators, thereby unacceptably raising
the risk of human error. The report also notes continued
combat operations in the vicinity and the installation
of military equipment and personnel within the plant,
which also contribute to the risk of nuclear disaster. I
want to mention that we join the Director General in
commending the staff at all nuclear facilities for their
endurance and resilience in keeping the sites running in
a safe and secure way amid the conflict.
Nikopol’s brave Mayor recently told a media outlet,
“Our biggest challenge is that we cannot predict what is
going to happen tomorrow, or even if there is going to
be a tomorrow.” Another Ukrainian citizen was quoted
saying, “All of us are just scared all the time. I am old,

S/PV.9124

I have diabetes. If anything happens, I will only have
time to lie on the floor and close my eyes.” No one
should have to live like this. There is no excuse for the
unnecessary risk of a nuclear incident. No one should
be questioning if there will be a tomorrow.
The plant and the electricity it produces belong
to Ukraine. Any attempt by Russia to disconnect the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant from Ukraine and
redirect the power it generates towards Russia would
be highly provocative, selfish and short-sighted. We
reject all efforts by Russia to use Ukraine’s electric
grid as a pawn in this unjustified war, and Ukraine’s
nuclear power plant as a military shield or deployment
site. Russia is responsible for this crisis, and it can also
resolve it now. The solution is not complicated. The
Russian Federation must end its reckless behaviour and
immediately withdraw its troops, not only from the area
surrounding Zaporizhzhya but from all of Ukraine.
Wry cynicism from Russia claiming profound concern
about the risk of catastrophe will not cut it.
It is obvious that the fastest way to fix this is for
Russia to withdraw immediately. Unfortunately for all
of us, the Russian Federation showed its true colours
when it obstructed the outcome document of the tenth
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Russia alone
blocked consensus on a final document. That should
come as no surprise, given that Russia’s actions during
its further invasion of Ukraine have undermined the safe,
secure and peaceful use of nuclear energy — the exact
kind of issues that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)and its Review Conference
are called on to address. That lack of commitment to
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy calls into question
Russia’s reliability as a supplier of nuclear material,
equipment and technology. The world’s responsible
NPT States parties have called for Russia to end all
military activity near the Zaporizhzhya facility and
rightly return full control of it to Ukraine. Now is the
time for Russia to listen before it is too late.
As the conflict’s toll on civilians grows ever higher,
I hope that each of us, on behalf of the countries we
represent, will underscore in this Chamber that Russia
must silence its guns, withdraw from Ukraine and
embrace diplomacy. General statements of concern or
appeals to all parties will not help resolve the crisis.
All parties are not responsible for this situation. Russia
is, and it is now incumbent on Russia to show with
its actions that it respects the Charter of the United

22-581397/18

S/PV.9124

Threats to international peace and security

Nations by respecting Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by commending Director General
Grossi of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), as well as his staff, for their visit to the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant under extremely
challenging circumstances. We welcome the IAEA’s
ongoing presence there, and I also offer my thanks to
Ukraine for helping to facilitate the visit.
The IAEA has assessed that the physical integrity
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant has been
violated several times, and with the publication of its
report today, the IAEA has confirmed the presence of
Russian military personnel, vehicles and equipment in
the plant. We understand that in some cases, Russian
military equipment has been no more than 60 metres
from the nuclear reactors. The report also confirms the
immense stress and pressure under which the plant’s
brave Ukrainian staff are operating. They are no
longer workers but hostages being held at gunpoint. By
choosing to invade a nuclear power plant and putting
Zaporizhzhya in the crossfire, Russia is playing roulette
with nuclear safety. As long as Russia’s occupation of
the plant continues, its safe and secure operation cannot
be ensured. Any measures to address nuclear safety at
the plant should therefore involve a full withdrawal of
Russian troops and personnel.
This is the third meeting that Russia has called
on this issue in recent weeks. But we should be under
no illusion. The situation at Zaporizhzhya is entirely
of Russia’s making. It is Russia’s invasion that has
disrupted the operation of nuclear facilities across
Ukraine. It is Russia that is jeopardizing the safety
of millions in the region who would be affected by
a nuclear incident. And it is Russia that can resolve
the situation by immediately withdrawing its forces
from Zaporizhzhya and all of Ukraine and ceasing its
senseless and reckless aggression.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
expressing our appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his briefing. I also thank the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for his
team’s visit to Zaporizhzhya and his report.
The IAEA mission last week to the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant was a positive development in a
conflict in which moments of good news have been few
and far between. The presence of the Agency’s inspectors
8/18

06/09/2022

there enables us to know the real dimensions of the risks
to the safety of those nuclear installations. Avoiding
a nuclear catastrophe must be a priority for all the
parties. This conflict has already resulted in the deaths
of tens of thousands of people and the displacement
of millions. We find it extremely concerning that the
plant’s physical integrity has been violated repeatedly
in recent weeks. Even more worrying is the fact that the
prospect of an IAEA mission was not enough to stop the
bombings. Brazil reiterates its appeal for an immediate
suspension of all actions that could jeopardize the
security of Zaporizhzhya, before the damage to the
plant results in irreparable consequences for human
life, the environment and the safety of the region. In
that context, we take note of the recommendations that
Director General Rafael Grossi has made to the parties.
We would like to once again remind the Council
that attacks on nuclear facilities dedicated to peaceful
purposes constitute violations of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and the Statute of the
IAEA. We remind the parties of their responsibilities
under multilateral instruments such as the Convention
on Nuclear Safety, the Joint Convention on the Safety
of Spent Fuel and the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and its Amendment. We
expect that rationality will prevail and that fears of a
nuclear disaster can be dispelled.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me also thank the
Secretary-General and Director General Grossi of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for their
information and leadership on this very important issue.
We are happy that despite having been delayed
for no reason, the IAEA inspection team was able to
conduct its first mission at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant. We commend Director General Grossi and
his team for their resolve in maintaining the mission
despite extremely challenging circumstances. We thank
them and welcome their report. We understand that this
is the IAEA’s most important, complex and challenging
field mission since Chornobyl.
The visit and presence of IAEA experts in the plant
is reassuring and a relief, even though the findings and
what we heard today from the Director General are
worrying — in fact alarming. We fully subscribe to
the conclusion that continued fighting in and around
the nuclear plant can only increase the risk of disaster,
since, as has already been verified, the physical integrity
of the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
22-58139

06/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

plant in Ukraine has been violated several times, and
that the continued hostilities represent a continuing
imminent threat. It is now common knowledge and a
sad and worrisome fact that the seven pillars that are
essential to maintaining nuclear safety and security,
which were recalled by the Director General again here
today, have been compromised at the power plant. That
is unacceptable.
The presence of Russian military forces at the
nuclear power plant is illegal. It prevents the operator
and the Ukrainian authorities from fulfilling their
nuclear and radiation safety obligations in accordance
with international conventions and IAEA safety
standards. As has already been stated by the IAEA
Board of Governors,
“Russia’s invasion and its continued presence at
Ukraine’s nuclear facilities significantly raise the
risk of nuclear incidents and accidents”.
The IAEA report released today confirms that
assertion. As we have said here more than once, the
Ukrainian staff operating the plant under the Russian
military occupation are under constant high stress and
pressure. That is not sustainable and could lead to an
increased risk of human error, with implications for
nuclear safety.
Just a few weeks ago, the tenth Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) was unable to adopt a final
document. It was another of those sad moments when
diplomacy fails in its core mandate. We all know why
it happened. We all know who stood alone, in complete
isolation, stubbornly holding hostage the entire world,
which had come together to reaffirm the importance
of the NPT and its three pillars. It is therefore no
surprise that we here in the Chamber, along with every
nuclear expert in the world, are right to be seriously
worried that the reckless actions of the Russian army
may accidentally or intentionally lead to a cascade of
dreadful events that will threaten not only Ukraine,
its population and all of its neighbours, but also the
European continent and beyond.
The situation is clear and there is no room for
polemics or the blame game, and certainly not for
the distorted narratives that we hear incessantly.
We are called here, and not for the first time, to deal
with the symptoms of a problem when we know that
we need to tackle the problem’s very source. What
business is it of Russia’s to attack, overrun, occupy and

S/PV.9124

militarize a nuclear power plant in another country?
Who is responsible for the fighting in and around the
nuclear power plant in Ukraine in the first place? Why
has Russia not answered the call to demilitarize the
power plant, hand it over to those to whom it legally
belongs — Ukraine — and agree to establish a secure
perimeter in order to avoid the unthinkable? A clear and
straightforward answer to those questions would help
provide more clarity for us here and ease those worries.
We reiterate our call to the Russian Federation to
withdraw its military forces and all other unauthorized
personnel from the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant,
its immediate surroundings and all of Ukraine so
that the Ukrainian operator can resume its sovereign
responsibilities and the legitimate operating staff
can conduct their duties without outside interference,
threats or oppressive working conditions. We are
worried that widespread infrastructure damage — a
constant and ferocious feature of the ongoing Russian
attack on Ukraine — and the loss of a power supply,
which has happened more than once and led to the
repeated switching off of reactors, will increase the
threat of fire at the plant, which in turn would damage
the cooling systems and lead to a nuclear meltdown.
That would be dreadful. Albania condemns any act of
violence perpetrated inside or near the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant or against its personnel. We fully
support the recommendation of the IAEA to establish
a secure perimeter around the nuclear power plant and
call for its immediate implementation.
Let me conclude by saying that nuclear power
plants are not built to resist or survive military activity,
either at the plant itself or anywhere near it. They must
therefore not be turned into a military garrison or a
platform for military attacks. Let us not forget that
meddling with nuclear safety is tantamount to playing
with fire, the kind of fire that could burn millions and
lead to catastrophic consequences for the environment
that would last for decades.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and Director General Grossi for
their briefings. We greatly welcome the support and
assistance mission of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant, and I would like to commend both the IAEA
and the United Nations for the manner in which the
mission has been conducted. We welcome the Director
General’s report and its recommendations, as well as
the Director General’s intention to maintain an ongoing

22-581399/18

S/PV.9124

Threats to international peace and security

IAEA presence at the plant. The IAEA has a key role
in assisting Ukraine in upholding nuclear safety and
security in the face of Russia’s occupation of such
critical Ukrainian infrastructure.
We are deeply concerned about the situation at
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, including the
ongoing military activity and shelling around the
plant. We strongly support the Secretary-General’s
call for demilitarizing the area around the plant. The
fact that the plant has lost all connection to the main
Ukrainian grid raises serious concerns. We urge
Russia to stop its efforts to disconnect the plant, which
creates a significant risk of a catastrophic radiological
incident. The Director General has again clearly set out
the importance of the seven pillars of nuclear safety
and security and how they are being flouted at the
Zaporizhzhya plant due to Russia’s actions. We call
on Russia and indeed all States to fully commit to the
seven pillars for all nuclear facilities and materials,
including in situations of armed conflict.
Once again, we must be perfectly clear — the issues
at the Zaporizhzhya plant arise solely from the unjust
and unprovoked war waged by Russia against Ukraine.
The reckless actions of Russia’s military forces and
their forcible seizure of the nuclear plant have already
demonstrated their utter disregard for nuclear safety and
security. Once again, let me reiterate that if Russia is
serious about safety at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant, it must end its illegal occupation of the site and
withdraw its troops and munitions. That is essential so
that the Ukrainian authorities, together with the IAEA,
can uphold their responsibilities for safety and security
at the site. Russia must end this war, withdraw from
the full territory of Ukraine and respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of its neighbours.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for their timely and
alarming briefings. The importance of the IAEA
mission to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
and the Agency’s continued presence there cannot be
overstated. Its professional and impartial efforts are key
to our understanding of the situation at the plant. We
also commend the crucial work done by the Ukrainian
staff, who in severe circumstances continue to operate
the plant under its occupation by Russian forces. We
call on Russia to return full control of the facility to
its Ukrainian operator. One clear line of Ukrainian
operational control and authority is vital.
10/18

06/09/2022

The safety and security situation at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant has deteriorated solely because of
Russia’s aggression. It is totally unacceptable that a
nuclear facility has become a front line in the ongoing
Russian war on Ukraine. We appreciate the IAEA
summary report, with recommendations, which was
released earlier today. The IAEA has identified an
urgent need for interim measures to prevent a nuclear
accident arising from the physical damage caused by
military means. As the Director General has explained,
that can be achieved by the immediate establishment of
a nuclear safety and security protection zone.
We reaffirm the importance of the seven pillars
of nuclear safety and security outlined by the Director
General and support the Agency in helping to ensure
the implementation of the pillars in Ukraine. We also
echo the Director General’s concerns, including about
the physical integrity of the plant, its power supply and
the conditions for its staff. Nuclear facilities should
not be used for military activities or the storage of
military material.
We remain concerned about the possibility that
Russia’s seizure of a nuclear power plant is also a means
of taking hostage a central source of electricity supply
essential to the civilian population of Ukraine. The
electricity generated at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant rightly belongs to the people of Ukraine. Any
attempt to disconnect the plant from the Ukrainian grid
is unacceptable. Russia must immediately withdraw its
forces in and around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant and all other Ukrainian nuclear facilities.
The ongoing attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure are having a devastating and unacceptable
impact. Russia’s illegal war and unprovoked aggression
have caused terrible suffering for the people of Ukraine
and beyond, including by aggravating global food
insecurity, affecting the most vulnerable the hardest.
Let me end by again reiterating that Norway
condemns in the strongest possible terms Russia’s
choice to wage this war. The Russian Federation
must immediately withdraw its forces from within
Ukraine’s internationally recognized borders. That is
the only sustainable solution to the many issues we are
discussing today.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
and the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) for his update on the recent
22-58139

06/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

visit of the IAEA team to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant.
India attaches high importance to ensuring the
safety and security of nuclear facilities in Ukraine,
as any accident involving nuclear facilities could
potentially have severe consequences for public health
and the environment. In that regard, we appreciate
the recent visit by the IAEA team and will continue
to carefully follow developments regarding the safety
and security of Ukraine’s nuclear power reactors and
facilities. We have noted that the IAEA will continue
to maintain a presence at the Zaporizhzhya plant. We
consider the IAEA’s discharge of its safeguards and
monitoring activities in accordance with its Statute
and in an effective, non-discriminatory and efficient
manner to be a high priority, and we value its efforts
in that regard. With a view to ensuring that the safety
and security of nuclear facilities and personnel working
there are not endangered, we reiterate our call for strict
mutual restraint.
India remains concerned about the situation in
Ukraine. We have consistently called for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and an end to the violence since
the beginning of the conflict. We have called on both
sides to return to a path of diplomacy and dialogue. We
support all diplomatic efforts to end the conflict.
We welcome the initiative backed by the SecretaryGeneral to reopen the export of grain from Ukraine via
the Black Sea and to facilitate the export of Russian
foodstuffs and fertilizers. Those efforts demonstrate
that differences can be resolved through sustained
dialogue and diplomacy, which has been India’s
consistent position. We continue to reiterate that the
global order should be anchored in international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of States.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres
and the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) for their briefings. I would also
like to take this opportunity to express the gratitude
of the United Arab Emirates to the entire IAEA team
who visited the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant for
their professionalism and dedication under extremely
difficult circumstances. The IAEA’s mission was a
crucial first step in assessing the safety and security of
Ukraine’s nuclear facilities. The United Arab Emirates
welcomes the cooperation extended by both parties,

S/PV.9124

which made the visit possible and allowed access to
the power plant. We hope that the constructive spirit
of technical cooperation on all matters related to the
operation and protection of the Zaporizhzhya plant will
continue to prevail and will be extended to all other
nuclear facilities throughout Ukraine.
At the same time, we echo the concerns of
Director General Grossi and the IAEA in its report
issued today about the fact that the physical integrity
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant has been
violated several times. As the report highlights, it will
be important to put measures in place to prevent a
nuclear accident that could arise from physical damage
to the plant. In that respect, the recent news that the
plant was again disconnected from the power grid
owing to fire caused by shelling is a source of serious
concern and demonstrates that even with the IAEA’s
presence at the plant, de-escalation remains critically
important to guaranteeing its safety before it is too
late. The disruption of the external power supply to
the plant and any incident undermining the safety and
security of its staff could have disastrous consequences
and would be unacceptable. Nuclear plants such as
Zaporizhzhya are afforded special protection under
international humanitarian law, and those protections
must be respected. The risks of a nuclear disaster are
simply too great and the consequences too terrible. As
we have said before, the United Arab Emirates strongly
supports the seven pillars of nuclear safety and security
articulated by the IAEA and calls on both parties to the
conflict to ensure that they are respected. It is alarming
that the IAEA’s report today confirmed that all seven
pillars have been compromised.
The safe operation of the Zaporizhzhya power
plant is crucial not only because of the dire effects
of a potential nuclear incident but also because of
the critical need for its regular supply of power for
civilians, and all the more so with winter approaching.
Going forward, the continued presence of international
inspectors from the IAEA will remain essential in
order to assess safe operations and to stabilize the
situation at the Zaporizhzhya plant. We welcome the
IAEA’s commitment to remaining on the ground while
at the same time undertaking further periodic technical
visits. Ultimately, however, the parties to the conflict
and the international community must work for a return
to normalcy as soon as possible. The most crucial step
for that is a cessation of hostilities and a diplomatic end

22-5813911/18

S/PV.9124

Threats to international peace and security

to the conflict. All of us on the Security Council must
do all we can to support every effort to that end.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for setting the scene of the situation
in Zaporizhzhya. I also thank the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
Rafael Grossi, for the helpful information that he just
provided about the situation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant. We note with interest the deployment of
IAEA experts to the site for an inspection mission and
to ensure that the facilities are functioning normally.
We have taken note of the state of play described by
Mr. Grossi and of his recommendations. We have
confidence in his team on the ground, and our attention
will remain focused on Zaporizhzhya.
We remain concerned about the information
according to which there were several violations of
the physical integrity of the power plant as well as
disruptions to the electricity supply. The risks of a
nuclear accident clearly have not yet been limited or
controlled. It will be crucial and urgent to restore and
preserve the physical integrity of the nuclear power
station. We condemn any use or threat of use of a
nuclear facility for military purposes. The possibility
of a nuclear accident with potentially catastrophic
consequences should in no way be used as a threat or
a weapon of war. We call once again for a halt to any
kind of military activity within or near the power plant.
The parties to the conflict should abstain from any
attack on the nuclear site. We call for an independent
and impartial investigation to establish responsibility
for any military activity that damages nuclear facilities.
We would like to point out that parties to the conflict
have to abide by the existing rules of nuclear security
and cooperate with the IAEA in a transparent manner to
make sure that the sites are safe. We cannot be satisfied
with half measures, given the scope of the danger.
We will never stop saying that it is time to restore
peace in Ukraine as a top priority. In parallel with
efforts to save the world from a nuclear catastrophe,
negotiations must be carried out in good faith in order
to put an end to the war. We support all initiatives that
aim to bring the parties to the negotiations table with a
view to achieving a cessation of hostilities. There is an
alternative, and none is better that peaceful coexistence.
My country dissociates itself from any attempt to use
the Council for any ends other than the search for
international peace and security.
12/18

06/09/2022

We support all political and diplomatic efforts that
seek to put an end to the escalation, silence the guns
and reach an agreement to bring about sustainable
peace between the parties. A nuclear disaster would
be an extremely serious assault on our collective peace
and security. It is in the name of that common destiny
that we urge the parties to show goodwill, commitment
and perseverance in the search for peace.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank Secretary-General Guterres
and Director General Grossi for their briefings.
For some time, the safety and security of
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant has been
nerve-racking for the international community, and it
has been the unanimous expectation of all to facilitate
an International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) field
visit to the plant as soon as possible. Thanks to the
joint cooperation of Russia and Ukraine, Director
General Grossi and his colleagues were able to visit
successfully last week, which helps to gain an objective
understanding of the operations of, and damage to, the
nuclear facilities and to take targeted actions.
China is pleased with that positive development and
recognizes the efforts of Director General Grossi and
the staff of both the IAEA and the Secretariat. At the
same time, despite the repeated warnings and appeals
from the international community, the shelling of the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant continues. Even
after the IAEA visitors arrived at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, the shelling did not cease. That is
truly concerning.
The Chornobyl nuclear accident has not faded from
our memory, and the effects of the Fukushima nuclear
accident have not dissipated to date. The world simply
cannot afford yet another nuclear disaster. We once
again call on the parties concerned to remain committed
to humanity, scientific rationality, communication
and cooperation; strictly abide by the Convention on
Nuclear Safety and other relevant international laws;
strictly implement the seven-pillar principles proposed
by Director General Grossi; avoid actions that endanger
the safety and security of nuclear facilities and refrain
from repeatedly testing this dangerous path.
We support the long-term presence of Agency
experts at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and
hope that the resident experts can provide continuous,
steady and professional technical support in order
to guarantee the safety and security of the nuclear
22-58139

06/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

facilities. We also encourage the Agency to maintain
its communication with the relevant parties.
Since the outbreak of the crisis in Ukraine, the
threat to the safety and security of nuclear power plant
posed by armed conflict has kept the world under
the looming spectre of a nuclear disaster. In the face
of countless lives and the well-being of generations,
we cannot afford to take any chances or do nothing.
Instead, we must do our best to minimize accidents.
The international community should step up diplomatic
efforts to promote the early resumption of negotiations
between the parties, achieve a ceasefire and stop the
fighting as soon as possible and eliminate nuclearsecurity risks at their source.
We once again call upon all parties to adopt
a responsible approach in order to promote the
de-escalation of the situation, work to find a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Ukraine, work together to build
regional peace and tranquility and jointly maintain
global security and stability.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing and Mr. Rafael Grossi, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
for informing us on the visit of the mission to the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
At the outset, I welcome that the agreements reached
between the conflicting parties enabled a team of 14
IAEA experts to carry out a technical inspection of the
nuclear plant and allowed two experts to permanently
remain at the plant in order to continue to monitor the
situation on the ground. That is extremely important
for the Agency to continue to have access to objective,
truthful and independent real-time information. As we
and others have expressed here in the Security Council,
ensuring the smooth operation and security of the plant
is vital if we are to avoid a disaster with very serious
humanitarian consequences for Ukraine, neighbouring
countries and the entire world.
We also thank the United Nations Department
of Safety and Security for the logistical support and
security they provided to the IAEA mission during its
visit to Zaporizhzhya. We once again call on all parties
to refrain from taking action that could endanger the
integrity and operation of the nuclear plant and to
ensure the physical safety of the international experts
of the IAEA, in whom we placed our trust due to their
professionalism, skill and impartiality.

S/PV.9124

It is regrettable to hear that the seven pillars
of nuclear security are not being fully respected in
Zaporizhzhya, according to Director General Grossi,
and we take note of his timely recommendations. We
reiterate that any attack on the nuclear plant is an
unacceptable violation of international law and the
Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency. We
urge the Agency to continue sharing with the Council
all information on the situation on the ground. We hope
that the conditions at the nuclear plant will quickly
improve in order to ensure its security.
We hope that the visit of the IAEA mission and
its permanent presence at the nuclear plant help bring
about prompt negotiations to put an end to hostilities in
Ukraine. Given the looming threat of a nuclear disaster,
Mexico reiterates its commitment to do anything it can
to promote a diplomatic path that can put an end to
the war.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his statement and
Director General Rafael Grossi for this important
briefing on the state of play at the Russian-held
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
The briefing we heard this afternoon reinforces our
continuing concern about the rapidly escalating risk of
radioactive exposure resulting from the militarization
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and its
surrounding environs. Following the unrelenting
shelling of the facility on Thursday, 25 August, which
led to a temporary loss of the main power supply to
the nuclear reactors, we received, with equal concern,
the news of the loss of the nuclear power plant’s main
connection to the power grid on Saturday due to sustained
shelling. Those incidents compromise the cooling and
safe functioning of the plant and elevate the risks of
accidental or deliberate radioactive exposure, which,
if it should occur, would result in catastrophic levels
of harm to human lives, the environment, the climate
and biodiversity of Ukraine and the wider European
continent, with equally damaging consequences for
adjoining continents.
The counter-accusations of both parties have been
unhelpful to the situation and serve only to deepen the
mistrust and drift between them, further endangering
the safety of the plant. We therefore fully endorse the
position of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) that pending the end of the conflict and the
re-establishment of stable conditions, there is an urgent

22-5813913/18

S/PV.9124

Threats to international peace and security

need for interim measures to prevent a nuclear accident
resulting from physical damage caused by military
action. We also endorse the two-step approach indicated
by the Secretary-General in his statement to the
Council this afternoon. In that regard, Ghana supports
the professional leadership of the Director General and
the sustained engagement of the IAEA to undertake
verification and safeguards measures to ensure the
physical integrity of the nuclear plant in accordance
with the IAEA’s seven pillars of nuclear safety and
security. We support all efforts to restore and safeguard
the security of the plant, welcome the continued
presence of the IAEA support and assistance mission to
Zaporizhzhya and urge the warring sides to cooperate
with the mission to the fullest extent, as we work for
the demilitarization of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant and all other nuclear zones in Ukraine.
We reaffirm our position on the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and urge the parties to take concrete
measures in compliance with their international
obligations to preserve the integrity of nuclear sites. We
underscore the dictates of international humanitarian
law on the protection of civilians from harm and
civilian infrastructure from destruction in times of war,
without exception.
While welcoming the various key initiatives being
undertaken at several levels to address the unfavourable
effects of the war on the lives and livelihoods of the
Ukrainian people, the global economy and food
and energy supply chains, we emphasize that such
responses cannot replace the composite gains of ending
the war. That is why we strongly urge for the active
pursuit of a comprehensive and sustainable solution to
the war, while addressing the related security concerns
of the parties through diplomacy and dialogue. We
deem it crucial that the Russian Federation heed the
international community’s call for the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of its forces from the
internationally recognized borders of Ukraine in order
to pave the way for meaningful engagement between
the parties towards a pacific settlement.
Lastly, we urge for the continued support of the
Council and the international community in finding
a speedy, comprehensive and lasting solution to this
unjustified attack on the people and sovereignty
of Ukraine.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Mr. Rafael Grossi, Director
14/18

06/09/2022

General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), for their briefings. Their participation in this
meeting underscores the extreme sensitivity and gravity
of this matter and their resolved commitment and
endeavours to avert what could be the worst scenario
yet in the war in Ukraine.
As a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Kenya upholds
the Treaty’s aims of preventing the spread of nuclear
weapons and weapons technology, fostering the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and furthering the
goal of disarmament. We are conscious that any attack,
intended or accidental, on any nuclear installation will
instantly activate and deploy them as nuclear weapons
with catastrophic consequences. We are therefore deeply
concerned about the fragile nuclear safety and security
situation in Ukraine, in particular at the Zaporizhzhya
plant, especially with the alarming reports of increased
shelling at the nuclear site in recent weeks and days.
Kenya welcomes the presence of the members of the
IAEA support and assistance mission to Zaporizhzhya
and urges that they receive full support and cooperation
to enable them to accomplish their objective.
We reiterate our call to the parties concerned
to exercise restraint, act with caution, refrain from
any action that could compromise nuclear safety and
security and spare no effort to minimize the possibility
of a nuclear incident. In that regard, we welcome the
seven pillars articulated by the Director General of the
IAEA and in particular endorse the call, including by
the Secretary-General, for a demilitarized perimeter
around the nuclear facility. Kenya continues to call
for an immediate cessation of the war by prioritizing
the available diplomatic tools to spare the people of
Ukraine from further suffering. Lastly, I reaffirm
Kenya’s respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank the Secretary-General and the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) for their briefings.
On 24 February, trampling on the Charter of the
United Nations and every principle of international
law, Russia attacked and invaded Ukraine. The
consequences of this illegal and unjustified war
have had repercussions in every area, including the
22-58139

06/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

humanitarian, food, energy and nuclear sectors. Let us
not shift blame. We would be facing none — I repeat,
none— of those many challenges if Russia had not
started this war. The solution to every one of them
lies first and foremost in a return to full respect for
international law, as the International Court of Justice
demanded on 16 March, and in the full restoration of
Ukraine’s sovereignty.
Among those challenges, Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine continues to pose a serious threat to
Ukrainian nuclear facilities. Russia’s illegal occupation
of the nuclear plant and the actions of Russian armed
forces in its vicinity are significantly increasing the risk
of an accident. The situation is creating an unacceptable
risk not only for Ukraine but for all of Europe. Russia
bears the responsibility for it, and Russia must live up
to its responsibility to withdraw its troops from the
plant and from all of Ukraine. Russia is attempting to
blame the other side, but it is Russia that is acting like
a pyromaniac firefighter, setting fires all over Ukraine
in order to subsequently offer its advice on how to put
them out.
France has been actively engaged for several weeks
at the highest level in facilitating sending the mission
of IAEA experts to the Zaporizhzhya plant. President
Macron and the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs
welcomed the Director General of the IAEA to Paris to
provide him with our full support. France welcomes the
mission as an encouraging and necessary first step as
well as the constructive role played by the Ukrainian
authorities in ensuring that the mission can do its work
in the best possible conditions.
The findings reported by the Agency are very
worrisome. The plant has been disconnected from
the power grid several times over the past few days.
The plant’s only remaining operational reactor was
temporarily disconnected because of a fire. As the
Director General said, the physical integrity of the plant
has been violated on several occasions, and that cannot
continue. In view of the emergency, it is imperative
that the strikes and shelling around and from within
the plant cease. All Russian military personnel and
equipment must be immediately withdrawn from the
plant — in other words, we call for its demilitarization.
The Ukrainian personnel operating the plant must
be able to carry out their duties without threat or
pressure, and Ukrainian sovereignty over the plant
must be respected. Russia must restore full control of it
and of all nuclear facilities in Ukraine to the Ukrainian

S/PV.9124

authorities and cease its attempts to divert the electricity
generated to the territories that it is occupying illegally.
France commends and will continue to support the
efforts of the IAEA Director General. In that regard,
we welcome the Agency’s willingness to establish a
permanent presence at the site of the power plant to
address nuclear safety and security and safeguards
issues. It is important that the Agency be able to carry
out its mission safely and without interference.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Grossi to respond to the
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Grossi: I value all of the comments made by
delegations concerning the work we have carried out
so far. They are a tremendous source of encouragement
with regard to the work we are undertaking and that is
to come. The purpose of all that work, as I was saying
before, is not only to produce reports — although
reports are often the indispensable basis for political
action — but to get things done and to improve the
situation. I am also grateful for the recognition of the
importance of the seven pillars we have delineated, as
well as the widespread support for our idea and our
initiative to establish an interim measure to maintain
the safety and security of the power plant through a
protection zone.
The representative of the Russian Federation asked
some more concrete questions, but if I may I will address
them globally, given that he referred to the interactions
that led to the mission and how it was facilitated. I
think it took a lot of effort from all sides and I am very
grateful for the fact that if we go back to the start of the
year — and, indeed, the months that followed — there
were plenty of obstacles that the mission had to face in
terms of its itinerary, characteristics and even logistics.
Finally, I think there was a minimum common
denominator in terms of reaching the conviction that
the mission had to proceed. That was indeed the case,
which is why I would like to acknowledge all who made
it possible. Some of the representatives here today also
referred to that.
At the moment, I would say that I think the most
important developments are yet to come. As I said
in my report, I will soon be approaching the relevant
parties with some very concrete elements for their
consideration in order to try to move forward with the

22-5813915/18

S/PV.9124

Threats to international peace and security

next logical step after the important first one, which
will be to establish immediate protection for the plant.
I am always at the disposal of the Security Council
and the Secretary-General, whose support I am very
grateful for. We will continue to count on his support
to our personnel, especially those who remain at the
plant and will have to be replaced at some point in the
rotation that we are going to establish. I know that with
the bright and dedicated people from the United Nations
Department for Safety and Security, the Department
of Operational Support and the Secretary-General
himself, we are going to be able to do it.
Now my invitation, my urge and my appeal
are for us to work together for the protection of
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant through the
establishment of a nuclear safety and security protection
zone. The International Atomic Energy Agency will be
contacting all sides very soon with concrete steps for
their consideration.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Grossi
for the clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): As well as the other
members of the Council, I recognize the representative
of the terrorist State of Russia in the permanent seat of
the Soviet Union.
I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
participation in today’s meeting. I would also like to
thank the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Rafael Grossi, for his
informative briefing.
It is a matter of regret that Russia has again
attempted to misuse the Security Council toolbox to
distract the international community’s attention from
the urgent need to demilitarize and de-occupy the
Ukrainian nuclear facility that the Russians have turned
into a military base. It is indeed interesting to observe
in this Chamber how the Russian envoy whines that he
has not had time to properly study the report released
by the IAEA, as if it were not Russia itself that called
for this meeting in such an urgent manner. I would
suggest that the only explanation for Russia’s haste is
that it was attempting to exert pressure on Director
General Grossi and his team while they were still in the
process of drafting the report. When that plan failed,
thanks to the round-the-clock work of the IAEA, which
issued the report today, before the meeting, the Russian
16/18

06/09/2022

envoy tried desperately to manipulate the situation,
using the report that he himself admitted he had not
had time to study. My advice to the Russian envoy is as
follows. First, next time he should be patient. He should
not rush, unless it is a matter of the Russian army’s
withdrawal from Ukraine; and secondly, he should not
put words in my Government’s mouth. It is my role to
speak on behalf of my Government in this Chamber,
and it will never be his.
Against a backdrop of increased security threats
following the occupation of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant, Ukraine has clearly demonstrated its
readiness to explore every option to neutralize a nuclear
risk and avert horrific consequences. In early August,
following numerous violations by the occupiers of
all the IAEA’s nuclear safety and security pillars, the
Ukrainian leadership officially requested that the IAEA
lead an international mission to the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, with an option to establish a
permanent presence for the Agency at the site until the
competent Ukrainian authorities regained full control
of the facility. Despite various provocations by Russia
on the mission’s way to the plant, Ukraine made every
effort to ensure that the mission took place as quickly
as possible and could operate safely. The preparations
for the visit and the ensuing developments revealed that
the occupying Power was willing to further engage in
nuclear terrorism and to spare no effort to misuse the
IAEA for manipulative purposes.
Ukraine appreciates the bravery and professionalism
of the IAEA mission’s experts. However, the visit was
only the first step. The Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant remains under occupation. Russian military
equipment and weapons are still deployed at the site.
Armed provocations continue and the illegally present
representatives of the Rosatom State Nuclear Energy
Corporation continue to interfere in the technological
process of the plant’s management.
Ultimately, the only way to remove the nuclear
threats resulting from the illegal Russian presence at the
plant is through the withdrawal of Russian weaponry
and troops and the return of full, legitimate control of
the station to Ukraine. That is a key prerequisite for
restoring not just nuclear safety and security but also
respect for international law. According to the IAEA
mission’s report, which we did have time to study, the
Russian military occupation has seriously affected the
safety and security of the plant. It states that under
22-58139

06/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

“the condition that the operating staff is subject to
constant high stress and pressure while operating the
[plant] is not sustainable and could lead to increased
human error with implications on nuclear safety.”
We are concerned about the fact that the Ukrainian
staff are working under such conditions, dealing with
threats and pressure from the Russians. We fully agree
with the report’s statement that it is
“essential that the Ukrainian staff operating the
plant under Russian occupation must be able to
carry out their important duties without threats or
pressure undermining not only their own safety but
also that of the facility itself.”
During previous meetings of the Security Council,
the delegation of Ukraine drew attention to Russia’s
practice of using the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
as a shield for its own personnel and hardware. Our
information has now been verified by the IAEA. Let
me quote the report.
“The team observed the presence of Russian
military personnel, vehicles and equipment at
various places at the [Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant], including several military trucks on
the ground floor of the Unit 1 and Unit 2 turbine
halls and military vehicles stationed under the
overpass connecting the reactor units. The team
also observed the presence of an expert group
from Rosenergoatom.”
The IAEA points to another important consideration in
the report, which is that
“the presence of Rosatom senior technical
staff could lead to interference with the normal
lines of operational command or authority
and create potential frictions when it comes to
decision-making.”
The delegation of Ukraine, like the IAEA mission,
finds that the efforts made by the operating personnel
“are being taken under very challenging
circumstances with military personnel and
equipment, as well as representatives of Rosatom
being present on the site.”
We therefore call on Russia to implement the report’s
recommendation for their removal.
The issue that is currently under discussion, which is
the continuing presence of the IAEA at the Zaporizhzhya

S/PV.9124

power plant, is an idea that I would like to point out
was put forward by Ukraine. The Ukrainian side stands
ready to further discuss the specific modalities of such
a presence with the IAEA. The proposal currently
under discussion should be properly assessed against
the background of potential risks and challenges. Given
the willingness of the Russian occupiers to continue
their staged provocations, we should find an efficient
way to ensure both the safety of the IAEA experts and
their immunity to Russia’s manipulations. Ukraine is
ready for immediate substantive consultations with the
IAEA on the issue of the modalities of the Agency’s
continued presence at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant with a view to stabilizing the critical situation at
the facility and avoiding further aggravation.
As President Zelenskyy said in his video address to
the nation less than an hour ago, with regard to Director
General Grossi’s proposal to create a nuclear safety
and security protection zone, we need to look at the
specific content of such an instrument. What exactly
does “protection” mean? If the proposal envisages the
demilitarization of the territory of the nuclear power
plant — which is logical, since it was the Russian
military presence that put the plant under the threat
of a radiation disaster — then we can support such a
demilitarized protection zone. In any case, it is clear
that modern international organizations will need a
much broader mandate for their actions. The President
believes that the world not only deserves, but needs
the representatives of the IAEA to force Russia to
demilitarize the territory of the nuclear power plant and
return full control of it to Ukraine.
We confirm that under no circumstances has
Ukraine ever resorted to forceful military actions
in relation to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant,
which would endanger not only our own State, but also
millions of lives in neighbouring countries. Yesterday,
due to provocative shelling by Russia, the last power
transmission line that connected the station to Ukraine’s
energy system was damaged. It was the second time
that Russian provocation had put the Zaporizhzhya
power station one step away from a nuclear disaster. As
President Zelenskyy said in his statement yesterday, we
consider the fact that Russia is doing this right now, on
the eve of the IAEA’s conclusions, to be very telling.
The shelling of the territory of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant means that the terrorist State does
not care what the IAEA says or what the international
community decides. All Russia wants is for the

22-5813917/18

S/PV.9124

Threats to international peace and security

06/09/2022

situation to remain at its worst for as long as possible.
That can be corrected only by strengthening sanctions
and by officially recognizing Russia as a terrorist State
at every level.

would not be sitting here for the third time discussing
the blatant lack of nuclear safety and security in Europe,
and there would be no risk of a nuclear incident with
consequences reaching far beyond Ukraine’s borders.

Ukraine has a very clear, transparent and honest
position. While we controlled the station, there was no
threat of a radiation disaster. However, as soon as Russia
arrived, the worst-case scenario immediately became
possible. That requires an international response from
the United Nations and every normal State. Let me
reiterate that the main outcome of the joint international
efforts must be the withdrawal of the Russian military
and civilian personnel from the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant territory and from Enerhodar. That will
definitely restore the plant to safe and secure operation,
as it was before the full-fledged Russian war against
Ukraine. As the IAEA’s report says,

In contrast to Russia’s false claims, it is the Russian
seizure of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant that
poses a serious threat to the safety and security of that
very site. It is Russia that is militarizing the power
plants. It is Russia that is placing equipment and troops
on their premises. That has created the dangerous
situation in Zaporizhzhya. That can be changed by the
Russian Federation at any time by demilitarizing the
site, and we call on Russia to do so.

“the current situation is untenable and the best
action to ensure the safety and security of Ukraine’s
nuclear facilities and its people would be for this
armed conflict to end now.”
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Zahneisen (Germany): First of all, let me thank
you, Sir, for giving us the opportunity to speak in the
Council today on this matter, which is of deep concern
to my country. I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement and Director General Grossi
for his comprehensive briefing. Like other delegations,
we thank Director General Grossi for his leadership on
the matter and very much welcome his recent report
on Zaporizhzhya. Our deep appreciation also goes
out to the International Energy Agency (IAEA) team
on the ground and to the Ukrainian operating staff in
Zaporizhzhya, who continue to work under extremely
difficult conditions.
As I said previously, my country remains deeply
concerned about the immense danger to nuclear safety
resulting from Russia’s unprovoked and illegal war of
aggression against Ukraine — a nuclear danger that
could threaten the entire European continent and beyond.
There can be no doubt as to who is responsible for the
precarious situation. It is not a chicken-or-egg question.
It is the Russian Federation that attacked its neighbour
Ukraine and illegally occupied parts of Ukrainian
territory, including the premises of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant. Without Russia’s aggression, we

18/18

Under the current circumstances, it has been of the
utmost importance to investigate the situation and to
assess the safety of the plant’s operation on the ground.
Germany, nationally and as President of the Group of
Seven, was among the countries that actively pushed
for the mission to be deployed as a matter of urgency,
and we thank the IAEA for conducting the mission
under exceptionally difficult circumstances. We agree
with the Director General that the situation at the plant
remains of grave concern with regard to nuclear security
and other issues concerning the infrastructure and
power lines, as well as the safety of the operating staff.
It is of crucial importance that the mission can
continue its work at the power plant and remain
consistently present at the site. The IAEA must be able to
permanently respond to safety, security and safeguards
concerns related to the Zaporizhzhya power plant.
Finally, we demand that Russia hand back full
control of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant to its
rightful sovereign owner, Ukraine, in order to ensure
its safe and secure operations and provide continued
electricity supply to the Ukrainian population.
In conclusion, the Russian Federation must change
its course, fully respect the letter and spirit of the Charter
of the United Nations and withdraw its armed forces
from all Ukrainian territories. The Russian Federation
must comply with the legally binding order of the
International Court of Justice to immediately suspend
all military operations against Ukraine. Germany will
continue to support the territorial integrity and political
independence of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

22-58139
