A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/196*
31 March 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 100
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/48/726)]
48/196.

International assistance to Sierra Leone

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/158 of 17 December 1982, 38/205 of
20 December 1983 and 39/192 of 17 December 1984, in which it appealed to all
States, the specialized agencies and international development and financial
institutions to provide all possible assistance for the development of Sierra
Leone,
Recalling also its resolution 37/133 of 17 December 1982, in which it
decided to include Sierra Leone in the list of the least developed countries,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 866 (1993) of
22 September 1993, in which the Council decided to establish, under its
authority, the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia to, inter alia,
monitor compliance with the peace agreement, 1/ including at points on
Liberia’s borders with Sierra Leone and other neighbouring countries,
Aware that the Government of Sierra Leone, in cooperation with the
Governments of the other States members of the Economic Community of West
African States, embarked, at the height of the Liberian crisis, upon a peacekeeping/peace-monitoring exercise at Monrovia, capital of neighbouring
Liberia,

__________
*

Reissued for technical reasons.

1/

S/26272, annex.

/...

A/RES/48/196
Page 2

Aware also of the serious destruction and devastation of the productive
areas of the territory of Sierra Leone, and of its economy as a whole, brought
about by the spill-over effect of the conflict in Liberia,
Concerned at the consequent devastating effects on the lives and
properties of Sierra Leoneans in the eastern and southern provinces, which
have resulted in massive outflows of refugees and displaced persons,
Alarmed at the astronomical cost to the Government of Sierra Leone of
protecting its territory and people from the spill-over effect of the conflict
in Liberia,
Conscious of the need for the international community to assist Sierra
Leone in the rehabilitation of its economy and the effective implementation of
reconstruction and rehabilitation programmes, which require the mobilization
of substantial resources that are beyond the current means of the country,
Aware that the financial crisis that Sierra Leone is undergoing has led
to a slowing down of its economic and social development,
1.
Expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General for his efforts
in mobilizing the international community, the United Nations system and other
organizations to provide assistance to Sierra Leone;
2.
Calls upon the international community and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to provide Sierra Leone with technical,
financial and other forms of assistance for the repatriation and resettlement
of Sierra Leonean refugees, returnees and displaced persons;
3.
Appeals to the international community and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to provide adequate assistance for the
rehabilitation of the economy of Sierra Leone and the reconstruction of its
devastated areas;
4.
Urges all States and relevant United Nations bodies to provide all
possible assistance to help the Government of Sierra Leone meet the critical
humanitarian needs of the population and to provide, as appropriate, food,
medicine and essential equipment for hospitals and schools;
5.
Urgently reiterates its appeal to the international community,
including the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system, to contribute generously, through bilateral and
multilateral channels, to the economic and social development of Sierra Leone;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize
the resources necessary for an effective programme of financial, technical and
material assistance to Sierra Leone;
7.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its forty-ninth session on the implementation of the present
resolution;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-ninth
session an item entitled "International assistance to Sierra Leone".
86th plenary meeting
21 December 1993
