8. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "The
situation in Liberia: further report of the Secretary-General (S/26200)". 9

Adopted unanimously at the 3263rd meeting.
Decisions

Resolution 856 (1993)
of 10 August 1993

In a letter dated 27 August 1993; 2 the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolution 813 (1993) of26 March 1993,

"The members of the Council have been kept informed of the
latest developments regarding the implementation of the Peace
Agreement signed at Cotonou, Benin, on 25 July 1993 10 on Liberia.

Welcoming the signing under the auspices of the Economic
Community of West African States, on 25 July 1993, at Cotonou,
Benin, of a Peace Agreement between the Interim Government of
National Unity of Liberia, the National Patriotic Front of Liberia and the
United Liberation Movement of Liberia for Democracy, 10
Considering that the signing of the Peace Agreement constitutes a
major achievement and an important contribution to the restoration of
peace and security in Liberia and in this region of West Africa, and
creates the opportunity to bring an end to the conflict,

"In this connection I wish to inform you that the Council would
support the establishment by the United Nations of a voluntary trust
fund for Liberia to finance the implementation of the Peace Agreement, including deployment of Economic Community of West
Afiican States peace-keeping troops, demobilization of combatants,
elections and humanitarian assistance, as called for by the Economic
Community of West African States at its summit meeting held at
Cotonou from 22 to 24 July 1993.

Taking note of the further report of the Secretary-General of 2
August 1993,11

"On behalfofthe members of the Council I look forward to being
informed of progress in this regard."

1. WelcQ111es the decision of the Secretary-General to send a technical
team to Liberia to gather and evaluate information relevant to the
proposed establishment of a United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia;

At its 3281st meeting, on 22 September 1993, the Council decided
to invite the representative of Liberia to participate, without vote, in the

discussion of the item entitled "The situation in Liberia: report of the
Secretary-General (S/26422 and Add. I )". 9

2. Approves the dispatch to Liberia as soon as possible of an advance
team of thirty military observers to participate in the work of the Joint
Cease-fire Monitoring Committee, im;:luding in particular to monitor,
investigate and report cease-fire violations in conjunction with the said
Committee, the mandate of said team to expire within three months;

Resolution 866 (1993)
orll September 1993

The Security Council,

3. Looks forward to the report of the Secretary-General on the
proposed establishment of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia, including in particular a detailed estimate of the cost and scope
of this operation, a time-frame for its implementation, the projected
conclusion of this operation, how to ensure coordination between the
Mission and the peace-keeping forces of the Economic Community of
West African States and their respective roles and responsibilities;

Recalling its resolutions 813 ( 1993) of 26 March 1993 and 856
(1993) of 10 August 1993,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of9 and 17
September 199313 on the proposed establishment of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia,

4. Calls upon all parties to the conflict to respect and implement the
cease-fire provided for in the Peace Agreement signed at Cotonou on
25 July 199310 and to cooperate fully with the advance mission and
ensure the safety of all United Nations personnel and all other peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel within Liberia;

Noting that the Peace Agreement si~ned by the three Liberian parties
atCotonou, Benin, on 25 July 1993 1 calls on the United Nations and
the Military Observer Group of the Economic Community of West
African States to assist in the implementation of the Agreement,

5. Urges the conclusion at the earliest possible stage of a status of
mission agreement;

Emphasizing, as noted in the report of the Secretary-General of2
August 1993,11 that the Peace Agreement assigns the Military Observer
Group the primary responsibility of supervising the implementation of
the military provisions of the Agreement and envisages that the United
Nations role shall be to monitor and verify this process,

6. Commends the Economic Community of West African States for
its efforts to restore peace, security and stability in Liberia;

7. Commends also the Organization of African Unity for its efforts
in support of the peace process in Liberia:

Noting that this would be the first peace-keeping mission undertaken
by the United Nations in cooperation with a peace-keeping mission
already set up by another organization, in this case the Economic
Community of West African States,

9

See Official Records ofthe Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year, SupplementforJ11/y, August and September 1993.
10

12

Ibid., document S/26272, annex.

13

S/26376

Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year, Supplement for July, August and September I 993. documents
S/26422 and Add. I

Ibid., document S/26200.
110

Recognizing that United Nations involvement would contribute
significantly to the effective implementation of the Peace Agreement
and would serve to underline the international community's commitment to conflict resolution in Liberia,

(c)
To observe and verify the election process, including the
legislative and presidential elections to be held in accordance with the
provisions of the Peace Agreement;

Commend1i1g the Economic Community of West African States for
its continuing efforts to restore peace, security and stability in Liberia.

(d)
To assist, as appropriate, in the coordination of humanitarian
assistance activities in the field in conjunction with the existing United
Nations humanitarian relief operation;

Commending also the efforts of the Organization of African Unity
in support of the peace process in Liberia,

(e)
To develop a plan and assess financial requirements for the
demobilization of combatants;

Snssing the importance of full cooperation and close coordination
between the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia and the
Military Observer Group in the implementation of their respective
mandates,

(j)
To report on any major violations of international humanitarian law to the Secretary-General;
(g)
To train the Military Observer Group engineers in mine
clearance and, in cooperation with the Group, coordinate the identification of mines and assist in the clearance of mines and unexploded
bombs;

Taking note of the deployment of an advance team of United
Nations military observers to Liberia as authorized under resolution 856
(1993),

(h)
Without participation in enforcement operations, to coordinate with the Military Observer Group in the discharge of the
Group's separate responsibilities both formally, through the Violation
Committee, and informally;

Welcoming the establishment of the Joint Cease-fire Monitoring
Committee composed of the three Liberian parties, the Military
Observer Group and the United Nations,

4. Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to conclude with
the Chairman of the Economic Community of West African States an
agreement defining, before deployment of the Mission, the roles and
responsibilities of the Mission and the Community in the implementation of the Peace Agreement, in accordance with the concept of
operations outlined in chapter N of the report of the Secretary-General,
and requests the Secretary-General to keep the Council informed on the
progress and outcome of the negotiations leading thereto;

Welcoming also the formation in Cotonou on 27 August 1993 of the
five-member Council of State representing all three Liberian parties
which, in accordance with the Peace Agreement, shall be installed
concomitantly with the commencement of the disarmament process
and shall be responsible for the day-to-day operation of the transitional
government,
Noting that the Peace Agreement calls for legislative and presidential
elections to take place approximately seven months after the signing of
the Peace Agreement,

5. Encourages African States to provide the additional troops
requested from them by the Economic Community of West African
States for the Military Observer Group;

1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of 9 and 17
September 1993u on the proposed establishment of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia;

6. Welcomes also the steps taken by the Secretary-General to
establish a Trust Fund for Liberia, which would facilitate the sending
of reinforcements by African States to the Military Observer Group,
assist in supporting troops of participating Group countries and also
assist in mine-clearing, humanitarian and development activities, as
weU as the electoral process, and calls on Member States to support the
peace process in Liberia by contributing to the Trust Fund;

2. Decides to establish the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia under its authority and under the direction of the SecretaryGeneral through his Special Representative for a period of seven
months, subject to the proviso that it will continue beyond 16 December 1993 only upon a review by the Council based on a report from the
Secretary-General on whether or not substantive progress has been
made towards the implementation of the Peace Agreement signed at
Cotonou on 25 July 1993 10 and other measures aimed at establishing
a lasting peace;

7. Urges the Liberian parties to commence the encampment,
disarmament and demobilization process without delay;
8. Welcomes the decision to establish the transitional government
and urges also the Liberian parties to begin the exercise of that
government's responsibilities concomitantly with the process described
in paragraph 7 above and consistent with the Peace Agreement;

3. Also decides that the Mission shall comprise military observers as
well as medical, engineering, communications, transportation and
electoral components, in the numbers indicated in the report of'the
Secretary-General, together with minimal staff necessary to support it,
and shall have the following mandate:

9. Calls 011 the transitional government to conclude expeditiously,
and no later than sixty days after its installation, a status of mission
agreement with the United Nations to facilitate the full deployment of
the Mission;

(a)
To receive and investigate all reports on alleged incidents of
violations of the cease-fire agreement and, if the violation cannot be
corrected, to report its findings to the Violation Committee established
pursuant to the Peace Agreement, and to the Secretary-General;

10.
U~the Liberian parties to finalize the composition of the
Elections Commission so that it can promptly undertake the necessary
preparations for legislative and presidential elections by March 1994,
at the latest, in accordance with the timetable foreseen in the Peace
Agreement;

(h)
To monitor compliance with other elements of the Peace
Agreement, including at points on Liberia's borders with Sierra Leone
and other neighbouring countries, and to verify its impartial application,
and in particular to assist in the monitoring of compliance with the
embargo on delivery of arms and military equipment to Liberia and the
cantonment, disarmament and demobilization of combatants;

11.
Calls on the Liberian parties to cooperate fully in the safe
delivery of humanitarian assistance to all parts of the country by the
most direct routes, in accordance with the Peace Agreement;

111

the attention of the members of the Council, who agree with the
proposal contained therein."

12.
Welcomes the stated commitment of the Military Observer
Group to ensure the safety of observers and civilian staff of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia and urges the Liberian parties to
take all necessaiy measures to ensure the security and safety of Mission
personnel, as well as of the personnel involved in relief operations, and
strictly to abide by applicable rules of international humanitarian law;

In a letter dated 17 November 1993, 18 addressed to the President of
the Security Council for the attention of the members of the Council,
the Secretary-General referred to Security Council resolution 866
(1993) of22 September 1993, by which the Council had authorized the
establishment of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia. The
Secretary-General stated that, in his letter of 4 October 1993,16 he
informed the Council of the initial list of Member States contributing
military elements to the Mission. Having completed the necessary
additional consultations, he proposed that the Czech Republic, Hungary
and Pakistan be added to the list of contributing countries. The
Secretary-General further stated that he was continuing to consult
certain other States and that he would revert to the Council when he
had an indication of whether they were also ready in principle to
contribute military personnel to the Mission.

13.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit progress reports to
the Council on the implementation of the present resolution by 16
December 1993 and by 16 February 1994;
Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

14.

Adopted unanimously at the 3281st meeting.
Decisions
In a letter dated 27 September 1993,14 addressed to the President of
the Security Council for the attention of the members of the Council,
the Secretary-General referred to Security Council resolution 866
(1993) of22 September 1993, by which the Council had authorized the
establishment of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia. The
Secretary-General stated that following the usual consultations, it was
his intention to appoint Major-General Daniel Ishmael Opande of
Kenya as the ChiefMilitary Observer of the Mission.

In a letter dated 19 November 1993,19 the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:

"I have the honour to inform you that your letter dated 17
November 1993 concerning the additions to the list of Member
States contributing military elements to the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia18 has been brought to the attention of the
members of the Council, who take note of the information contained
in your letter and agree with the proposal therein."

In a letter dated 4 October 1993,15 the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:

In a letter dated 3 December 1993,20 addressed to the President of the
Security Council for tile attention of the members of the Council, the
Secretary-General referred to his letters of 4 October 199316 and 17
November 1993 18 by which he had submitted to the Council tile list of
Member States contributing military personnel to the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia. Having completed the necessary additional
consultations, the Secretary-General proposed that India be added to the
list of contributing countries. The Secretary-General further stated that
he was continuing to consult certain other States and would revert to
the Council when he had an indication of whether they were also ready
in principle to contribute military personnel to the Mission.

"I have the honour to infonn you that your letter dated 27
September 1993 concerning the appointment of the Chief Military
Observer of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia14 has
been brought to the attention of the members of the Council, who
agree with the proposal contained therein."
In a letter dated 4 October 1993,16 addressed to the President of the
Security Council for the attention of the members of the Council, the
Secretary-General referred to Security Council resolution 866 1993 of
22 September 1993, by which the Council decided to establish a United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia. Following the usual consultations,
the Secretary-General proposed that the military elements of the
Mission be composed of personnel from the following States: Austria,
Bangladesh, China, Ecuador, Egypt, Guinea-Bissau, Jordan, Kenya,
Malaysia, Slovakia and Uruguay. The Secretary-General further stated
that he was continuing to consult certain other States and that he would
revert to the Council when he had an indication of whether they were
also ready in principle to contribute military personnel to the Mission.

In a letter dated 8 December 1993,21 the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:

''I have the honour to inform you that your letter dated 3 December 1993 concerning the addition of one country to the list of
contributing countries for the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia20 has been brought to the attention of the members of the
Council, who take note of the information contained in your letter
and agree with the proposal mentioned therein."

In a letter dated 8 October 1993 ,' 7 the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:

In a letter dated 16 December 1993,22 the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:

"I have the honour to inforn1 you that your letter dated 4 October
1993 concerning the composition of the military elements of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia 16 has been brought to

"The members of the Council have taken note of your report of
13 December 1993 on the United Nations Observer Mission in

14

18

S/26778
S/26779

S/26532.

19

ll

S/26533.

20

S/26857

16

S/26554.

21

S/26858

S/26555.

22

S/26886

17

112
