A /73/PV.62

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

62nd plenary meeting

Thursday, 20 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly will consider the reports of the Sixth
Committee on agenda items 79 to 87, 90 and 91, 111,
123, 137, 167 and 169 to 178. I request the Rapporteur
of the Sixth Committee, Ms. Nadia Alexandra Kalb of
Austria, to introduce the reports of the Committee in
one intervention.
Ms. Kalb (Austria), Rapporteur of the Sixth
Committee: I have the honour to present the reports of
the Sixth Committee on its work during the seventythird session of the General Assembly. The Assembly
allocated to the Committee 24 substantive and three
procedural agenda items, most of which fall under
three of the headings corresponding to the priorities
of the Organization, namely, “Promotion of justice and
international law”, “Drug control, crime prevention and
combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations” and “Organizational, administrative
and other matters”.
Under the first heading, “Promotion of justice and
international law”, the Sixth Committee considered
11 agenda items and adopted 16 draft resolutions
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption.
The report on agenda item 79, “Criminal accountability
of United Nations officials and experts on mission”,
is contained in document A/73/549, and the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 9 thereof.

The report on agenda item 80, entitled “Report of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-first session”, is contained
in document A/73/496, and the four draft resolutions
recommended to the Assembly for adoption are
reproduced in paragraph 14 thereof.
The report on agenda item 81, entitled “United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law”, is contained in document A/73/557.
The report on agenda item 82, entitled “Report of
the International Law Commission on the work of its
seventieth session”, is contained in document A/73/556,
and the three draft resolutions recommended to the
Assembly for adoption are reproduced in paragraph 12:
draft resolution I, entitled, “Report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its seventieth session”;
draft resolution II, entitled “Subsequent agreements and
subsequent practice in relation to the interpretation of
treaties”; and draft resolution III, entitled “Identification
of customary international law”.
The report on agenda item 83, entitled “Status of
the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed
conflicts”, is contained in document A/73/555.
The report on agenda item 84, entitled
“Consideration of effective measures to enhance the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives”, is contained in
document A/73/554.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-45430 (E)

*1845430*

A/73/PV.62

The report on agenda item 85, entitled “Report of
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization”, is contained in document A/73/486.
The report on agenda item 86, entitled “The rule
of law at the national and international levels”, is
contained in document A/73/553.
The report on agenda item 87, entitled “The
scope and application of the principle of universal
jurisdiction”, is contained in document A/73/550.
The report on agenda item 90, entitled “Protection
of persons in the event of disasters”, is contained in
document A/73/558.
The report on agenda item 91, entitled
“Strengthening and promoting the international treaty
framework”, is contained in document A/73/560. Under
the terms of the draft resolution, which is reproduced
in paragraph 7 of the report, the Assembly would
amend the regulations to give effect to Article 102 of
the Charter.
I shall now turn to the heading “Drug control,
crime prevention and combating international terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations”, under which the
Sixth Committee considered agenda item 111, entitled
“Measures to eliminate international terrorism”. The
relevant report is contained in document A/73/551,
and the draft resolution is reproduced in paragraph
9 thereof.
Under the third and final heading, “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”, the Sixth Committee
considered 12 substantive and two procedural items.
Agenda item 147, entitled “Administration of justice
at the United Nations”, was allocated to the Fifth and
Sixth Committees. The views of the Sixth Committee
on that item were transmitted to the Fifth Committee
through a letter from the President of the General
Assembly dated 13 November 2018 and annexed to
document A/C.5/73/11.
The report on agenda item 167, entitled “Report of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”, is
contained in document A/73/552.
Furthermore, the Sixth Committee considered 10
requests for observer status in the General Assembly. It
recommended that the Assembly grant observer status
to the New Development Bank, under agenda item
174; the International Council for the Exploration of
2/35

20/12/2018

the Sea, under agenda item 175; the European Public
Law Organization, under agenda item 176; the Asian
Infrastructure Investment Bank, under agenda item
177; and the International Think Tank for Landlocked
Developing Countries, under agenda item 178. The
reports concerning those requests are found in
documents A/73/463, A/73/465, A/73/462, A/73/464
and A/73/466, respectively.
The Committee further recommended that
the Assembly defer to the seventy-fourth session a
decision on the requests for observer status in the
General Assembly for the Cooperation Council of
Turkic-speaking States, under agenda item 169; the
Eurasian Economic Union, under agenda item 170; the
Community of Democracies, under agenda item 171;
the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands Secretariat, under
agenda item 172; and the Global Environment Facility,
under agenda item 173. The reports on those requests are
contained in documents A/73/433, A/73/434, A/73/467,
A/73/436 and A/73/435, respectively.
Concerning the two procedural items — agenda
item 123, entitled “Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly”, and agenda item 137, entitled
“Programme planning” — the report under agenda item
123, which contains the provisional programme of work
of the Sixth Committee for the seventy-fourth session,
is to be found in document A/73/559, while the report
on programme planning is contained in document
A/73/563, and no further action by the Assembly
is required.
The draft resolutions and the draft decisions
relating to the agenda items under all three headings
were adopted by the Sixth Committee without a vote,
and it is my hope that the General Assembly will be in
a position to do the same.
Finally, I wish to inform the Assembly that there is
no report in respect of agenda item 5, entitled “Election
of the officers of the Main Committees”. Consistent
with previous practice, the election of the officers of
the Sixth Committee for the seventy-fourth session
will be taken up at a later stage in the course of the
current session.
That concludes my introduction of the reports of
the Sixth Committee. Let me take this opportunity
to express my gratitude to the Chair of the Sixth
Committee, Ambassador Michel Xavier Biang of
Gabon, for his dedicated work and the commendable
leadership he provided to the Committee, as well as the
18-45430

20/12/2018

other members of the Bureau, Ms. Maria Angela Ponce
of the Philippines, Mrs. Barbara Kremžar of Slovenia
and Mr. Patrick Luna of Brazil, for their cooperation
and friendship. I also wish to thank all representatives
and colleagues for their valuable contributions to the
success of the session. Finally, I would like to express
my gratitude and appreciation to the secretariat of the
Sixth Committee and to the Codification Division of
the Office of Legal Affairs for its efficient and valuable
support and for the competent and professional advice
provided throughout the session.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Sixth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the reports of the Sixth Committee that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Statements will
therefore be limited to explanations of vote or position.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7
of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
when the same draft resolution is considered in a Main
Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation should,
as far as possible, explain its vote only once, that is,
either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless
that delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.
May I also remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I therefore
hope that we may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Committee.
Members are reminded that additional sponsors
are no longer accepted now that draft resolutions and

A/73/PV.62

decisions have been adopted by the Committee. Any
clarification about sponsorship should be addressed to
the Secretary of the Committee.
Agenda item 79
Criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/549)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/196).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 79?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 80
Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its fiftyfirst session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/496)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it four draft resolutions recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 14 of its report.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Report
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-first session”. The
Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 73/197).
The President (spoke in Spanish): We now turn to
draft resolution II, entitled “United Nations Convention
on International Settlement Agreements Resulting from
Mediation”. The Sixth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 73/198).

18-454303/35

A/73/PV.62

The President (spoke in Spanish): We now
turn to draft resolution III, entitled “Model Law on
International Commercial Mediation and International
Settlement Agreements Resulting from Mediation of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law”. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 73/199).
The President (spoke in Spanish): We now turn to
draft resolution IV, entitled “Model Law on Recognition
and Enforcement of Insolvency-Related Judgments of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law”. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 73/200).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Singapore, who has asked
to speak in explanation of position.
Mr. Khng (Singapore): Singapore would like to
take this opportunity to express its appreciation to
Member States for their support for resolution 73/198,
entitled “United Nations Convention on International
Settlement Agreements Resulting from Mediation”,
which adopts the Convention and authorizes a ceremony
in Singapore on 7 August 2019 for the Convention’s
opening for signature.
We commend the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law for its recent work on
mediation. The Convention provides a uniform and
efficient framework for the enforcement of international
settlement agreements resulting from mediation and
for allowing parties to invoke such agreements, and the
amended Model Law, contained in resolution 73/199,
seeks to harmonize the legal frameworks in this area.
We believe that both instruments will facilitate the
growth of international commerce, to the benefit of the
global economy.
Singapore is honoured to be associated with the
Convention. We look forward to welcoming delegations
to Singapore in August next year to be among the first
signatories of the Convention and to participate in the
events that will be organized in conjunction with the
signing ceremony.
4/35

20/12/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 80?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 81
United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/557)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I consider
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/201).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 81?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 82
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its seventieth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/556)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it three draft resolutions recommended by
the Sixth Committee in paragraph 12 of its report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution I, entitled
“Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its seventieth session”, is postponed to a later
date to allow time for the review of its programme
budget implications by the Fifth Committee. The
Assembly will take action on draft resolution I as soon
as the report of the Fifth Committee on its programme
budget implications is available.
We therefore first turn to draft resolution II, entitled
“Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice in
relation to the interpretation of treaties”. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
18-45430

20/12/2018

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 73/202).
The President (spoke in Spanish): We now turn to
draft resolution III, entitled “Identification of customary
international law”. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 73/203).
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 82.
Agenda item 83
Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection
of victims of armed conflicts
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/555)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I consider
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/204).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 83?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 84
Consideration of effective measures to enhance the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/554)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/205).

A/73/PV.62

The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 84?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 85
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/486)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/206).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 85?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 86
The rule of law at the national and international
levels
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/553)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/207).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic,
who has asked to speak in explanation of position.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation would like once
again to express its reservations about paragraph 3 of
resolution 73/207, which has just been adopted, and
dissociates itself from the consensus on that paragraph,
given that it refers to a report of the Secretary-General
contained in document A/73/253.

18-454305/35

A/73/PV.62

20/12/2018

The basis for our reservations is paragraph
63 of the Secretary-General’s report, which falls
under sub-heading II.C.2.(iv), “Other international
accountability mechanisms”. Syria believes that
the content of that paragraph is inappropriate and
unbalanced in view of the fact that the General Assembly
is determined to promote the so-called International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. In that regard, I would like to reiterate previous
statements I have made here at the General Assembly
explaining that the Syrian Arab Republic’s position on
the Mechanism can in no way be interpreted as Syria’s
acceptance or recognition of it, its mandate or its
illegitimate activities.

territory, is null and void. It therefore cannot be used in
future in any legal or legislative proceedings.

Two years after that illegitimate Mechanism’s
establishment through a non-consensus General
Assembly resolution (resolution 71/248), Syria remains
entirely confident that our political and legal position
with regard to the Mechanism is correct and credible.
Its establishment was a violation of the Charter of the
United Nations. It constituted an act of aggression
against the competencies and mandate of the Security
Council and was an example of the politicization of the
work of the General Assembly.

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/550)

Today I should emphasize and point out to the
members of the General Assembly, who are entrusted
with upholding justice, international law and the
Charter, that the Secretariat and the Office for Legal
Affairs, along with those Member States that, sadly, have
promoted this illegitimate Mechanism, have been unable
for two years to respond to any of the legal arguments
set forth in our frequent communications to them about
it. I refer in particular to the communications from the
Syrian Permanent Mission contained in documents
A/73/562, A/72/106 and A/71/799, which categorically
and unquestionably show that the so-called Mechanism
is merely a distorted and illegitimate body that was
dead on arrival and still is. The Mechanism cannot
legally be considered a subsidiary body created by the
General Assembly or one with legal status. Because the
Mechanism cannot conclude agreements with Member
States or other entities, the United Nations cannot accept
voluntary contributions or make budgetary allocations
to support the Mechanism’s work. Moreover, any
information or evidence collected by the Mechanism,
and subsequently saved and analysed outside of Syrian
6/35

In conclusion, I urge members to carefully read the
legal analysis of the Mechanism prepared and submitted
by the Syrian Arab Republic entitled “Wrongful Acts
Can’t Be Promoted or Legalized”, which is annexed to
a letter addressed to the Secretary-General (A/73/562).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 86?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 87
The scope and application of the principle of
universal jurisdiction
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/208).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 87?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 90
Protection of persons in the event of disasters
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/558)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/209).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 90?
It was so decided.
18-45430

20/12/2018

Agenda item 91
Strengthening and promoting the international
treaty framework
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/560)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/210).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 91?
It was so decided.

A/73/PV.62

The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/532).
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 123.
Agenda item 137 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/563)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Sixth Committee?
It was so decided (decision 73/533).
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 137.

Agenda item 111

Agenda item 167

Measures to eliminate international terrorism

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/551)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/211).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 111?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/559)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision, entitled “Provisional
programme of work of the Sixth Committee for the
seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly”. The
Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/552)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/212).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
call on those representatives who wish to speak in
explanation of position.
Mr. Musikhin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation supported resolution
73/212 but would nevertheless like to comment on
paragraph 12, in which the General Assembly expresses
“its appreciation for the efforts made by the host
country, and expects that the issues raised at the
meetings of the Committee will be resolved in a spirit
of cooperation and in accordance with international
law, including the Headquarters Agreement”.
The Russian delegation fully supports the part of that
paragraph that calls on the host country to abide by its
international legal obligations, which is particularly

18-454307/35

A/73/PV.62

relevant given the current disastrous state of affairs
with regard to the issue. The United States authorities
have embarked on a course of broadly violating their
obligations under the Headquarters Agreement and
other relevant international treaties, including the
Convention on Privileges and Immunities of the United
Nations, as well as the decisions of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country and the relevant
General Assembly resolutions on the agenda item under
consideration today.
The tone and content of the resolution have become
more strident this year. The host country is urged to
cease its ongoing illegal actions. Unfortunately, we see
no willingness on the part of United States authorities
to respond to the calls of the General Assembly.
Among other things, that is demonstrated by the
ongoing restrictions applied to part of the premises
of the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation,
referred to in paragraph 3, and the long-standing
discriminatory attitude to a number of delegations,
culminating in the imposition of a 25-mile restrictive
zone that limits the movement of diplomats and of
deliberate visa restrictions for Mission personnel and,
just recently, for staff members in the Secretariat. Those
all-encompassing violations now affect a number of
permanent missions and citizens of countries working
in the Secretariat. These discriminatory measures are
being imposed on States whose independent positions
are not to the liking of Washington. However, it is clear
that no one is immune to such illegal measures.
Against that background, I am certain that all will
agree that the Assembly’s expression of “appreciation”
in paragraph 12 is ridiculous. The Russian delegation
cannot agree with such language and dissociates itself
from the consensus on paragraph 12 of resolution
73/212.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation would also like to
express its reservation with regard to, and dissociation
from, the consensus on paragraph 12 of resolution
73/212, just adopted. The reason for our reservation
and dissociation is that we want to be in line with the
positions that we have always maintained under this
agenda item, whether at the frequent meetings of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country or
during meetings of the Sixth Committee. We still firmly
believe that the reactions of the host country on the
issues of implementing the relevant General Assembly
resolutions, its commitment to the recommendations
8/35

20/12/2018

of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
and its respect for international law, including the
Headquarters Agreement, do not in general suggest
that the future looks bright for the straightforward
implementation of those resolutions, recommendations
and conventions.
Despite our deep appreciation for the administration
of the City of New York and its employees, and for the
efforts of the personnel of the Permanent Mission of the
United States of America to the United Nations aimed at
addressing the concerns, requests and issues referred to
them, we continue to believe that the problem is not here
in New York. Rather, it comes from politicized decisions
and punitive restrictions from the host Government,
which seeks to punish certain permanent missions
and United Nations staff of particular nationalities as
a result of political disagreements between the United
States Government and the Governments of other
countries.
Nevertheless, in that regard, I want to highlight
that the most recent meeting of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, held on 18 December,
was significant and promising in that it allowed us to
discuss various important and constructive proposals,
all of which were taken very seriously, with a view to
finding solutions to the restrictions, complexities and
measures that are being imposed on certain permanent
missions and certain Secretariat staff who are citizens
of particular countries.
In conclusion, we look forward to the SecretaryGeneral becoming seriously engaged on this important
issue in the coming days. We also look forward to future
communications from, and initiatives launched by, the
Permanent Representative of Cyprus in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country, for the purposes of seeking to implement the
recommendations and conclusions set out in the latest
report of the Committee (A/73/26). Moreover, we want
to see the Government of the host country adopt new
approaches that would enable a more positive outlook
and the possibility of putting an end, once and for
all, to the punitive and discriminatory restrictions I
mentioned.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 167?
It was so decided.
18-45430

20/12/2018

Agenda item 169
Observer status for the Cooperation Council of
Turkic-speaking States in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/433)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?

A/73/PV.62

The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/536).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 171?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 172
Observer status for the Ramsar Convention on
Wetlands Secretariat in the General Assembly

The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/534).

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/436)

The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 169?

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?

It was so decided.
Agenda item 170
Observer status for the Eurasian Economic Union
in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/434)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/535).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 170?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 171
Observer status for the Community of Democracies
in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/467)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?

The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/537).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 172?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 173
Observer status for the Global Environment
Facility in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/435)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/538).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 173?
It was so decided.

18-454309/35

A/73/PV.62

Agenda item 174
Observer status for the New Development Bank in
the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/463)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will
now take action on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/213).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 174?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 175
Observer status for the International Council for
the Exploration of the Sea in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/465)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/214).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 175?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 176
Observer status for the International Council for
the European Public Law Organization in the
General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/462)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
10/35

20/12/2018

Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/215).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 176?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 177
Observer status for the International Council for
the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank in the
General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/464)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/216).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 177?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 178
Observer status for the International Council for
the International Think Tank for Landlocked
Developing Countries in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/466)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/217).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 178?
It was so decided.
18-45430

20/12/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
General Assembly, I would like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Michel Xavier Biang of Gabon, Chair of the Sixth
Committee, the members of the Bureau and delegations
for a job well done.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Sixth Committee
before it.
Mr. Korneliou (Cyprus), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was suspended at 11.05 a.m. and
resumed at 11.10 a.m.
Reports of the Second Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now consider the reports of the Second Committee
on agenda items 17 to 27, 64, 123 and 137. I request
the Rapporteur of the Second Committee, Ms. Anneli
Lepp of Estonia, to introduce the reports of the Second
Committee in one intervention.
Ms. Lepp (Estonia), Rapporteur of the Second
Committee: It is an honour for me to introduce to the
General Assembly the reports of the Second Committee
on the agenda items allocated to it by the General
Assembly at its seventy-third session.
The reports, contained in documents A/73/535 to
A/73/548, include the texts of draft resolutions and draft
decisions recommended by the Second Committee to the
General Assembly for adoption. For the convenience of
delegations, a checklist of action taken in the Committee
has been prepared by the Secretariat and is contained in
document A/C.2/73/INF/1, in English only.
During the main part of the seventy-third session
of the General Assembly, the Second Committee held
28 plenary meetings and two special events, as well
as a joint formal meeting with the Economic and
Social Council. The Committee also held its annual
dialogue with the Executive Secretaries of the Regional
Commissions. The Second Committee adopted a total
of 39 draft resolutions, eleven of which were adopted by
recorded vote, and two draft decisions.
Under agenda item 17, entitled “Information
and communications technologies for sustainable
development”, the Second Committee recommends,
in paragraph 17 of its report contained in document
A/73/535, the adoption of one draft resolution.

A/73/PV.62

Under agenda item 18, entitled “Macroeconomic
policy questions”, the report of the Second Committee
is issued in five parts. The report under the chapeau
is contained in document A/73/536, and the
recommendations are contained in the following
addenda.
Under sub-item (a) of agenda item 18, entitled
“International trade and development”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 13 of its report
contained in document A/73/536/Add.1, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 18, entitled
“International financial system and development”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of
its report contained in document A/73/536/Add.2, the
adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (c) of agenda item 18, entitled
“External debt sustainability and development”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of
its report contained in document A/73/536/Add.3, the
adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (d) of agenda item 18, entitled
“Promotion of international cooperation to combat
illicit financial flows and strengthen good practices on
assets return to foster sustainable development”, the
Second Committee recommends, in in paragraph 11 of
its report contained in document A/73/536/Add.4, the
adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 19, entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the outcomes of the International
Conferences on Financing for Development”, the
Committee recommends, in paragraph 12 of its report
contained in document A73/537, the adoption of one
draft resolution.
Under agenda item 20, entitled “Sustainable
development”, the report of the Second Committee
has been issued in 12 parts. The report under the
chapeau is contained in document A/73/538, and the
recommendations are contained in the chapeau, as well
as in the addenda.
Under the chapeau of item 20, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 20 of its report
contained in document A/73/538, the adoption of two
draft resolutions.
Under sub-item (a) of agenda item 20, entitled
“Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the

18-4543011/35

A/73/PV.62

Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
and of the United Nations Conference on sustainable
Development”, the Second Committee recommends,
in paragraph 14 of its report contained in document
A/73/538/Add.1, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 20, entitled
“Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway and
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 13 of
its report contained in document A/73/538/Add.2, the
adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under sub-item (c) of agenda item 20, entitled
“Disaster risk reduction”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 17 of its report contained
in document A/73/538/Add.3, the adoption of two draft
resolutions.
Under sub-item (d) of agenda item 20, entitled
“Protection of global climate for present and future
generations of humankind”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 9 of its report contained in
document A/73/538/Add.4, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under sub-item (e) of agenda item 20, entitled
“Implementation of the United Nations Convention
to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 8 of its report contained in
document A/73/538/Add.5, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under sub-item (f) of agenda item 20, entitled
“Convention on Biological Diversity”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 11 of its report
contained in document A/73/538/Add.6, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (g) of agenda item 20, entitled
“Report of the United Nations Environment Assembly
of the United Nations Environment Programme”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 19 of
its report contained in document A/73/538/Add.7, the
adoption of one draft resolution. The consideration
of the draft resolution will take place at a later date
12/35

20/12/2018

following the review by the Fifth Committee of the
related programme budget implications.
Under sub-item (h) of agenda item 20, entitled
“Harmony with Nature”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 12 of its report contained
in document A/73/538/Add.8, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under sub-item (i) of agenda item 20, entitled
“Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable
and modern energy for all”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 10 of its report contained
indocument A/73/538/Add.9, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under sub-item (j) of agenda item 20, entitled
“Combating sand and dust storms”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of its report
contained in document A/73/538/Add.10, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (k) of agenda item 20, entitled “The
role of the international community in the prevention
of the radiation threat in Central Asia”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of its report
contained in document A/73/538/Add.11, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 21, entitled “Implementation
of the outcomes of the United Nations Conferences on
Human Settlements and on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development and strengthening of the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)”,
the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 15 of
its report contained in document A/73/539, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 22, entitled “Globalization and
interdependence”, the report of the Committee is issued
in three parts. The report under the chapeau is contained
in document A/73/540, and the recommendations are
contained in the following addenda.
Under sub-item (a) of agenda item 22, entitled
“Globalization and interdependence”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of its report
contained in document A/73/540/Add.1, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 22, entitled
“International migration and development”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of its report
18-45430

20/12/2018

A/73/PV.62

contained in document A/73/540/add.2, the adoption of
one draft resolution.

the recommendations are contained in the following
addenda.

Under agenda item 23, entitled “Groups of
countries in special situations”, the report of the
Committee is issued in three parts. The report under
the chapeau is contained in document A/73/541, and
the recommendations are contained in the following
addenda.

Under sub-item (a) of agenda item 25, entitled
“Operational activities for development of the United
Nations system”, the Second Committee recommends,
in paragraph 10 of its report contained in document
A/73/543/Add.1, the adoption of one draft resolution.

Under sub-item (a) of agenda item 23, entitled
“Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 8 of its report contained in
document A/73/541/Add.1, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 23, entitled
“Follow-up to the second United Nations Conference
on Landlocked Developing Countries”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of its report
contained in document A/73/541/Add.2, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 24, entitled “Eradication of
poverty and other development issues”, the report of the
Committee is issued in three parts. The report under
the chapeau is contained in document A/73/542, and the
recommendations are contained in the chapeau, as well
as in the addenda.
Under the chapeau of item 24, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 21 of its report
contained in document A/73/542, the adoption of two
draft resolutions.
Under sub-item (a) of agenda item 24, entitled
“Implementation of the Third United Nations Decade
for the Eradication of Poverty (2018-2027)”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of its report
contained in document A/73/542/Add.1, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 24, entitled
“Industrial development cooperation”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 10 of its report
contained in document A/73/542/Add.2, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 25, entitled “Operational
activities for development”, the report of the
Committee is issued in three parts. The report under
the chapeau is contained in document A/731543, and

Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 25, entitled
“South-South cooperation for development”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 12 of its report
contained in document A/73/543/Add.2, the adoption of
one draft resolution, and in paragraph 13, the adoption
of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 26, entitled “Agriculture
development, food security and nutrition”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 29 of its report
contained indocument A/73/544, the adoption of four
draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 27, entitled “Towards global
partnerships”, the Second Committee recommends,
in paragraph 11 of its report contained indocument
A/73/545, the adoption of one draft resolution.
In connection with that draft resolution, on behalf
of the Committee, I would like to present an oral
revision, consisting of the insertion of three preambular
paragraphs, which were agreed upon by Member States
participating in the informal consultations, but were
inadvertently omitted from the version on which action
was taken by the Committee, as well as an agreed oral
revision to paragraph 10. The revision reads as follows.
First, following the seventh preambular paragraph,
the following two preambular paragraphs should be
added:
“Noting that relevant stakeholders, including
the private sector entities, need information about
and understanding of the nature and the scope of
the Sustainable Development Goals, and of the
modalities by which they can engage with the
Goals, and, in this regard, decisive action is also
imperative for raising awareness of the Sustainable
Development Goals at all levels;
“Recognizing that while progress is being
made on the global engagement of the private sector
regarding the sustainable Development Goals at the
level of perception and awareness as well as the
inclusion of sustainability on the business models

18-4543013/35

A/73/PV.62

by some companies, the immense potential of
support for the Sustainable Development Goals, in
particular by small and medium-sized enterprises,
still represents a largely unutilized source for the
Goals’ full implementation”.
Secondly, following the eleventh preambular
paragraph, the following preambular paragraph should
be added:
“Welcoming, in the context of enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and
all its relevant partners, including through
multi-stakeholder partnerships, efforts to step
up international cooperation and collaboration in
science, research, technology and innovation on
the basis of common interest and mutual benefit,
focusing on the needs of developing countries and
the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”.
Thirdly, in paragraph 10, the words “such as United
Nations technology innovation laboratories’” should
be replaced by the words “such as the United Nations
Technology Innovation Labs”.
That concludes the proposed revisions under
item 27.
Under agenda item 64, entitled “Permanent
sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of
the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over
their natural resources”, the Committee recommends,
in paragraph 16 of its report contained in document
A/73/546, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 123, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of its report
contained in document A/73/547, the adoption of one
draft decision.
Under agenda item 137, entitled “Programme
planning”, as indicated in paragraph 2 of document
A/73/548, no action was required on the item.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
cooperation that prevails in the Second Committee.
Alhough the work of the Committee had to be extended
by two working days to enable it to reach a conclusion on
all the items before it, the Committee was able to fulfil
the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly and
complete its work effectively and constructively. The
14/35

20/12/2018

Committee concluded its work on 3 December, which
was commendable given that the Committee started its
substantive work relatively late, on 8 October.
On behalf of the Bureau of the Second Committee,
I would like to express our deep appreciation to all
the facilitators and coordinators and to all delegations
for their constructive participation and commitment.
I want to take this opportunity to acknowledge the
leadership of our Chair, His Excellency Jorge SkinnerKlée Arenales of Guatemala, as well as the commitment
of the other members of the Bureau and Vice-Chairs,
Mr. Mehdi Remaoun of Algeria, Mr. Cédric Braquetti
of Monaco and Ms. Hessa Alateibi of the United Arab
Emirates.
I also want to express the Bureau’s thanks to the
Secretary of the Second Committee and her team from
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management for the support and guidance provided
to the Bureau and to delegations, as well as to the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs and other
substantive offices that supported the work of the
Committee.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur of
the Second Committee.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Committee have been made
clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records. If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall therefore take it that
the General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports
of the Second Committee that are before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote or position. I would like
to remind members that, in accordance with decision
34/401, a delegation should, as far as possible, explain
its vote only once, that is, either in the committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the committee. In
addition, I remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
I should like to advise representatives that we shall
proceed to take decisions on the recommendations
contained in the report of the Second Committee in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
18-45430

20/12/2018

A/73/PV.62

Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. This means
that where separate or recorded votes were taken, we
will do the same. I should also hope that we may proceed
to adopt without a vote those recommendations that
were so adopted in the Second Committee. The results
of the votes will be uploaded to the PaperSmart portal.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 17?

I would like to draw the attention of members to a
note by the Secretariat, in English only, entitled “List
of proposals contained in the reports of the Second
Committee”, which has been circulated as document
A/C.2/73/INF/1. The note has been distributed desk
to desk in the General Assembly Hall as a reference
guide for action on draft resolutions and decisions
recommended by the Second Committee in its reports.
Members will find, in the fourth column of the note,
the symbols of the draft resolutions or decisions of
the Committee, with the corresponding symbols of
the reports for action in the plenary in column two
of the same note. For reports containing multiple
recommendations, the draft resolution or decision
number is contained in column three of the note.

Macroeconomic policy questions

Members are reminded that additional sponsors
are no longer accepted now that draft resolutions and
decisions have been adopted in the Committee. Any
clarification about sponsorship in the Committee reports
should be addressed to the Secretary of the Committee.
Members are also reminded that any corrections
to the voting intention of delegations after the voting
has concluded on a proposal should be made directly to
the Secretariat after the meeting. I count on members’
cooperation in avoiding any interruptions to our
proceedings in this regard.
Agenda item 17
Information and communications technologies for
sustainable development
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/535)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 17 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Second Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/218).

It was so decided.
Agenda item 18
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/536)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided (decision 73/539).
(a) International trade and development
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/536/
Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report.
I now call on the representative of Switzerland,
who wishes to speak in explanation of vote before
the voting.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I have the honour to
deliver a statement on behalf of the following countries:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Kenya, Laos, Liechtenstein, Malaysia,
Mexico, Myanmar, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
Peru, the Philippines, the Russian Federation, Thailand,
Turkey, Saint Lucia, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa,
the Sudan, Venezuela and my own country, Switzerland.
As the Second Committee’s deliberations are
coming to an end, we, a cross-regional group of
like-minded countries, feel the need to reaffirm our
joint commitment to the multilateral trading system
for the global economy. The United Nations has the
mandate to address global economic and financial
governance issues, including the multilateral trading
system and its impact on sustainable development.
In that regard, we attach great importance to the
development and strengthening of the multilateral
trading system centred around the World Trade
Organization (WTO) that is universal, rules-based, open,

18-4543015/35

A/73/PV.62

transparent, predictable, inclusive, non-discriminatory
and equitable. We greatly value the WTO’s framework
and rules, which foster international trade and
development, facilitate the peaceful settlement of trade
disputes and serve as a bulwark against protectionism.
The WTO has contributed to the strength, predictability
and stability of the global economy.
We believe that the multilateral trading system
fosters coherence among trade policies across the
globe and allows regional and bilateral initiatives to be
mutually supportive in advancing a progressive trade
agenda and economic development. We reaffirm that
international trade is an engine for inclusive economic
growth and poverty reduction and contributes to the
promotion of sustainable development as recognized
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We underline the importance for all to benefit
from the opportunities that the multilateral trading
system generates.
The Acting President: We shall now take a
decision on the draft resolution. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
16/35

20/12/2018

Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 184 votes to 1
(resolution 73/219).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 18?
It was so decided.
(b) International financial system and development
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/536/
Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We shall now take a decision on the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
18-45430

20/12/2018

Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America

A/73/PV.62

The draft resolution was adopted by 184 votes to 1
(resolution 73/220).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Georgia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: May I take that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of sub-item (b) of agenda item 18?
It was so decided.
(c) External debt sustainability and development
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/536/
Add. 3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/221).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 18?
It was so decided.
(d) Promotion of international cooperation to
combat illicit financial flows and strengthen
good practices on assets return to foster
sustainable development
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/536/
Add.4)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/222).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 18 and of agenda item 18
as a whole.

18-4543017/35

A/73/PV.62

Agenda item 19
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcomes
of the International Conferences on Financing for
Development
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/537)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/223).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 19.
Agenda item 20
Sustainable development
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 20 of its report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions
I and II, one by one. Draft resolution I is entitled
“Oil slick on Lebanese shores”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
18/35

20/12/2018

(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Guatemala, Honduras,
Papua New Guinea, Tonga, Vanuatu
Draft resolution I was adopted by 166 votes to 7,
with 7 abstentions (resolution 73/224).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Entrepreneurship for sustainable development”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
18-45430

20/12/2018

Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet
Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Brunei Darussalam, Cuba,
Djibouti, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Yemen
Abstaining:
Bangladesh, China, Nicaragua, South Africa,
Turkey
Draft resolution II was adopted by 153 votes to 25,
with 5 abstentions (resolution 73/225).

A/73/PV.62

[Subsequently, the delegations of Bahrain, Lebanon
and the Plurinational State of Bolivia informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote against.]
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda
21 and the outcomes of the World Summit
on Sustainable Development and of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/
Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Midterm
comprehensive review of the implementation of the
International Decade for Action, ‘Water for Sustainable
Development’, 2018–2028. The Second Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 73/226).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
and of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,

18-4543019/35

A/73/PV.62

Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Abstaining:
New Zealand, Norway, Turkey
Draft resolution II was adopted by 135 votes to 47,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 73/227).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 20.
(b) Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme
20/35

20/12/2018

of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/
Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (SAMOA) Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy
for the Further Implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States”. The Second Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 73/228).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Towards the sustainable development of the
Caribbean Sea for present and future generations”. The
Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 73/229).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
those representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of position on the resolutions just adopted.
Ms. Fidan (Turkey): Turkey joined the consensus
on resolution 73/229, entitled “Towards the sustainable
development of the Caribbean Sea for present and
future generations”, as it addresses important issues
with respect to the sustainable development of the
Caribbean region. We fully support the efforts of
the Association of Caribbean States to develop and
implement regional initiatives to promote sustainable
conservation management of the coastal and marine
resources of those States.
Turkey dissociates itself, however, from references
made in this resolution to the international instruments
to which it is not party. Those references, therefore,
cannot be construed as a change in the legal position
of Turkey with regard to the resolution. We would also
like to recall that Turkey does not consider the language
in resolution 73/124 on oceans and the law of the seas
with regard to the United Nations Convention on the
18-45430

20/12/2018

Law of the Sea as agreed language. It therefore calls for
a vote on that resolution every year.
Mr. González (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
As a nation with coasts on the Atlantic and Pacific
Oceans, Colombia’s geography enables it to enjoy great
diversity in terms of marine and coastal ecosystems. My
country is therefore committed to their conservation,
protection and sustainable development through the
implementation of policies, plans and programmes
that underscore the importance of those issues at the
national, regional and international levels. In addition,
my country relies on a robust institutional framework
for addressing marine and coastal matters and a holistic
approach by which the sea, the coast and its resources
are all included as key elements for ensuring the
country’s sustainable development.
Colombia is developing its activities in the marine
environment in strict compliance with the various
international commitments that it has expressly adopted
or accepted. We would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate that we have not yet ratified the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS),
as its provisions are not effective or enforceable except
for those that we have expressly accepted. Similarly,
the Government of Colombia does not share the belief
that UNCLOS is the sole normative framework for
governing ocean activities. Consequently, my country
reiterates that resolution 73/229 and its adoption by
consensus cannot be considered or interpreted in any
way that would imply the express or tacit acceptance
by the Colombian State of the provisions contained
in UNCLOS.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 20.
(c) Disaster risk reduction
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/
Add. 3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 17 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Effective global
response to address the impacts of the El Niño
phenomenon”. The Second Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

A/73/PV.62

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 73/230).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Disaster risk reduction”. The Committee
adopted draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 73/231).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
(d) Protection of global climate for present and
future generations of humankind
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/
Add.4)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/232).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 20.
(e) Implementation of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/
Add.5)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/233).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.

18-4543021/35

A/73/PV.62

(f) Convention on Biological Diversity
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/
Add.6)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Implementation of the Convention on
Biological Diversity and its contribution to sustainable
development”. The Second Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/234).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
(g) Report of the United Nations Environment
Assembly of the United Nations Environment
Programme
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/
Add.7)
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that action on the draft resolution contained
in paragraph 19 of the report is postponed to a later date
to allow time for the review of its programme budget
implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly
will take action on the draft resolution as soon as the
report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget
implications is available.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 20.
(h) Harmony with Nature
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/
Add.8)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/235).
22/35

20/12/2018

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (h)
of agenda item 20.
(i) Ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/
Add.9)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/236).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda
item 20?
It was so decided.
(j) Combating sand and dust storms
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/
Add.10)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/237).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (j) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
(k) The role of the international community in the
prevention of the radiation threat in Central
Asia
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/
Add.11)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Committee
18-45430

20/12/2018

adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/238).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mrs. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan): The adoption
of resolution 73/238 shows the commitment of the
international community to developing cooperation
and coordination and decreasing threats from sites
of former uranium mining activity, especially from
uranium tailings in Central Asia.
I would like to point out that Kyrgyzstan, in
cooperation with multiple development partners, has
been conducting various international events to promote
this issue. The importance and necessity of updating
the resolution was noted by the President of the Kyrgyz
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Sooronbai Zheenbekov,
during the general debate of the seventy-third session
of the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.7).
Today’s adoption of the updated resolution is the
result of extensive and commendable cooperation
among Member States and international and regional
organizations. I am sure that it will contribute to the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
and their principles, as well as to increased ecological
stability in Central Asia and the entire world.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (k) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 20.
Agenda item 21
Implementation of the outcomes of the
United Nations Conferences on Human
Settlements and on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development and strengthening of the

A/73/PV.62

United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat)
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/539)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 15 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/239).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 21?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 22
Globalization and interdependence
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/540)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided (decision 73/540).
(a) Globalization and interdependence
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/540/
Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Towards
a New International Economic Order”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic

18-4543023/35

A/73/PV.62

Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Armenia, Equatorial Guinea, Republic of Korea,
Tonga, Turkey
The draft resolution was adopted by 133 votes to
48, with 5 abstentions (resolution 73/240).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 22?
24/35

20/12/2018

It was so decided.
(b) International migration and development
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/540/
Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
18-45430

20/12/2018

Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Hungary, Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Italy, Libya
The draft resolution was adopted by 182 votes to 3,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 73/241).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
those representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Morini (Italy): In consideration of the different
sensitivities that emerged among political parties and in
the light of the outcome of the parliamentary debate on
the subject, the Italian Government decided to defer the
final decision on whether to join the Global Compact
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration (resolution
73/195). Consistent with that position and in the light
of the references to the Global Compact contained in
resolution 73/241, entitled “International migration
and development”, Italy abstained in the voting on
the resolution.
Mr. Annakou (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): My
country abstained in the voting on resolution 73/241,
entitled “International migration and development”,
notwithstanding the importance of the contribution of
legal migrants to sustainable development in the host
countries to which they have voluntarily migrated and
their contribution to strengthening the economies of
their countries of origin.

A/73/PV.62

Secondly, the Global Compact confuses the terms
“refugee” and “migrant”, without making a clear
distinction between them. It considers illegal migrants
as refugees, although refugees are in fact people who
have left their countries due to natural disasters,
conflicts or wars. The Compact confuses the rights of
working migrants and immigrants with legal contracts.
Thirdly, the Global Compact does not distinguish
among destination countries, transit countries
and countries of origin, nor among the duties and
responsibilities of those different categories of countries,
and it assumes the same duties and responsibilities for
all of them. It also calls for the full integration of illegal
migrants and aims to allow them to settle wherever
they are, thereby changing the demographics of those
countries, especially transit countries such as Libya.
We categorically reject that.
Fourthly, the Global Compact does not directly
address the root causes of migration. On the contrary,
it encourages people from countries of origin to seek
more opportunities and a better life in other countries.
It does not make any mention of support for transit
countries affected by migration and encourages
migration regardless of the security capabilities of
transit countries, which may be countries in situations
of conflict or emerging from conflict, such as Libya.
Encouraging migration could be considered a
violation of the most important element of human rights,
the right to life of migrants. It is therefore clear that the
Compact recognizes migration as a right, whereas it is
in fact a choice. Individuals who make that choice must
adhere to the regulations and laws of countries of transit
and destination regarding entry, residence and work.
My country has been a victim on an unprecedented
scale of huge illegal migrant flows, which have led to
the deterioration of its security, economic and social
situation. The Global Compact does not address our
concerns in that regard but rather exacerbates them, in
particular with regard to the living conditions of Libyan
nationals and illegal migrants alike.

In several paragraphs, resolution 73/241 mentions
the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration (resolution 73/195), about which my country
has expressed several reservations for many reasons.

Fifthly, the Government of National Accord is a
transition Government. It therefore cannot accede to a
Global Compact such as this, which sets commitments
for future Governments that cannot be met.

First, the Compact aims to legalize illegal migration
and does not make a clear distinction between legal and
illegal migration.

Mr. Iglesias Mori (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Chile would like to highlight that
it is reserving its position on paragraphs 4, 5 and

18-4543025/35

A/73/PV.62

7 of resolution 73/241 on international migration
and development.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 22.
Agenda item 23
Groups of countries in special situations
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/541)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided.
(a) Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/541/
Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/242).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 23?
It was so decided.
(b) Follow-up to the second United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing
Countries
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/541/
Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/243).
26/35

20/12/2018

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 23 and of agenda item 23, as a whole.
Agenda item 24
Eradication of poverty and other development
issues
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/542)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 21 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II, one by vote.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Eradicating
rural poverty to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus,
Belize,
Benin,
Bhutan,
Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
18-45430

20/12/2018

Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Georgia, Turkey
Draft resolution I was adopted by 133 votes to 48,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 73/244).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Promotion of sustainable tourism, including
ecotourism, for poverty eradication and environment
protection”. The Second Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/245).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of China, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Rural
poverty is a formidable challenge facing members of
the international community. This is the third year of
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, yet 80 per cent of the extreme poor
still live in rural areas. Rural poverty is becoming
an obstacle to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals. Countries must pay more attention
to rural poverty while advancing the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Resolution 73/244, which the General Assembly has
just adopted, is a testament to the firm resolve of the

A/73/PV.62

international community to eliminate rural poverty and
leave no country and no one behind.
As the Coordinator of the Group of 77 and China,
my country has worked closely with members of the
group for a resolution that comprehensively reflects the
strong demand of developing countries to change the
backwardness of rural areas. We have worked hard in an
open, inclusive and constructive manner to ensure that
the suggestions of other Member States are included in
the draft to the greatest extent possible. In this regard, I
would like to thank all the countries that have voted in
favour of resolution 73/244.
We hope that the international community will view
the General Assembly’s adoption of the resolution as an
opportunity to take more concrete and effective actions
to eliminate rural poverty. Real results emerging from
these efforts will give the rural poor better lives with a
sense of fulfilment and greater dignity and happiness.
The Group of 77 and China would like to work together
with all Member States to advance the implementation
of the resolution.
(a) Implementation of the Third United Nations
Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2018–
2027)
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/542/
Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/246).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 24?
It was so decided.
(b) Industrial development cooperation
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/542/
Add.2)
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph
10 of its report.

18-4543027/35

A/73/PV.62

We shall now take a decision on the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
28/35

20/12/2018

United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Congo, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 183 votes to 2
(resolution 73/247).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Republic of the
Congo informed the Secretariat that it had intended
to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 24 and
agenda item 24 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 25
Operational activities for development
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/543)
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to take note of the report of the
Second Committee?
It was so decided (decision 73/542).
(a) Operational activities for development of the
United Nations system
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/543/
Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/248).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 25?
It was so decided.
18-45430

20/12/2018

(b) South-South cooperation for development
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/543/
Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report and a draft
decision recommended in paragraph 13 of the same
report. The Assembly will now take action on the draft
resolution and the draft decision, one by one.
The Assembly will first turn to the draft resolution,
entitled “South-South cooperation”. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/249).
The Acting President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Draft provisional rules of procedure
and provisional agenda of the second High-level United
Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation”. The
Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/543).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 25 and of agenda item 25
as a whole.
Agenda item 26
Agriculture development, food security and
nutrition
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/544)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it four draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 29 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to IV, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “World Food Safety
Day”. The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 73/250).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “World Pulses Day”. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

A/73/PV.62

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 73/251).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “International Year of Plant Health, 2020”. The
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 73/252).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution IV, entitled “Agriculture development,
food security and nutrition”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,

18-4543029/35

A/73/PV.62

Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

20/12/2018

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 27?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 64
Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the
occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/546)

Against:
United States of America

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 16 of its report.

Abstaining:
Croatia

We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.

Draft resolution IV was adopted by 185 votes to 1,
with 1 abstention (resolution 73/253).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Croatia and
Namibia informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 26?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 27
Towards global partnerships
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/545)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution entitled
“Towards global partnerships: a principle-based
approach to enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and all relevant partners”, as orally revised by
the Rapporteur.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same, taking into account the oral revision?
The draft resolution, as orally revised by the
Rapporteur, was adopted (resolution 73/254).
30/35

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
18-45430

20/12/2018

Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Kiribati, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire,
Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Papua New Guinea,
Samoa, Togo, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu
The resolution was adopted by 159 votes to 7, with
13 abstentions (resolution 73/255).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 64?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 123 (continued)

A/73/PV.62

Agenda item 137 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/548)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/545).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 137.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union, who wishes to make a statement following the
adoption of the resolutions of the Second Committee.
Mr. Babajide (European Union): I am speaking
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Serbia and Albania, the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Chair of the Second Committee and all the members
of the Bureau for their commitment and leadership
throughout the session. The EU and its member States
remain committed to the revitalization of the Second
Committee, including the reform of its agenda and the
strengthening of its working procedures.

The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/544).

During the deliberations of the Second Committee,
the EU and its member States endeavoured to uphold
key concepts of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the
Paris Climate Change Agreement in the Committee’s
resolutions through proposals on mainstreaming
language, and we thank delegations for engaging in these
discussions. We also dedicated considerable efforts to
preserving the guiding principle of the 2030 Agenda that
no one will be left behind, and we introduced language
amendments at the time of adoption of relevant draft
resolutions in the Second Committee. A list of the 14
draft resolutions concerned is annexed to the hard copy
of this statement that is being circulated in the Hall.

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 123.

While we chose not to reintroduce these
amendments in the plenary of the General Assembly,
we would like to reiterate our position as follows.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/547)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Second Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision, entitled “Programme of work of the
Second Committee for the seventy-fourth session of the
General Assembly”. The Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?

18-4543031/35

A/73/PV.62

The solemn commitment that no one will be left
behind was expressed by all our leaders in 2015 when
they adopted the 2030 Agenda. The agreement reflects
a people-centred approach to development that focuses
on the dignity and rights of each individual.
However, the EU is concerned about the fact that
since the seventieth session of the General Assembly,
there has been a gradual and subtle movement towards
a concept of development that focuses on States rather
than individuals. We feel that this movement is shifting
us away from the universal approach epitomized by the
Sustainable Development Goals.
Let us be clear. We fully accept that the notion of
no country being left behind is contained in the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda. We completely support the
ambition of the 2030 Agenda for its goals and targets
be met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society. However, the language introduced in an
imperfect compromise last year does not accurately
reflect either the Addis Ababa Action Agenda or the
2030 Agenda.
We cannot accept a gradual reinterpretation of
a concept subscribed to by all of our leaders. At a
time when we should focus on delivering on the key
agreements of 2015, we must resist the temptation to
constantly seek to rewrite or undermine them.
The Second Committee should be a forum of great
importance to the international development agenda,
but its potential remains unfulfilled. People’s lives and
livelihoods are at stake. We should aim to make the
Second Committee as relevant as possible and focus on
driving forward delivery of the 2015 agreements. As I
said, we should not get caught in the fruitless trap of
renegotiating them.
During the Second Committee negotiations this
year, the EU consistently proposed alternative language
for the relevant preambular and operative paragraphs
that is closely based on what our leaders agreed and is
firmly faithful to their vision for the 2030 Agenda. We
regret that these proposals were not accepted. We regret
even more deeply that fellow negotiators refused even
to come to the table to discuss the issue, rebuffing all
attempts on our part to find a compromise text that would
have bridged our positions. In order to better reflect
the 2030 Agenda, we therefore proposed the following
amendments to the relevant draft resolutions: first, the
deletion of the repetitive paragraph in the preambular
section that misquotes paragraph 1 of the Addis Ababa
32/35

20/12/2018

Action Agenda, and secondly, the replacement of the
relevant operative paragraph with the following:
“Calls upon all stakeholders to implement
the present resolution as a means to deliver the
comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred
set of universal and transformative goals and
targets of the 2030 Agenda, in which the dignity
of the human person is fundamental, the goals and
targets are met for all nations and peoples and for
all segments of society, no one is left behind, and
we endeavour to reach the furthest behind first.”
As the Secretary-General himself has noted,
at a time when multilateralism and the rules-based
international system are under threat, we need to hold
firm to the principles agreed by our leaders in 2015.
This is particularly important in the lead-up to the
High-level Political Forum at the level of Heads of
State and Government to be held in September 2019,
during which progress will be assessed. We note that
the Secretary-General himself wrote to the leaders of
the members of the Group of 20 to urge them to do more
to deliver on the 2030 Agenda and its central promise to
leave no one behind.
We sincerely hope that we can find a way for the
Second Committee to become a more constructive
vehicle for delivering on this ambition and that our
suggestions will find the support of Member States. In
this regard, we look forward to engaging in the informal
consultations that the Chair announced for January
2019 to work towards a solution for this issue and on the
revitalization of the Second Committee more broadly.
Mr. Gad (Egypt): I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
During this session, the Group of 77 and China
submitted many draft resolutions for the consideration
of the Second Committee under its various agenda items,
with a view to ensuring substantive deliberations by the
General Assembly on global financial, economic and
development issues. The Group engaged constructively
and in good faith throughout the negotiations with a
view to achieving consensus on the actions needed to
address global economic and development challenges.
The Group positively considered all proposals
suggested by our partners on the basis of their
relevance to the issues being considered. At times we
took such proposals on board, even if they went against
the Group’s preferred positions, when we deemed them
18-45430

20/12/2018

A/73/PV.62

necessary and desirable for guaranteeing consensus
and charting a positive way forward.

to implement the 2030 Agenda, the ideal of leaving no
one behind will face considerable challenges.

Throughout the course of the Second Committee’s
work, the Group upheld its obligations and
responsibilities in preserving the work of the Second
Committee and its established working methods. The
Group showed flexibility in engaging on new proposals
made by partners, engaged with different language
despite late submissions, maintained communication
channels during the informal and offline discussions,
restrained itself as much as possible from breaking the
silence procedure and, most importantly, was willing
to revert to agreed language where consensus on new
language could not be reached.

The Group of 77 and China would like to lend its
strong support for, and continued engagement in, the
efforts aimed at improving our work. We have supported
the efforts of the Chair of the Second Committee and
the Bureau, and we laud and commend their efforts
and will continue to do so throughout this session and
future sessions of the Second Committee.

Efforts to draft and negotiate Second Committee
resolutions are not an end in themselves. They serve
an objective. Lest we forget, our mission here is to
strengthen international cooperation and its norms and
rules, as well as to promote the peace and prosperity
of all nations on the ground. Our understanding is that
efforts to serve this mission must be undertaken with
a cumulative perspective. We should build on what we
agreed on previously. Unfortunately, during the course
of negotiations, we noticed attempts to rescind what we
had subscribed to in the recent past. Our vision is that,
for the Second Committee and the United Nations to
pursue its mission, our focus should be on providing
and reinforcing the means to implement what we had
agreed to, rather than on renegotiating it. This is the
only path that will enable us to collectively achieve our
overarching goals and commitments.
In this regard, the core of the 2030 Agenda, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the Paris Climate Change
Agreement and the many other relevant instruments
adopted recently is to ensure inclusiveness in order
to achieve their ambitious goals at the international,
regional and country level and to leave no country and
no one behind. The concepts of leaving no country or
person behind are mutually complementary and by no
means contradictory or mutually exclusive. In order to
see that no one is left behind, we should ensure that
countries are properly helped to set up safeguards that
ensure that no individual among their citizens is left
behind. Countries are entrusted to formulate policies,
enforce laws and create an enabling environment to
guarantee the inclusiveness of implementation of the
2030 Agenda for all segments of society and to leave no
one behind. If countries are not enabled and empowered

I would like to reiterate that the Group of 77 and
China is committed to multilateralism, and we will
continue to do our best to safeguard the consensus of
the international community on the actions needed to
transform our world into a prosperous world for present
and future generations.
The Acting President: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I would like to thank the Chair of the
Second Committee, Mr. Jorge Skinner-Klée Arenales
of Guatemala, the members of the Bureau and the
Secretary of the Committee, as well as representatives,
for a job well done.
The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration
of all the reports of the Second Committee before it for
this meeting.
Agenda item 75 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Draft resolution (A/73/L.69)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.69.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States to introduce the annual draft resolution on
assistance to the Palestinian people (A/73/L.69). The
EU remains gravely concerned about the difficult
living conditions of and the humanitarian situation
affecting the Palestinian people, in particular women
and children, throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in Area C and, in particular, in the
Gaza Strip.

18-4543033/35

A/73/PV.62

In Gaza, a humanitarian disaster is imminent.
We commend the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his efforts to mitigate this risk and
improve the humanitarian situation, including through
the fuel-delivery deal. The immediate priority must be
to reduce tensions and avoid another conflict in Gaza.
The return of the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza
Strip is indispensable if we are to achieve a lasting
improvement in the conditions and the humanitarian
situation there. But to ensure lasting results, it will be
crucial to make fundamental changes in the situation in
Gaza, which should include an end to the closure and
the full opening of crossing points, while addressing
Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
The EU will continue to support United Nations
and Egyptian efforts to achieve the reunification of
Gaza and the West Bank under a single and legitimate
Palestinian Authority. The EU will continue to work
with its partners, the Israelis and the Palestinians,
other regional stakeholders and our partners within the
Middle East Quartet to that end.
In this context, the EU is determined to sustain
its assistance in support of the Palestinian people,
including Palestinian refugees. The European Union
and its member States are collectively the largest
contributor to the budget of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. We were among the first to answer the Agency’s
call for additional funds during this year’s extraordinary
financial crisis. We are and will continue to be strong,
reliable and predictable supporters of the Agency,
whose role remains crucial to the stability of the region.
We would like to thank all parties and the rest of the
membership for joining the consensus again this year
and for rallying behind the principles and objectives
outlined in the draft resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.69, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/73/L.69, the following countries have become
34/35

20/12/2018

sponsors of the draft resolution: the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Liechtenstein, the Philippines and
the Sudan.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.69 without a vote?
Draft resolution A/73/L.69
(resolution 73/256).

was

adopted

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of Palestine to make a
statement after the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Shawesh (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Taking
note of the Secretary-General’s report (A/73/84) on
assistance to the Palestinian people covering the period
from April 2017 to March 2018, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and his team for all the efforts they
have made in preparing the report, which addresses all
the economic and social aspects of the situation of the
Palestinian people.
I would also like to thank all the United Nations
agencies and programmes that have provided assistance
to the Palestinian people and continue to do so, as
well as donor countries, whether acting individually
or collectively, including our friend the European
Union (EU), whose observer just introduced resolution
73/256. The EU is at the top of the list of donors and
providers of relief and development assistance to the
Palestinian people at all levels, including education,
health care, good governance and the building of
Palestinian institutions.
I would also like to thank all of those who helped to
address the financial crisis faced by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) over the past year. Their efforts
enabled UNRWA to fulfil its mission, as set forth
by the General Assembly, in continuing to provide
assistance to the Palestinian refugees wherever the
Agency operates. We hope that this assistance will be
enduring and sufficient to preventing any shortage of
fundamental humanitarian services provided by the
Agency, which have constituted a lifeline for a large
number of Palestinian refugee families, including
women and children.
On 1 January 2016, the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) entered into force, and we began to
develop our national development plans in a realistic
18-45430

20/12/2018

manner to be in line with the SDGs and ensure that
no one is left behind. For its part, the Palestinian
Government completed drafting its National Policy
Agenda, a five-year national development plan for the
period 2017-2022. The Agenda, which will constitute
a national programme of work for the benefit of our
people with a view to helping them achieve freedom and
prosperity, is based on the three pillars of independence,
governmental reform and sustainable development.
These principles are in line with numerous priorities set
forth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
They were formulated through a consultative process
that included our various national and international
partners, led by the United Nations in Palestine.
At the margins of the High-level Political Forum
held in July 2017, the State of Palestine submitted its
first national voluntary review on the implementation of
the SDGs. We stressed to the members of the Assembly
that despite the long-standing challenge that we face
at all levels in the form of the Israeli occupation, we
have been able, with the support of our brothers and
many friends, and through Palestine’s own planning
and operational efforts, to make good progress towards
achieving the SDGs. We hope to continue that so as
to achieve more of the goals going forward, and to
consolidate and sustain what we have attained.

A/73/PV.62

The absence of a political solution to the PalestinianIsraeli conflict is the greatest obstacle to sustainable
development in Palestine. Persistent restrictions on our
freedom of movement, the state of siege, the exhaustion
of Palestinian natural resources, the expansion of
settlements, and the systematic demolition of Palestinian
facilities — all of these strongly affect Palestinians’
human, social and political life and their ability to enjoy
their rights, and undermine the efforts being made
to achieve sustainable development in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
The State of Palestine will continue to coordinate
with all donors as well as the United Nations, so that
we can guarantee dignified living conditions for
Palestinian people living under the yoke of Israeli
occupation. We will spare no effort to achieve a lasting,
just and comprehensive peace based on the principles of
international law, and the terms of reference of peace,
including relevant United Nations resolutions, until the
day that the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory
comes to an end and an independent State of Palestine
is realized, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel in peace and safety.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 75.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

18-4543035/35
