United Nations

A/RES/69/314

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 August 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 13

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 30 July 2015
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/69/L.80 and Add.1)]

69/314. Tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the intrinsic value of biological diversity and its various
contributions to sustainable development and human well-being, and recognizing
that wild fauna and flora in their many beautiful and varied forms are an
irreplaceable part of the natural systems of the Earth which must be protected for
this and the generations to come,
Concerned, therefore, about the increasing scale of poaching and illegal trade
in wildlife and wildlife products and its adverse economic, social and environmental
impacts,
Expressing serious concern over the steady rise in the level of rhinoceros
poaching and the alarmingly high levels of killings of elephants in Africa, which
threaten those species with local extinction and, in some cases, with global
extinction,
Recognizing that illicit trafficking in wildlife contributes to damage to
ecosystems and rural livelihoods, including those based on ecotourism, undermines
good governance and the rule of law and, in some cases, threatens national stability
and requires enhanced regional cooperation and coordination in response,
Emphasizing that the protection of wildlife must be part of a comprehensive
approach to achieving poverty eradication, food security, sustainable development,
including the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, economic
growth, social well-being and sustainable livelihoods,
Reaffirming its call for holistic and integrated approaches to sustainable
development that will guide humanity to live in harmony with nature and lead to
efforts to restore the health and integrity of the Earth’s ecosystem,
Expressing concern that, in some cases, illicit trafficking in protected species
of wild fauna and flora is an increasingly sophisticated form of transnational
organized crime, recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 2012/19 of
26 July 2012, in which the Council recognized that organized crime had diversified
and represented a threat to health and safety, security, good governance and the
sustainable development of States, and therefore underlining the need to combat
such crimes by strengthening international cooperation, capacity-building, criminal
justice responses and law enforcement efforts,
15-12997 (E)

*1512997*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/314

Tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife

Recognizing the legal framework provided by and the important role of the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, 1
an international agreement that stands at the intersection between trade, the
environment and development, promotes the conservation and sustainable use of
biodiversity, should contribute to tangible benefits for local people and ensures that
no species entering into international trade is threatened with extinction,
Recognizing also the importance of other multilateral environmental
agreements, including the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of
Wild Animals,2 the Convention on Biological Diversity,3 the Convention concerning
the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage4 and the Convention on
Wetlands of International Importance especially as Waterfowl Habitat,5
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/40 of 25 July 2013 on
crime prevention and criminal justice responses to illicit trafficking in protected
species of wild fauna and flora, in which the Council encouraged Member States to
make illicit trafficking in protected species of wild fauna and flora involving
organized criminal groups a serious crime,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2011/36 of 28 July
2011 on crime prevention and criminal justice responses to illicit trafficking in
endangered species of wild fauna and flora,
Reaffirming that the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime6 and the United Nations Convention against Corruption7 constitute
effective tools and an important part of the legal framework for international
cooperation in fighting illicit trafficking in endangered species of wild fauna and
flora,
Recognizing the important work of the International Consortium on Combating
Wildlife Crime, a collaborative effort of the secretariat of the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the World Bank and the World Customs Organization, by, inter
alia, providing technical assistance to Member States,
Welcoming resolution 1/3 of 27 June 2014 of the United Nations Environment
Assembly of the United Nations Environment Programme, on illegal trade in
wildlife,8 in which the Environment Assembly called upon the General Assembly to
consider the issue of illegal wildlife trade at its sixty-ninth session,
Welcoming also the efforts of and cooperation between Member States,
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations, as well as
activities of United Nations agencies and other entities, aimed at preventing and
fighting illicit trafficking in wildlife, and in this regard taking note of the Paris

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 993, No. 14537.
Ibid., vol. 1651, No. 28395.
3
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
4
Ibid., vol. 1037, No. 15511.
5
Ibid., vol. 996, No. 14583.
6
Ibid., vol. 2225, No. 39574.
7
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
8
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/69/25), annex.
2

2/5

Tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife

A/RES/69/314

Declaration of 2013, the London Declaration of 2014, the Kasane Statement of 2015
and the Brazzaville Declaration of 2015,
Recalling its resolution 68/205 of 20 December 2013, in which it proclaimed
3 March, the day of the adoption of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, as World Wildlife Day, and
welcoming the international observance of the Day in 2014 and 2015 in order to
celebrate and raise awareness of the world’s wild fauna and flora,
Taking note of the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and
Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels, and Public Participation, adopted by the Thirteenth United
Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in Doha from
12 to 19 April 2015,9
Taking note also of the ministerial declaration of the high-level segment of the
eleventh session of the United Nations Forum on Forests on the international
arrangement on “The forests we want: beyond 2015”10 and of the resolution on the
international arrangement on forests beyond 2015 11 adopted by the Forum at its
eleventh session,
1.
Reaffirms the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,12 in which the economic,
social and environmental impacts of illicit trafficking in wildlife, where firm and
strengthened action needs to be taken on both the supply and demand sides, were
recognized and the importance, in this regard, of effective international cooperation
among relevant multilateral environmental agreements and international
organizations was emphasized;
2.
Encourages Member States to adopt effective measures to prevent and
counter the serious problem of crimes that have an impact on the environment, such
as illicit trafficking in wildlife and wildlife products, including fauna and flora as
protected by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora,1 and poaching;
3.
Urges Member States to take decisive steps at the national level to
prevent, combat and eradicate the illegal trade in wildlife, on both the supply and
demand sides, including by strengthening the legislation necessary for the
prevention, investigation and prosecution of such illegal trade as well as
strengthening enforcement and criminal justice responses, in accordance with
national legislation and international law, acknowledging that the International
Consortium on Combating Wildlife Crime can provide valuable technical assistance
in this regard;
4.
Calls upon Member States to make illicit trafficking in protected species
of wild fauna and flora involving organized criminal groups a serious crime, in
accordance with their national legislation and article 2 (b) of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;6

_______________
9

Economic and Social Council resolution 2015/19, annex.
Economic and Social Council decision 2015/254.
11
Economic and Social Council resolution 2015/33.
12
Resolution 66/288, annex.
10

3/5

A/RES/69/314

Tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife

5.
Also calls upon Member States to review and amend national legislation
as necessary and appropriate so that offences connected to the illegal wildlife trade
are treated as predicate offences, as defined in the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, for the purposes of domestic moneylaundering offences, and are actionable under domestic proceeds of crime
legislation;
6.
Encourages Member States to harmonize their judicial, legal and
administrative regulations to support the exchange of evidence regarding and
criminal prosecution of illicit trafficking in wildlife, as well as to establish
national-level inter-agency wildlife crime task forces, consistent with national
legislation;
7.
Urges Member States to engage actively in efforts to raise awareness
about and address the problems and risks associated with the supply and transit of
and demand for illegal wildlife products and to reduce the demand using targeted
strategies in order to influence consumer behaviour;
8.
Strongly encourages Member States to support, including through
bilateral cooperation, the development of sustainable and alternative livelihoods for
communities affected by illicit trafficking in wildlife and its adverse impacts, with
the full engagement of the communities in and adjacent to wildlife habitats as active
partners in conservation and sustainable use, enhancing the rights and capacity of
the members of such communities to manage and benefit from wildlife and
wilderness;
9.
Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider taking
measures to ratify or accede to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the United Nations Convention against
Corruption,7 and calls upon States parties to take appropriate measures to ensure the
full and effective implementation of their obligations under the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and other
relevant multilateral agreements, as well as to consider ways to share information
with one another on best practices to tackle illicit trafficking in wildlife in line with
those instruments;
10. Calls upon Member States to prohibit, prevent and counter any form of
corruption that facilitates illicit trafficking in wildlife and wildlife products;
11. Strongly encourages Member States, in line with Economic and Social
Council resolution 2013/40, to cooperate at the bilateral, regional and international
levels to prevent, combat and eradicate international illicit trafficking in wildlife
and wildlife products through, inter alia, the use of international legal instruments
such as the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
the United Nations Convention against Corruption;
12. Encourages Member States, where relevant and appropriate, to enhance
cooperation for the timely and cost-efficient repatriation of live illegally traded
wildlife, including eggs, consistent with the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora;
13. Calls upon United Nations organizations, within their respective
mandates and in line with Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/40, to
continue to support efforts by Member States to fight illicit trafficking in wildlife,
such as through capacity-building and by supporting alternative livelihoods, and to

4/5

Tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife

A/RES/69/314

improve cooperation with all relevant stakeholders in order to facilitate a holistic
and comprehensive approach by the international community;
14. Calls upon, in this regard, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, within its mandate and resources, in line with Economic and Social Council
resolution 2013/40 and in close cooperation and collaboration with Member States,
to continue to collect information on patterns and flows of illicit trafficking in
wildlife and to report thereon;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to further improve the coordination of
activities undertaken by United Nations specialized agencies, funds and
programmes relating to the scope of the present resolution, within their respective
mandates and in line with Economic and Social Council resolution 2013/40;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General, taking into account Economic and
Social Council resolution 2013/40, to report to the General Assembly at its
seventieth session on the global status of illicit trafficking in wildlife, including
poaching and illegal trade, and on the implementation of the present resolution, and
to make proposals for possible future action, including consideration of the
appointment of a special envoy to promote awareness and galvanize international
action;
17. Decides to revisit the issue and the implementation of the present
resolution on an annual basis, beginning at its seventieth session.
100th plenary meeting
30 July 2015

5/5
