S/PV.8518

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8518th meeting

Tuesday, 30 April 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heusgen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Elé Ela
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2019/282)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-12391 (E)
*1912391*

S/PV.8518

The situation concerning Western Sahara

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2019/282)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/282, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2019/349, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Russian Federation, South Africa
The President: The draft resolution received 13 votes
in favour, none against and 2 abstentions. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2468 (2019).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We are
pleased with the Council’s strong statement of support
for the efforts of the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, Horst Köhler, to achieve
a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political
solution that would provide for the self-determination
of the people of Western Sahara. We are disappointed,
2/9

30/04/2019

however, that some members of the Council still chose
to abstain in the voting, despite our sincere efforts to
underscore the Council’s unity towards the ongoing
political process.
With this mandate renewal, the United States
sought to maintain the Council’s focus on that political
process. The Security Council’s objective should be
to advance a timely and mutually acceptable political
solution. As the Council has clearly stated today with
this mandate, it is crucial that the parties and the
neighbouring States cooperate more fully with each
other and build additional trust, which is needed to
achieve a political solution.
We believe that the Council’s close attention to this
issue been instrumental to the political progress made
over the past year. In December, Morocco, the Frente
Popular para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río
de Oro (Frente POLISARIO), Algeria and Mauritania
met under United Nations auspices in Geneva for the
first direct talks since 2012. In March, the delegations
met again and began in-depth discussions on how
to achieve a mutually acceptable political solution.
Those ongoing consultations between the Personal
Envoy, Morocco, the Frente POLISARIO, Algeria
and Mauritania, which aimed at achieving a realistic,
practicable and enduring solution for the Western
Sahara, are crucial to laying the groundwork for a
negotiated settlement.
As we have said before, United Nations peacekeeping
operations must support political solutions, and we will
continue to assess the performance of the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara against
that principle. We express our full support to Personal
Envoy Köhler and his team. We stand ready for his
briefings to the Council as he deems appropriate. We
also thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, Colin Stewart, and the
members of MINURSO for their efforts.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2468 (2019),
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
and supports the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara. My delegation thanks the
American penholder for its in-depth consultations and
its high-level engagement.
First, I wish to reiterate France’s full support for
the efforts of the Personal Envoy. This new resolution
19-12391

30/04/2019

The situation concerning Western Sahara

reaffirms the Security Council’s support for the political
process it launched in Geneva, bringing together
Morocco, the Frente Popular para la Liberación de
Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro (Frente POLISARIO),
Algeria and Mauritania for the first time in six years,
in December. Personal Envoy Horst Köhler has all
our support in moving forward and organizing a third
meeting in Geneva in that format when he deems the
conditions to be appropriate.
It is important for the four delegations to continue
their discussions in a constructive spirit of compromise
with a view to achieving a realistic, pragmatic, just,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution, in
accordance with the Council’s resolutions. The two
previous round tables allowed Morocco, the Frente
POLISARIO, Algeria and Mauritania to agree on the
special responsibility of the region and the need to
develop trust. It is now necessary to build on those
achievements. I take this opportunity to reiterate that
France considers the 2007 Moroccan autonomy plan to
be a serious and credible basis for discussions.
Secondly, I would like to recall France’s full
support for the work of MINURSO and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara. The latest consultations with Special
Representative Colin Stewart on 10 April have
served as a reminder of the essential role played by
that peacekeeping operation in ensuring respect for
the ceasefire and thereby contributing to regional
stability. The return to normalcy in Guerguerat, to
which the Secretary-General refers in his latest report
(S/2019/282), is proof of this and will remain the
subject of vigilant attention. In that regard, I commend
the outstanding work of the MINURSO teams, whose
presence helps to ensure calm, reduce the risk of
escalation by effectively preventing tensions on the
ground and thus create the conditions necessary for
the continuation of the dialogue among Morocco, the
Frente POLISARIO, Algeria and Mauritania.
It is in the light of that essential role of MINURSO
that I recall France’s commitment to the return to
a 12-month mandate, which must remain the norm,
while six-month mandates should be the exception.
A one-year mandate ensures continuity and greater
predictability in the management of this mission,
while reducing uncertainties about its future. The
existence and mandate of that peacekeeping operation
should not be conditional on the progress of the
political discussions or the good performance whereby

S/PV. 8518

MINURSO contributes by creating the right conditions
on the ground. In that regard, we regret that the Council
has not been able to commit itself to the fact that it will
consider returning to a one-year term in due time, and
we express the wish that it be renewed for one year
in October.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to reiterate its unequivocal and strong support for
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO), which was established
by the Council under resolution 690 (1991). That was
the beginning of the issue. We recall that MINURSO
was created primarily to facilitate the holding of a
referendum in Western Sahara to enable its people to
realize their right to self-determination.
We also wish to emphasize our firm support for the
political process facilitated by the Secretary-General’s
good offices through his Personal Envoy for Western
Sahara, Mr. Horst Köhler. We express our appreciation
for the work he is undertaking, as well as for the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara and Head of MINURSO, Mr Colin
Stewart. The role of the Security Council in supporting
the Personal Envoy and the Special Representative in
the discharge of their respective mandates is critical in
seeking a solution to the situation in Western Sahara.
Although resolution 2468 (2019) contains numerous
paragraphs with which South Africa can agree, there
remain several elements of concern to our delegation.
These include the following.
First, the current text as it stands is not balanced
and does not provide a true reflection of the efforts
undertaken by the two parties, Morocco and the
Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, which are both
States members of the African Union. The mandate
as approved tends to favour one party over the other,
which is not conducive to a neutral political process.
Secondly, the use of terms such as “realistic”
and “realism”, as well as additional references to
“compromise”, are of concern to us. It is unclear as
to what is meant by these terms as the principle of
self-determination for the people of Western Sahara
is well established by numerous General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, as I said earlier. We
should not in any way dilute that principle through
unclear and ambiguous terms and language. The
Council must reaffirm its commitment to the right to

19-123913/9

S/PV.8518

The situation concerning Western Sahara

self-determination for the people of Western Sahara in
an unqualified manner.
Thirdly, the resolution should not try to unduly
influence the direction of the political process or to
pre-empt any final status of the negotiations.
Fourthly, South Africa regrets that the Council
continues to resist a human rights monitoring mandate
for MINURSO, despite the fact that many around
this table eagerly propose such mechanisms in other
mandates, without exception. We have not seen the
same vigour or determination in terms of MINURSO,
which creates the impression that the human rights of
the people of Western Sahara are not held in the same
regard as those of other peoples elsewhere in the world.
That lack of consistency undermines the Council’s
credibility. Lastly, we want to note that the text must
differentiate between the parties to the conflict,
which are Morocco and the Frente Popular para la
Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro, and
the neighbouring States of Algeria and Mauritania.
We want to reiterate that the Council’s working
methods on this matter, whereby it delegates
responsibility to the Group of Friends of Western
Sahara, remain a serious source of concern for South
Africa. We have consistently raised this issue as
problematic, particularly given the unrepresentative
nature of the Group, which does not include a single
African member of the Council, despite the fact that
this is an African issue. This is yet another example
of an African issue being decided by non-Africans. It
is unjust.
South Africa would like to reiterate its principled
position on the situation in the Western Sahara, which
remains the last colony on the African continent,
listed by the United Nations as a non-self-governing
territory. Our own national experience has taught us
the value of the international solidarity that brought
down the repressive system of apartheid. Similarly, it is
international solidarity that will ultimately realize the
foremost aspiration of the people of Western Sahara,
which is to eventually be independent and free. That
is why the Southern African Development Community
recently hosted a solidarity conference with the
Sahrawi people. As long as the Sahrawi people do
not enjoy their basic right to self-determination, they
will continue to be denied the opportunity to develop,
prosper and enjoy a brighter future. People who have
to live with uncertainty, whether under colonialism
4/9

30/04/2019

or in refugee camps, are severely disadvantaged. The
Security Council must take responsibility for ensuring,
through a neutral, balanced approach, that it can
assist the parties in progressing towards a mutually
acceptable settlement of the situation.
In considering the draft before us, South Africa
seriously considered not supporting resolution 2468
(2019), which is why we abstained in the voting. As we
have stated, the Council’s resolutions on MINURSO
continue to address the issue in an opaque and
non-inclusive manner. Council members are not given
enough time or opportunity to meaningfully negotiate
on the texts. They are a fait accompli by the penholders
and their supporters. That prevents Council members
from effectively exercising the mandate entrusted
to us by the General Assembly to contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
significant, though, that the draft before us does renew
MINURSO’s mandate for the next six months, and we
endorse that and the political process that the Personal
Envoy of the Secretary-General has embarked on.
Finally, we wish the people of Morocco and
Western Sahara a very fruitful, constructive and,
hopefully, happy ending to their political negotiations
through the third, fourth, fifth and sixth rounds of
talks in Geneva. The Council’s role is to support and
assist them in reaching such a settlement. As South
Africans, we hope that there will be a settlement one
day in Western Sahara. Morocco is a very substantial
African Member State. We need it to play its role in the
political and economic integration of Africa so that the
people of Western Sahara can live in freedom like the
rest of us.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the adoption of resolution 2468
(2019), on the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) until 31 October. In that regard, we
commend the excellent work done by the United States
penholders to reach the resolution that the Council
has just adopted. In accordance with the position we
expressed clearly expressed in October (see S/PV.8387),
as well as during the recent negotiations, my country
would have liked MINURSO’s mandate to have been
renewed for a full year. We believe that extension would
have enabled us to lay the groundwork for the longterm planning and organization of the Mission, whose
effectiveness is also crucial to making the progress in
19-12391

30/04/2019

The situation concerning Western Sahara

the political process that the international community
so desires.
Resolution 2440 (2018) established a framework
for relaunching the political process on Western
Sahara and urged stakeholders to fully commit to it.
We are pleased that today’s resolution confirms this
new momentum, as evidenced by the holding of two
round-table discussions between the parties and the
neighbouring States in order to identify the points
convergence likely to lead to a sustainable political
solution under the auspices of the United Nations. In
that regard, through today’s resolution the Security
Council reiterates its full support to the efforts and
dedication of Mr. Horst Köhler, Personal Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Western Sahara. We should
encourage his good offices, which have given the
process new impetus, for which the Council’s continued
support will be crucial. It is equally important that the
stakeholders continue to commit to it in good faith in
order to reach a just, lasting and mutually acceptable
political solution based on compromise. In that regard,
Morocco’s efforts to contribute to a final resolution of
this dispute, including through the autonomy initiative,
appear serious and credible, as today’s resolution
emphasizes, and in our view constitute a good basis
for discussion.
Lastly, my delegation particularly welcomes
the commitment of Mr. Colin Stewart, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara and Head of MINURSO, whose action on the
ground in a difficult environment has made it possible
to ensure compliance with military agreements and
relevant obligations, and to maintain peace in the
region. In conclusion, my country would like to urge
all the stakeholders, the neighbouring States and the
international community to unite their efforts with a
view to finding a definitive solution to the problem
of Western Sahara and ensuring the happiness of the
people of the region.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes and
supports the efforts of the Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Köhler, including through his
initiative to hold round-table talks in Geneva.
For the first time in many years, a chance has
emerged for achieving a just and mutually acceptable
solution to this long-standing problem that aligns
perfectly with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

S/PV. 8518

Two rounds of negotiations have already been held, and
we hope that they have laid the foundation for further
progress in the political process. We trust that the
next meeting, which all of the parties are prepared to
take part in — Morocco and the Frente Popular para
la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro
(Frente POLISARIO), and their neighbours, Algeria
and Mauritania — will result in substantive progress.
The international community generally, and the
Security Council, in particular, must assist the Special
Envoy in his work. For our part, we are working
with Morocco, the Frente POLISARIO, Algeria and
Mauritania. We have close, friendly relations with
all of them, which we cherish, especially since our
multifaceted ties have stood the test of time. We
believe that the African Union also has a potentially
significant role to play. We are supporting the activities
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO), which counts Russian
military observers among its ranks. It plays a crucial
stabilizing role in the region, and its effective work
enables us to maintain an environment conducive to
advancing a settlement for Western Sahara on the basis
of the relevant Council resolutions. However, while we
recognize the continued importance of implementing
the tasks that are part of the Mission’s mandate, we
believe it is wrong to create an artificial commotion
about the extension of its mandate, to attempt to use
the resolutions on it to define the direction that the
negotiations will take under the auspices of the United
Nations, or to change previously agreed approaches.
We believe that even if a settlement is achieved, the
Mission will inevitably be needed for a long time
after that.
Regrettably, in recent years amendments have been
introduced into the resolutions extending MINURSO’s
mandate that in our view undermine the Security
Council’s impartial and objective approach to the
issue of Western Sahara. Eroding previously approved
parameters is unacceptable. We must keep in mind that
they define the parties to the Western Sahara conflict and
provide for ultimately reaching a mutually acceptable
solution that guarantees the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara through procedures that are
in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. We have disagreed with the
artificial modification of those parameters in prior
years and have said so directly, and we were unable to
support such an approach on this occasion with regard

19-123915/9

S/PV.8518

The situation concerning Western Sahara

to resolution 2468 (2019). Our arguments for correcting
the imbalance were blatantly ignored, although what
we were asking for was a restoration of the previously
agreed wording. That has once again raised questions
about the penholdership system on country-specific
subjects in the Council.
Replacing the fundamental principles of the
Western Sahara settlement with abstract wording about
the importance of maintaining a realistic approach or
seeking compromises leads to ambiguity, undermines
trust in our work and dims the prospects for the political
process. Moreover, such an approach does not help to
create a constructive atmosphere for negotiations. We
well remember that at many meetings with the Council
Mr. Köhler has asked us to express our united support
through a consensus public response from the Security
Council. And there was a window for compromise.
Russia will continue to be an impartial, balanced
player with regard to the Western Sahara settlement and
will maintain contact with all the regional stakeholders.
We will work actively to support the negotiation process
launched by Mr. Köhler with the aim of arriving at a
mutually acceptable solution. We urge our colleagues
to contribute constructively as well. It is vital that
we act in order to disrupt the status quo, which is not
viable. We must keep in mind that the vacuum in the
political process and the unresolved issue of Western
Sahara could be exploited by a number of terrorist
entities, which would have a negative impact on the
military and political situation in the entire region.
Mr. Elé Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank the United States
penholder for this dossier for submitting resolution
2468 (2019), which we feel can contribute to a final and
lasting solution to the Western Sahara conflict.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea voted in favour
of the resolution, which renews the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) until 31 October. Our vote affirms
our full support for MINURSO, for Mr. Colin Stewart,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara and Head of MINURSO, and for the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara, former President Horst Köhler.
Equatorial Guinea has given clear and consistent
support to MINURSO as a mission with a mandate

6/9

30/04/2019

and adequate capacity to carry out its tasks and main
objective. However, for important reasons of form and
substance, the parties to the conflict have complicated
the situation and prolonged this United Nations Mission
for more than a quarter of a century. We were therefore
pleased with the renewed momentum generated
for the mandate by the meetings held in Geneva on
5 and 6 December 2018 and in Addis Ababa on 21 and
22 March 2019, at which Morocco, the Frente Popular
para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro,
Algeria and Mauritania committed to participating in
a United Nations-driven political dialogue on Western
Sahara, with a view to arriving at a solution that is
lasting and mutually acceptable to everyone, based on
the established agreements and in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Equatorial Guinea welcomes these efforts to
conduct negotiations with a view to ensuring respect for
the principles of international law in accordance with
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Equatorial Guinea encourages the parties
to continue along this path of negotiation in an
atmosphere of good faith and without conditions, with
a view to identifying areas of convergence, pursuing
strategic approaches to maintaining peace and finding
a peaceful political solution to the conflict. We would
also like to encourage the neighbouring countries and
other countries of the region to bring their influence
to bear on the parties in the political process, working
together with the United Nations and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea would have
preferred a 12-month renewal of MINURSO’s mandate,
but since this did not happen, we hope that in October
that request will be taken into account in order to give
the Mission and the Personal Envoy time to continue
their work without interruption.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
Kuwait voted in favour of resolution 2468 (2019), which
extends the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara until 31 October.
We had hoped for a unanimous renewal by the Security
Council for one year. We stress the importance of the
role of the Mission and of ensuring that it can fully
implement its mandate. We renew our support for the
Head of the Mission and for the work of Mr. Köhler,
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western

19-12391

30/04/2019

The situation concerning Western Sahara

Sahara, in implementing the relevant Security Council
resolutions and developing confidence-building
measures with a view to reaching a realistic, lasting,
practical and accepted political solution.
We reaffirm our support for continued negotiations,
backed by the United Nations. We welcome the
continued participation by all stakeholders in the round
tables, without preconditions and in good faith, with the
aim of maintaining the pace of the meetings, breaking
the deadlock and bringing views closer together. We
appreciate everyone’s concern about the future of the
Arab Maghreb and about the economic and social gains
that promote security, stability and development in
the region.
The State of Kuwait reaffirms its support for
the Moroccan initiative for the autonomy of Western
Sahara and for reaching a constructive solution
acceptable to all the parties. We stress the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Morocco and welcome
the credible and serious steps and initiatives it has
taken, as well as the role played by the two committees
of the National Council of Human Rights in Dakhla
and Laayoune under the auspices of the United Nations
bodies concerned with human rights.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Recently, thanks to the mediation efforts of Mr. Horst
Köhler, Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara, and the bona fide engagement of the
parties concerned and of neighbouring countries, two
round-table meetings on Western Sahara have been
successfully held. The prevailing atmosphere has been
constructive. The parties who attended the events
articulated in no uncertain terms their willingness to
continue the conversation, which China commends. We
hope that mutual trust will gradually increase on both
sides and enable the current positive momentum to
continue. The Council should continue to support the
work of Mr. Köhler and create the conditions necessary
to enable the Western Sahara political process to
move forward.
By working conscientiously under the Council
mandate, the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara (MINURSO) has been contributing
positively to the recent progress made in the Western
Sahara political process and the overall stability of
the situation in Western Sahara. China supports the
renewal of MINURSO’s mandate and will continue to

S/PV. 8518

play a constructive role in properly resolving the issue
of Western Sahara.
Resolution 2468 (2019), which the Council has just
adopted, extends the Mission’s mandate by six months
and expresses the Council’s full support for Personal
Envoy Köhler’s mediation efforts, which signifies the
Council’s resolve to uphold MINURSO’s mandate and
push for a political solution of the Western Sahara
issue. Going forward, we hope the Council will have
more thorough consultations on a future MINURSO
mandate-renewal resolution. The consultations should
more thorough and more inclusive, with a view to
achieving consensus.
China’s long-held stance on the issue of Western
Sahara is consistent. We shall continue to maintain an
impartial and objective position and support United
Nations efforts aimed at finding a political solution of
the Western Sahara issue and encourage the two sides
to use the relevant Council resolutions as a basis and
seek a just, lasting and mutually acceptable solution
through negotiation.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to begin my
statement by reiterating our delegation’s full support for
the good offices of the Secretary-General through the
political process led by his Personal Envoy, President
Horst Köhler.
We underscore the pivotal role played by the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) in maintaining peace and stability
in the region, a condition conducive for the peace talks
that include all parties. For that reason, my delegation
welcomes the renewal of the MINURSO mandate and
voted in favour of resolution 2468 (2019).
Understanding the sensitivity of the issue, we
believe that resolution 2468 (2019) very carefully
reflects a delicate balance. We thank the United States,
the penholder, for its efforts aimed at arriving at such
a balance through the engagement with the parties,
Member States and other relevant stakeholders. We
also commend the constructive engagement of all
parties with the political process and call on them to
remain committed to the process and to extend their
fullest support and cooperation to the Personal Envoy
to achieve progress towards a political solution.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom was pleased to vote in favour of resolution

19-123917/9

S/PV.8518

The situation concerning Western Sahara

2469 (2019) resolution today. We believe the resolution
sends a strong signal of our support for the valuable
work of the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General,
ex-President Horst Köhler, in his efforts to find a
mutually acceptable political solution that will provide
for the self-determination of the people of Western
Sahara. We encourage the parties and the neighbouring
States to continue their constructive engagement with
the Personal Envoy and with one another, in line with
the spirit of the resolution.
We call on all concerned to refrain from any
activity that could undermine negotiations or escalate
tensions on the ground. At the second round table
meeting, the participants themselves recognized
the importance of working to build additional trust
away from the negotiation table. We encourage them
to continue to do so to support progress towards an
enduring political solution.
The text of the resolution also reflects the strong
support of the Council for the continuing work of
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara and for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Colin Stewart, in carrying
out his duties. We regret that we were unable to speak
with one voice on the text before us today. However, we
remain convinced of the Council’s unanimous support
for ex-President Köhler’s efforts. Our support and the
support of the region and the international community
will be essential for a successful outcome to the process.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We would like to express our satisfaction
for the adoption of resolution 2468 (2019), which
renews the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO),
thanking the United States for the work done in drafting
a resolution that we consider balanced. The Dominican
Republic voted in favour of the resolution because we
consider it necessary to support the political process to
resolve the situation in Western Sahara, emphasizing
the importance of the role of MINURSO.
We understand that a 12-month renewal would
allow more certainty in the management and planning
of MINURSO’s resources, so we hope that the next
negotiation can embark on a discussion that will
highlight the benefits of a longer period. The Dominican
Republic considers that the autonomy plan presented

8/9

30/04/2019

by Morocco represents a serious and credible basis for
a negotiated solution.
Finally, the Dominican Republic reiterates its
support for the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara and urges all actors present in the
negotiation process to continue to work constructively,
always maintaining the spirit of compromise that
must prevail in this process. We are convinced that
it is possible to achieve a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable solution in Western Sahara in accordance
with Security Council resolutions.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Germany.
We too welcome today’s adoption of the mandate
renewal of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). We
consider the work of the Mission to be vital to ensuring
stability on the ground and providing the space for
the political process to move forward. We want to
explicitly thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Western Sahara, Mr. Stewart,
for his commitment to de-escalating tensions in the
area of operations and in closely coordinating with
the parties and the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara. He and his Mission must
be granted all rights and the freedom to fulfil their
mandate, which includes being able to meet with the
parties without restrictions.
The fact that resolution 2468 (2019) could not
count on the unanimous support of the Security
Council is regrettable. This should not discourage us
from standing united behind the political process and
the Personal Envoy. I welcome the unanimous support
given to the Personal Envoy in all statements heard
in the Council this morning, including the statements
made by the representatives of South Africa and the
Russian Federation. The Council, its Member States and
other countries with influence should demonstrate that
they are willing to use their weight and that influence
to support President Köhler in his efforts aimed at
bringing to this conflict a realistic, practical and lasting
solution that provides for the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara.
Personal Envoy Köhler was very clear in his
last briefing to the Council. He expects gestures of
good faith by the parties before he convenes a third

19-12391

30/04/2019

The situation concerning Western Sahara

round table. In this context, I am also grateful that
the mandate now to clearly include the demand for
additional trust to be built up between the parties.
It is now up to Morocco and the Frente Popular para
la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro
(Frente POLISARIO) to demonstrate political will and
engage in confidence-building measures. The Frente
POLISARIO’s destroying its remaining stockpile of
landmines was an encouraging sign. The resumption of
family visits or granting access to independent human
rights observers could also be gestures that would
facilitate dialogue and create trust. This list is anything
but exhaustive.

S/PV. 8518

In the end, we must not forget that Western Sahara
is not an abstract conflict to resolve. It is a conflict that
has affected the lives of thousands of people every day
for many decades.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

19-123919/9
