General Assembly-Eleventh Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE THIRD COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
Page

1038 (XI). Membership of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's
Fund (7 December 1956) (item 12) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1039 (XI). Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(23 January 1957) (item 30) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1040 ( XI). Convention on the Nationality of Married Women ( 29 January
1957) (item 33) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1041 (XI). Interim measures, pending entry into force of the covenants on
human rights, to be taken with respect to violations of the human rights
set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights (20 February 1957) (item 60) . . . .
........
1042 (XI). Long-range programme for community development (21 February
1957) (item 12) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
........
1043 (XI). International cultural and scientific co-operation ( 21 February
1957) (item 12) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1038 (XI). Membership of the Executive Board
of the United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 610 B (XXI) of 1 May 1956,
Noting that the number of Governments making
voluntary contributions to the United Nations Children's Fund has increased steadily since 1950, and has
thus far in 1956 reached seventy-eight,
Considering that it would be desirable to separate
the membership of the Executive Board of the United
Nations Children's Fund from the membership of the
Social Commission in order to provide for the direct
election of all members of the Executive Board,
Decides to replace paragraph 6 (a) of General
Assembly resolution 417 (V) of 1 December 1950 by
the following :
"That the Executive Board of the United Nations
Children's Fund shall be reconstituted as from 1
January 1957 to consist of thirty States, Members
of the United Nations or members of the specialized
agencies, to be designated by the Economic and
Social Council for appropriate periods, without prejudice to the terms of the States already elected and
with due regard to geographical distribution and to
the representation of the major contributing and
recipient countries".
612th plenary meeting,
7 December 1956.

17
17
18

19
20
20

Taking note in particular of the addendum to his report dealing with the effect of the shortfall in governmental contributions to the United Nations Refugee
Fund,2
Bearing in mind that, under the Statute of his Office, 3
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
is charged with the duty of seeking solutions for the
problems of refugees through voluntary repatriation,
resettlement and integration,
Bearing in mind the provisions of section II of General Assembly resolution 1006 (ES-II) of 9 November
1956 and General Assembly resolution 1129 (XI) of
21 November on the problem of Hungarian refugees,
the appeals of the Government of Austria for assistance
in dealing with this problem, and the response of
Governments to these appeals,
Taking note of the statements of the United Nations
Deputy High Commissioner for Refugees• on the steps
so far taken by the Office to deal with the prob1em of
Hungarian refugees and on the impact of this problem
on the programme of the United Nations Refugee
Fund,
1. Expresses its appreci,ation of the efforts of the
United Nations Deputy High Commissioner for
Refugees to implement the programme for permanent
solutions of the existing refugee problem and to deal
with the emergency situation created by the problem
of Hungarian refugees;
1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Session,
Supplement No. 11 (A/3123/Rev.1) and Supplement No.
11 A (A/3123/Rev.l/ Add.1 and 2).
'Ibid., Supplement No. 11 A (A/3123/Rev.1/Add.1 and 2),
addendum 1.
• Ibid., Fifth Session, Sttpplement No. 20, resolution 428
(V), annex.
• Ibid .. Eleventh Session, Third Committee, 690th and 692nd
meetings.

1039 (XI). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
A

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees1 covering the activities of his Office between May 1955 and May 1956,
l'7

General Assembly-Eleventh Se.aeion

18

2. E.xpresse.r its apprecwtion to the Government of
Austria for the part it has played in receiving and
assisting the refugees who have entered its territory;
3. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his efforts to effect solutions
in accordance with the Statute of his Office and the
programme of the United Nations Refugee Fund, under due safeguards in accordance with his responsibility under the said Statute to provide international
protection to refugees within his mandate ;
4. Requests the High Commissioner, in consultation
with the Secretary-General and with the Governments
concerned, to develop a comprehensive assessment of
the needs, both material and financial, of the Hungarian refugees, to be submitted to the United Nations
Refugee Fund Executive Committee for its approval
at the earliest possible date ;
5. Expresses grave concern at the shortfall in the
governmental contributions to the United Nations
Refugee Fund established at $16 million;.
6. Urges all States Members of the United Nations
or members of the specialized agencies to give early
and serious consideration to making contributions to
the United Nations Refugee Fund in order that the
target for 1956 and 1957 may be reached and the High
Commissioner enabled fully to implement the programme planned under that Fund;
7. Requests the High Commissioner to study with
the United Nations Refugee Fund Executive Committee the appropriate means to ensure the full implementation of the programme of the Fund.

643rd plenary meeting,
23 January 1957.

B
The General, Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 628
(XXII) of 13 July 1956,
Recalling with gratitude the work accomplished by
Dr. G. J. van Reuven Goedhart as United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and mindful of his
devoted and untiring efforts,
Recording its deep regret at his untimely death,
1. Decides that a plaque to the memory of Dr. G.
J. van Reuven Goedhart shall be placed in the Palais
des Nations in Geneva ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make appropriate arrangements for this purpose ;
3. Urges Governments actively to support tl,e work
on behalf of refugees in the spirit of the United Nations
Charter.
643rd plenary meeting,
23 January 1957.
1040 (XI). Convention of the Nationality of
Married Women

The General Assembly,
Considering that it is appropriate to conclude, under
the auspices of the United Nations, an international
convention on the nationality of married women, designed to eliminate conflicts of law arising out of provisions concerning the loss or acquisition of nationality
by women as a result of marriage, of its dissolution, or

of the change of nationality by the husband during
marriage,
Decides to open the Convention annexed to the
present resolution for signature and ratification at the
end of the eleventh session of the General Assembly.

647th plenary meeting,
29 January 1957.
ANNEX
CONVENTION ON THE NATIONALITY OF MARRIED WOMEN

The Contracting States,
Recognizing that, in article 15 of the Universal Declaration
ence to nationality arise as a result of provisions concerning
the loss or acquisition of nationality by women as a result
of marriage, of its dissolution or of the change of nationality
by the husband during marriage,
Recognizing that, in article 15 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the General Assembly of the United
Nations has proclaimed that "everyone has the right to a
nationality" and that "no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of
his nationality nor denied the right to change his nationality",
Desiring to co-operate with the United Nations in promoting
universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to sex,
Hereby agree as hereinafter provided:
Article 1
Each Contracting State agrees that neither the celebration
nor the dissolution of a marriage between one of its nationals
and an alien, nor the change of nationality by the husband
during marriage, shall automatically affect the nationality of
the wife.
Article 2
Each Contracting State agrees that neither the voluntary
acquisition of the nationality of another State nor the renunciation of its nationality by one of its nationals shall
prevent the retention of its nationality by the wife of such
national.
Article 3
1. Each -Contracting State agrees that the alien wife of one
of its nationals may, at her request, acquire the nationality
of her husband through specially priviliged naturalization
procedures; the grant of such nationality may be subject to
such limitations as may be imposed in the interests of national
security or public policy.
2. Each Contracting State agrees that the present Convention shall not be construed as affecting any legislation or
judicial practice by which the alien wife of one of its
nationals may, at her request, acquire her husband's nationality as a matter of right.
Article 4
1. The present Convention shall be open for signature and
ratification on behalf of any State Member of the United
Nations and also on behalf of any other State which is or
hereafter becomes a member of any specialized agency of the
United Nations, or which is or hereafter becomes a Party
to the Statute of the International Court of Justice, or any
other State to which an invitation has been addressed by
the General Assembly of the United Nations.
2. The present Convention shall be ratified and the in struments of ratification shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
Article 5
1. The present Convention shall be open for accession to
all States referred to in paragraph 1 of article 4.
2. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
