NOCOVER
(1)

NOCOVER
(2)

UNITED NATIüNS

RESOLUTIONS
adopted by the General Assembly
during its

THillTEENTH SESSION
Volume n
20 February - 13 March 1959

GENERAL A55EMBLY
OFFICIAL RECORDS : THIRTEENTH SESSION
SUPPLEMENT No. IBA (A/4090/Add.l)

New York, 1959

NOTE
The present volume contains the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during the period from 20 February 1959, when the thirteenth session was resumed
in accordance with Assembly resolution 1281 (XIII), to 13 March 1959. whcn
the session was adjourned.
For the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during the periocl Irom
16 September to 13 December 1958, see OfficÚlI Records of the General Asscmbiy,
Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/4090).

*
* *
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
documento
The arabic and roman numerals identifying each resolution indicare, respectively,
the number of the resolution and the nurnber of the session at which it was adopted.

CONTENTS
Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly

from 20 February to 13 March 1959

Pagt

1349 (XIII). The future of the Trust Territory of the Cameroons under
French administration (item 13)
Resolution of 13 March 1959
1350 (XIII). The future of the Trust Territory of the Cameroons under
United Kingdom aclministration (item 13)
Resolution of 13 March 1959

iii

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
FROM 20 FEBRUARY TO 13 MARCH 19591

1349 (XIII). The future of the Trust Territory
of the Cameroons under French administration

that there wil1 be general elections after independence
since such elections wiI1 then be necessary and useful
in order to settle various constitutional and other
questions,
N oting the resolution adopted by the Legislative Assembly of the Cameroons on 24 October 1958, the conc1usions of the V isiting Mission and the dec1arations
of the Administering Authority and the representatives
of the Cameroons Government concerning the desire and
readiness of the people of the Cameroons for independence,
Taking int o account the declarations of the Adrninistering Authority and the Government of the Cameroons
under French administration that the Territory wil1
become completely independent on 1 J anuary 1960, and
the assurances given by the representative of France
that his Government will sponsor the application that
wiI1 thereupon be made by the Government of the
Cameroons to be admitted to membership oí the United
Nations,
H aving heard the views of the petitioners,
1. Resolues, in agreement with the Administering
Authority, that, on 1 January 1960, when the Carneroons under French administration becomes independent,
the Trusteeship Agreement approved by the General
Assembly on 13 December 1946 sha11 cease to be in
force in accordance with Artic1e 76 b of the Charter oí
the United Nations;
. 2. Expresses its confidence that, at the earliest possible date aíter the attainment of independence on
1 January 1960, elections will be heId for the formation
of a new assernbly which should take decisions regarding
the establishment, in their final forrn, of the institutions
of the free and independent Cameroons;
3. Recommends that, upon the attainment of independence on I J anuary 1960, the Cameroons under
French administration shal1 be admitted to membership
of the U nited :-J ations according to Article 4 of the
Charter.
794th plenary meeting,
13 March 1959.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1282 (XIII) of 5 December
1958 requesting the Trusteeship Council to examine, as
early as possible during the twenty-third session, the
reports of the United Nations Visiting Mission to
Trust Territories in West Africa, 1958, on the Carneroons under French administration and the Cameroons
under United Kingdom adrninistration, and to transmit
them, with its observations and recommendations, to the
General Assembly not later than 20 February 1959, to
enable the Assembly, in consultation with the Administering Authorities, to take the necessary measures in connexion with the full attainment of the objectives of the
Trusteeship System,
Having exomined. the special report of the Trusteeship
Council," as well as the report of the Visiting Mission
on the Cameroons under French administration" and
the observations of the Administering Authority on it,"
Taking into account the statements made in the Fourth
Cornrnittee by the representatives of the Administering
Authority and by the Prime Minister of the Cameroons
under French admínistration,"
N oting with satisfaction the adoption by the Legislative
Assembly of the Cameroons under French administration of the amnesty law of 14 February 1959 and the
assurances given by the Prime Minister of the Carneroons that this law is being put into effect on the
widest possible basis and with the least possible delay,
N oting the statements of the representatives of the
Cameroons Government that it weIcomes the return of
aI1 Cameroonians who in recent years have left the
country and invites them to re-enter normal life without
fear of reprisal,
H aving been assured by the representatives of the
Administering Authority and the Government of the
Cameroons that there exist in the Territory freedom
of the Press, of assembly and of political association,
and other fundamental freedoms,
H aving been informed by the Prime Minister of the
Cameroons under French administration that his Government has issued a decree fixing 12 April 1959 as
the date for elections to be he1d to filI the four seats in
the Legislative Assembly allocated to the SanagaMaritime area, as wel1 as two vacant seats in the Mbouda
subdivision,
Noting with satisfaction the statement of the Prime
Minister of the Cameroons under French administration

1350 (XIII). The future of the Trust Territory
oí the Carneroons under Uníted Kingdom
administration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1282 (XIII) of 5 December
1958 requesting the Trusteeship Council to examine, as
3 qfficial Records of the Trusteeship' Council, Tuienty-third
Session, Supplement No. 3 (T/1441) documents T/1427 and
T /1434.
'
. • Official Rc cords 01 the General Assembly, Thirteentk SesSlon, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/4094, annex IlI.
5 See Official Re cords 01 the General Assembly Thirteenth
Session, Fourih Committee, 845th, 846th 849th' 860th and
871st meetings.
'
,

1 Resolutions adopted on the report oí the Fourth Committee.
For the text oí the report, see Official Records 01 the General
Assembly, Thirteentñ Sessum, Annexes, agenda ítem 13, document A/4095.
20fficial Récords 01 the General Assembly; Thirteentb Sessio«, Annexes, agenda ítem 13, document A/4094.

1

z
early as possible during the twenty-third session, the
reports of the United Nations Visiting Mission to
Trust Territories in West Africa, 1958, on the Carneroons under French administration and the Cameroons
under United Kingdom administration, and to transmit
them, with its observations and recommendations, to the
General Assembly not later than 20 February 1959,
to enable the Assembly, in consultation with the Administering Authorities, to take the necessary measures in
connexion with the full attainment of the objectives of
the Trusteeship System,
Havi1f,g examined, in consultation with the Administering Authority, the special report of the Trusteeship
Council," as well as the report of the Visiting Mission
-on the Cameroons under United Kingdom administration,"
Noting the staternents made in the Fourth Cornmittee
by the representatives of the Administering Authority,
by the Premier of the Southern Cameroons, by the
Leader of the Opposition in the Southern Cameroons
House of Assembly, and by the Minister for Northern
Cameroons Affairs in the Government of the N orthern
Region of Nigeria,?

1. Recommends that the Administering Authority,
in pursuance of Artic1e 76 b of the Charter of the
United Nations, take steps, in consultation with a
United Nations Plebiscite Cornmissioner, to organize,
under the supervision of the United Nations, separate
plebiscites in the northern and southern parts of the
Cameroons under United Kingdom aclministration, in
order to ascertain the wishes of the inhabitants of the
Territory concerning their future;
2, Recommends further that in the northern part of
the Territory the plebiscite should take place about the
middle of November 1959, that the people of the
northern part of the Territory should be asked:
" (a) Do you wish the Northern Cameroons to
be part of the Northern Region of Nigeria when the
Federation of Nigeria becomes independent?
or
" (b) Are you in favour of deciding the future of
the Northern Cameroons at a later date?"
e Official Records 01 the Trusteeship Council, Tsoewty-tbird
Session, Supplement :V o. 2 (T/1440), documents T /1426 ami
Add.1.

and that the plebiscite should be conducted on the basis
of the electoral register at present being compiled for
the elections to the Federal House of Representatives;
3. Recommends further that the plebiscite in the
southern part of the Territory should be conducted during
the next dry season between the beginning of December
1959 and the end of April 1960;
4. Decides that the two alternatives to be put to
the people of the southern part of the Territory and
the qualifications for voting in the plebiscite there should
be considered by the General Assembly at its fourteenth
session;
5. Expresses the hope that all concerned in the Territory will endeavour to reach agreement before the
opening of the fourteenth session oí the General Assembly on the alternatives to be put in the plebiscite
in the Southern Cameroons and the qualifications for
voting in it;
6. Decides to appoint a United Nations Plebiscite
Cornmissioner who shall exercise, on behalf oí the General Assembly, all the necessary powers and functions
of supervision, and who shall be assisted by observers
and staff to be appointed by the Secretary-General in
consultation with him;
7. Requests the United Nations Plebiscite Comrnissioner to submit to the Trusteeship Council a report in
two parts on the organization, conduct and results oí the
plebiscites, the first part oí the report, which shall deal
with the northern part of the Territory, to be submitted
in time for transmission to the General Assembly for
consideration before the end of its fourteenth session;
8. Requests the Trusteeship Council to transmit to
it the reports of the United Nations Plebiscite Cornmissioner, together with any recornmendations and observations it considers necessary.

794th plenary meeting,
13 March 1959.

*
* *
Al its 794th plenar» meetinq, on 13 Marcb 1959, the General
Assembly; voting by secret ballot , elected Mr. Djalal Abdoh
(han) United Nations Plebiscite Commissloner,
7 See

Official Récords o] the General A ssembly, Thirteentb

Session, Fourth Committee, 846th, 847th, 849th and 8SOth
meetings.

. ¡olWl .l..; 1

~, l""~l.:;.,lJ~ ~ J."...-JI 4
c=- ,j ~;,.,:JI JJ>J ",L.;:(JI ..,. •.....,.)1 r-'I'\ "':J':'-' ~ J--" J-...

. .....,..". ,j JI ~J""'.r.' ,j ~' ri' -......JI ¡",,'I'I , JI JI J1

tofiiJ~.~.g.[jJililli~
I

• .g.~~~.~~t~~~~M~.~~.~.o ~~~~~~~~fl~~~8~~~~ ••mo
HOW ro OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLlCATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and diatributors
throughout the world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.

COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLlCATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences
dépositaires du monde entier. Informez-vous auprés de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a: Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
I

EAE nOJIYlIHTI> H3JJ:AHHH OPI'AHH 3AII,HH OB'LEJJ:HHEHHhlX HAII,HR
H3AaRHJI OpraRH3a~HH ()(5'heAHReRRblx Ha~HA MO>KHO KynHTb B KRH>KRbIX Mara3RRax H areRTcTBax 80 acex pañonax MHpa. HaBOAHTe crrpaaxa 00 H3AaHHJlX B
BaweM KRH>KHOM Mara3HHe HnH nHWHTe no azrpecy : OpraRH3a~HH OO'heAHReRBbIX
Ha~HA, CeK~HH no npozraace H3AaHHA, HblO-PIOPK HnH :>KeHeBa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas están en venta en librerlas y casas diatrihuidoras en todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o diríjase a: Naciones
Unidas, Sección de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Printed in U.S.A.
Reprinted in U.N., New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50

8148-April1959-3,725
8241-Apri11966-400
16535-July 1980-200
