III.

59

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
---

Assembly, 13 according to which it should continue to
consider what concrete steps should be taken to facilitate the reduction of military budgets, bearing in mind
the relevant proposals and documents of the United
Nations on this question,
Convinced that reductions of military expenditures
could be carried out without affecting the military
balance to the detriment of the national security of any
country,
Recalling its resolution 33 /67 of l 4 December 1978, in
which the General Assembly requested the SecretaryGeneral, with the assistance of an ad hoe panel of experienced practitioners in the field of military budgeting:
(a) To carry out a practical test of the proposed
reporting instrument with the voluntary co-operation of
States from different regions and representing different
budgeting and accounting systems,
(b) To assess the results of the practical tests,
(c) To develop recommendations for further refinement and implementation of the reporting instrument,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General 14 submitted in pursuance of resolution
33 /67, containing recommended steps leading to the
early implementation of the revised instrument in a general and regular system for the international reporting of
military expenditures, ensuring an increasing participation with a view to universal reporting by an everwidening set of States and at the same time recommending that a further study should be undertaken of
the problems of comparing military expenditures among
different States and in different years as well as the
problems of verification that will arise in connexion with
agreements on reduction of military expenditures,
Recognizing with satisfaction that a carefully
elaborated reporting instrument has now become
available for general and regular implementation, in the
course of which it may be further refined, in particular
through its testing by a widening set of States,
Emphasizing the value of such a reporting instrument,
once fully implemented in its refined form, as a means
to increase confidence between States by contributing
to greater openness in military matters.
Convinced that the systematic reporting of military
expenditures is an important first step in the move
towards agreed and balanced reductions in military
expenditures,
I. Requests the Secretary-General . to make the
necessary arrangements for the above-mentioned report
to be issued as a United Nations publication and widely
distributed;
2. Recommends that all Member States should make
use of the reporting instrument and report annually to
the Secretary-General their military expenditures of the
latest fiscal year for which data are available, presenting their first report preferably not later than 30
April 1981;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report on these
matters to the General Assembly on an annual basis:
4. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of an ad hoe group of qualified experts in the field
of military budgets: 1 ;
"Resolution S-10/2.
14
A/35/479.
15
Subsequently referred to as the Group of Experts on the Reduction of Military Budgets.
·

--

.

-

(a) To refine further the reporting instrument on the
basis of future comments and suggestions received from
States during the general and regular implementation of
the reporting instrument:
(b) To examine and suggest solutions to the question
of comparing military expenditures among different
States and between different years as well as to the
problems of verification that will arise in connexion with
agreements on reduction of military expenditures:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of paragraph 4 above to the General
Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament:
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
group of experts with the necessary financial assistance
and secretariat services:
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Reduction of
military budgets".

94th plenary meeting
I 2 December I 980

35/143.

Implementation of General Assembly resolution
34/71 co'1cerning the signature and ratification
of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 2286 (XXII) of 5 December
1967, 3262 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3473 (XXX) of
11 December 1975, 32/76 of 12 December 1977, S-10/2
of 30 June 1978, 33/58 of 14 December 1978 and 34/71
of 11 December 1979 concerning the signature and
ratification of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco ), 16
Taking into account that within the zone of application of that Treaty, to which twenty-two sovereign
States are already parties, there are some territories
which, in spite of not being sovereign political entities,
are nevertheless in a position to receive the benefits
deriving from the Treaty through its Additional Protocol I, to which the States that de Jure or de facto are internationally responsible for those territories may
become parties,
Recalling with satisfaction that the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Kingdom
of the Netherlands became parties to Additional
Protocol I in 1969 and I 971, respectively,
I. Regrets that the signature of Additional Protocol
I by the United States of America and by France, which
the General Assembly duly noted with satisfaction and
which took place on 26 May 1977 and 2 March 1979,
respectively, has not yet been followed by the corresponding ratifications, notwithstanding the time
already elapsed and the invitations that the Assembly
has addressed to them and which it reiterates with special urgency in the present resolution;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item entitled "Implementation of
General Assembly resolution 35 / 143 concerning the
signature and ratification of Additional Protocol I of the
" United Nations. Treatv Series, vol. 634. No. 9068, p. 326.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

60

-

---· - ~ - - - - - .

---

Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco )".

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

35/144.

Chemical and bacteriological (biological)
weapons
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2826 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971, in which it commended the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, and expressed the
hope for the widest possible adherence to that Convention,
Recalling that, in paragraph 73 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 17 it expressed the opinion that all States which
have not yet done so should consider adhering to the
Convention,
Recalling that the States parties to the Convention
met at Geneva from 3 to 21 March 1980 to review the
operation of the Convention,
Noting with satisfaction that, at the time of the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, eighty-one States
had ratified the Convention, six States had acceded to
the Convention and a further thirty-seven States had
signed but had yet to ratify the Convention,

I. Welcomes the final declaration of the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, 18 in which the
States parties to the Convention, inter alia:
(a) Reaffirmed their strong determination, for the
sake of all mankind, to exclude completely the possibility of bacteriological (biological) agents and toxins
being used as weapons, their strong support for the Convention and their continued dedication to its principles
and objectives and their commitment to implement effectively its provisions;
(b) Expressed the belief that article I had proved sufficiently comprehensive to have covered recent scientific
and technological developments relevant to the Convention;
(c) Considered that the flexibility of the provisions
concerning consultations and co-operation on any
problems which might arise in relation to the objective,
or in the application of the provisions of, the Convention enabled interested States parties to use various international procedures which would make it possible to
ensure effectively and adequately the implementation of
the provisions of the Convention, taking into account
the concern expressed by the participants in the Conference to this effect-these procedures include, inter
alia, the right of any State party subsequently to request
that a consultative meeting open to all States parties be
convened at the expert level-and, having noted the con" Resolution S- JO /2.

"BWC/CONF.1/10, sect. II.

--

--

cerns and differing views expressed on the adequacy of
article V, believed that this question should be further
considered at an appropriate time;
(d) Reaffirmed the obligation assumed by the States
parties to the Convention to continue negotiations in
good faith towards the recognized objectives of an early
agreement on complete, effective and adequately verifiable measures for the prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and for
their destruction:
(e) Noted that during the first five years of the
operation of the Convention the provisions of articles
VI, VII, XI and XIII had not been invoked:
2. Calls upon all signatory States which have not
ratified the Convention to do so without delay and upon
those States which have not yet signed the Convention
to consider doing so at an early date as a significant contribution to international confidence.

94th plenary meeting
12 December J980
B

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2454 A (XXIII) of 20
December 1968, 2603 B (XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
2662 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2827 A (XXVI) of 16
December 1971, 2933 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972,
3077 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3256 (XXIX) of 9
December 1974, 3465 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
31/65 of 10 December 1976, 32/77 of 12 December
1977, S-10/2 of 30 June 1978, 33/59 A of 14 December
1978 and 34/72 of 11 December 1979, relating to the
complete and effective prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and
of their destruction,
Reaffirming also the necessity of strict observance by
all States of the principles and objectives of the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June I 925.'"
and of the adherence by all States to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, 20
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Disarmament,' 1 which embodies, inter alia, the report of
its Ad Hoe Working Group on Chemical Weapons,
Taking note of the joint report on progress in the
bilateral negotiations on the prohibition of chemical
weapons, submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America to the Committee on Disarmament on 7 July 1980, which regrettably have not yet resulted in the elaboration of a
joint initiative,
Considering it necessary that all efforts be exerted for
the earliest successful conclusion of the negotiations on
the prohibition of the development, production and
stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their
destruction,
1. Notes with satisfaction the work of the Committee
on Disarmament during its session held in 1980 regarding the prohibition of chemical weapons, in partic" League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV ( 1929), No. 21.18.
p. 65.
"'Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.

" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Ses.<ion.
Supplement No. 27 (A/35/27).
