S/PV.8363

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8363rd meeting

Thursday, 27 September 2018, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pompeo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wang Yi
Mr. Amon-Tanoh
Mr. Esono Angue
Mr. Negewo
Mr. Le Drian
Mr. Abdrakhmanov
Mr. Al Sabah
Mr. Blok
Mr. Popolizio Bardales
Mr. Czaputowicz
Mr. Lavrov
Ms. Wallström
Mr. Hunt

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-30061 (E)
*1830061*

S/PV.8363

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.

achieved and fully verified, it is our solemn collective
responsibility to fully implement all Security Council
resolutions pertaining to North Korea.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Japan and the Republic of Korea to
participate in this meeting.
I am pleased to welcome the distinguished Ministers
and representatives gathered here this morning.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on the agenda.

begin

its

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Secretary of State of the United States of America.
Time and time again, over the past quartercentury, the United Nations has made it clear that the
world cannot accept a nuclear-armed North Korea.
That is not just the United States position; that is the
world’s position. Past diplomatic attempts to halt North
Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile development were
unsuccessful, but now we are at the dawn of a new day.
Since taking office, President Trump has led the
international pressure campaign that has resulted in the
first significant diplomatic breakthrough in decades.
During President Trump and Chairman Kim’s historic
Singapore summit, Chairman Kim committed to
working towards the complete denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. The two leaders share a common,
personal understanding of what must take place for
the transformation of the relations between the United
States and Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The United States continues to engage with
North Korea to implement the commitments made in
Singapore. Yesterday, I had a very positive meeting with
Foreign Minister Ri Yong Ho to discuss how we can
move forward on all four commitments in the Singapore
joint statement. We also discussed the second summit
between President Trump and Chairman Kim Jong Un.
We must not forget what has brought us this
far — the historic international pressure campaign that
the Council has made possible through the sanctions
that it has imposed. Until the final denuclearization
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
2/20

27/09/2018

President Trump has made it abundantly clear that
if Chairman Kim follows through on his commitments,
a much brighter future lies ahead for North Korea and
its people, and the United States will be at the forefront
of facilitating that bright future. We want to see that
time come as quickly as possible, but the path to peace
and a brighter future is only through diplomacy and
denuclearization. That means that any other path that
North Korea may choose will inevitably lead to everincreasing isolation and pressure. It is imperative for
Members of the United Nations to take that to heart.
Enforcement of Security Council sanctions must
continue vigorously and without fail until we realize the
final, fully verified denuclearization of North Korea.
The members of the Council must set the example on
that effort and we must all hold each other accountable.
Particularly, we must all be accountable for
enforcing resolution 2397 (2017), which lowered the
annual cap on refined petroleum imports to North
Korea. The United States has made its assessment, and
we can say in no uncertain terms, that the cap of 500,000
barrels has been breached this year. We continue to see
illegal imports of additional refined petroleum using
ship-to-ship transfers, which are clearly prohibited
under the resolution. As Security Council members,
we must convey to the captains of those ships, their
owners and anyone else involved in those transfers that
we are watching them and that they must cease their
illicit activity.
We must all be accountable for cutting off North
Korea’s illegal coal exports, which provide funds that go
directly to its weapons of mass destruction programmes.
We must be accountable, too, for curbing the number of
North Korean labourers permitted within our borders.
The United States is troubled by recent reports that
Member States, including members of the Security
Council, are hosting new North Korean labourers. That
violates the spirit and letter of the Security Council
resolutions that we all agreed to uphold.
While sanctions remain part of the total approach
we are pursuing to rid the Korean peninsula of nuclear
weapons, I want to finish on a positive note. We are
well into a diplomatic process and we hope — indeed,
we want — to see this through to a successful end. I
am pleased that, based upon recent exchanges between
18-30061

27/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8363

President Trump and Chairman Kim, the President has
directed me to travel to Pyongyang next month to meet
with Chairman Kim and to accelerate that process.

attaches to addressing this danger to humankind, in
line with its responsibility for conflict prevention and
the maintenance of international peace and security.

I want to reiterate that the future can be very bright
for North Korea if it makes good on its commitment to
final, fully verified denuclearization. It will lead to the
positive transformation of relations between the United
States and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
to greater prosperity for the North Korean people, and
to an enduring peace. In our vision for a free and open
Indo-Pacific, nations are strong, sovereign, connected,
prosperous and at peace, but that vision for the region
will never be complete if we fail to bring about this
transformation on the Korean peninsula. The Korean
people, the region and the world will never realize
the full promise of the future if we do not seize this
unprecedented diplomatic opening for peace.

The situation on the Korean peninsula is one of the
longest-standing issues on the United Nations agenda,
as well as one of the most serious. A few months ago,
we all followed with great concern the rise in tensions
on the Korean peninsula, exacerbated by the danger of
military escalation in the region, following the conduct
of nuclear tests and the launch of ballistic missiles by
North Korea, in clear violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions.

I said at the beginning of my statement that we are
at the dawn of a new day in the world’s relationship with
North Korea. We do not yet know what that day will
bring, but we are hopeful that the current breakthrough
in diplomacy will yield a brighter future for North
Korea and a safer world for all of us. I look forward to
the discussion.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.
Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, it gives me pleasure to express Kuwait’s
appreciation for the efforts of the United States and
its Permanent Mission during its presidency of the
Security Council this month. I am also pleased to
see you, Mr. President, in the Chamber for the first
time since you took office as Secretary of State, and
I appreciate the comprehensive and enriching briefing
you have just presented.
Today’s meeting on non-proliferation and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea comes only
24 hours after the Security Council summit meeting
(see S/PV.8362) at which the reduction of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) was discussed by Heads
of State and Government. Such important meetings,
which complement many others held by the Council
this year, are a clear indication of the grave danger
posed by the threat of nuclear proliferation and WMDs,
as well as the utmost priority the Security Council

But the strong and sincere political will
demonstrated by the United States and States of the
region to choose the path of direct dialogue resulted in
the convening of three presidential summits in a period
of just four months, in addition to the understandings
that emerged therefrom. These summits led to a number
of commitments that were supported by the State of
Kuwait and the international community and contributed
to defusing the threat of a military confrontation and to
de-escalating tensions in the Korean peninsula, with a
view to achieving the desired goal of denuclearization
and the establishment of a comprehensive and lasting
peace between the two Koreas.
It is also important to emphasize the key role of
the Security Council in launching these diplomatic
talks. Indeed, the cohesion and unity of Council
members in condemning all North Korea’s illegal
programmes and activities, and in adopting a series
of international resolutions imposing the broadest and
most comprehensive sanctions in the history of the
United Nations, were central to the decision to start
negotiations, as had long been called for in relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Since the beginning of its membership of the
Council, the State of Kuwait has kept on working to
implement all the priorities we declared during our
election campaign. These priorities are at the core
of our foreign policy, which is founded on the basic
principles of international law, promoting the role of
preventive diplomacy and redoubling efforts to prevent
and resolve conflicts peacefully.
On that basis, the State of Kuwait believes that
the right way to deal with the issue being discussed at
this ministerial meeting of the Security Council is to
show full support for direct talks to reach a peaceful
solution to the crisis related to North Korea’s nuclear

18-300613/20

S/PV.8363

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

programme and to establish a sustainable peace on the
Korean peninsula. At the same time, we emphasize
the need for North Korea to comply fully with all its
international obligations pursuant to relevant Security
Council resolutions, including the elimination of its
nuclear weapons and illicit programmes, and to re-join
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
as a non-nuclear State.
The State of Kuwait also stresses the importance
of holding these direct talks in parallel and conjunction
with the full implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions by United Nations Member States,
which will provide support for the current course of
negotiations. Full commitment to the implementation
of Security Council resolutions and the resolution of
issues through dialogue and negotiations is the wisest
choice and only solution for all parties to resolve
this issue.
Before concluding, I would like to emphasize
that the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and
other WMDs can be guaranteed only through their
destruction and total elimination. I recall the first
resolution of the General Assembly, resolution 1 (I)
of 24 January 1946, which was adopted by consensus
and aimed at eliminating all nuclear weapons. The
commitment to achieving consensus to put an end to
the grave threats posed by such weapons confirms our
conviction that the continued unity of Security Council
members is the most important element of nuclear
disarmament on the Korean peninsula. The State of
Kuwait will remain committed and eager to support
dialogue and negotiations so that we can eliminate all
nuclear weapons and thereby fully implement the first
United Nations resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of China.
Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): In the
course of this year, we have seen important positive
developments on the Korean peninsula. The situation
has returned to the track of dialogue and negotiations.
Seizing the opportunity of the Pyeongchang Winter
Olympics, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the Republic of Korea have been able to
turn their relations around and open a new chapter of
reconciliation and cooperation.
In April, the entire world watched as Chairman Kim
and President Moon took a first step together across
the Military Demarcation Line. Last week again, we
4/20

27/09/2018

heard the good news that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea held
their third summit this year and issued the Pyongyang
Joint Declaration. The two Koreas have thus achieved
an overall improvement and development in their
relations and jointly undertaken to make the peninsula
a peaceful place free of nuclear weapons and nuclear
threats. China applauds the political decisiveness and
courage demonstrated by the two leaders. China firmly
supports the two countries in turning their leaders’
consensus into concrete actions, in building mutual
trust and in advancing reconciliation and cooperation
on the peninsula.
At their historic summit in Singapore in June, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the United
States reached important common understandings on
comprehensive denuclearization and the building of
a peace mechanism on the peninsula. That serves the
shared interests of all parties, including the United
States and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
and meets the need for regional peace and stability. It
is also what the international community hopes to see.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
United States are actively preparing for their second
summit. China supports their efforts to continue the
dialogue, meet each other halfway and secure more
deliverables at the meeting.
China’s position on the Korean peninsula issue is
consistent. China is committed to denuclearization,
peace and stability on the peninsula and to resolving
issues through dialogue. China has devoted great
efforts and energy to that end. The recent positive
developments on the peninsula are exactly what China
has been working for over the years. At this juncture,
we believe that the Security Council has a duty and
need to send a clear and united message and accelerate
the process of political settlement.
All parties need to work together for a peaceful and
stable peninsula. That is an aspiration shared by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Korea and all other countries of the region.
The peninsula issue is essentially about security. To
secure peace there, it is critical to address the legitimate
security concerns of all parties in an appropriate and
balanced manner. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has suspended its nuclear and missile tests and
gradually dismantled relevant facilities. The United
States and the Republic of Korea, for their part, have
18-30061

27/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

suspended large-scale military exercises. Building on
that, a timely release of declaration ending the war
would dispel the spectre of war on the peninsula and
manifest the political resolve to forsake war. It will help
build basic trust, further facilitate denuclearization
and put in place the conditions necessary for a final
peace accord.
In China’s view, a wise political decision must
be taken on this. All parties need to work together
for a completely denuclearized peninsula, which is a
prerequisite for lasting peace. It is what we must do
to uphold the nuclear non-proliferation regime, which
is the shared objective of concerted global efforts.
China believes that the most effective way to advance
denuclearization is in parallel with the building of
a peace mechanism on the peninsula so that the two
tracks can support and reinforce one another and be
settled together.
The main players in that process are the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the United States, but
all stakeholders are obligated to play their part. The
Six-Party Talks have played an important role and will
remain an indispensable multilateral platform. The
Security Council should also form consensus in a timely
manner to provide a driving force and international
guarantee.
All parties need to work together for a peninsula
of mutually beneficial cooperation. Denuclearization
is ultimately aimed at bringing a better life of greater
prosperity, peace and happiness to the people of the
peninsula and the region.
Over the past decades, cooperation around the
peninsula has stalled due to various disruptions, but
this year the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has made a major decision to shift its focus to economic
development. That decision deserves to be welcomed
and supported by the international community.
As the denuclearization process moves forward,
on the condition that they do not violate Council
resolutions, all parties can gradually foster practical
cooperation whenever where conditions are met as as
to improve people’s well-being. We hope that the day
denuclearization is achieved will also be the day that
development and revitalization come to the peninsula.
In carrying out its mandate under the Charter of
the United Nations, the Security Council has adopted
several resolutions related to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. As long as those resolutions remain

S/PV. 8363

valid, they must continue to be fully, completely and
accurately implemented. China firmly believes that
pressure is not the goal. Implementing sanctions and
promoting political settlement are equally important
under Council resolutions. Neither can be neglected,
replaced by the other or opted for alone.
There is a provision in Council resolutions that the
Council is prepared to modify the sanction measures
in the light of compliance by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Given the positive developments
in the inter-Korean relations and those between the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-United States,
as well as the important pledges and actions taken
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on
denuclearization, China believes that the Council will
need in due course to consider invoking that provision
in order to encourage the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and other relevant parties to further
advance denuclearization.
This year marks the sixty-fifth anniversary of the
Korean Armistice Agreement. China’s consistent goal
and the objective of the international community has
been to realize complete denuclearization and build
a peace mechanism on the peninsula. China calls on
all parties to demonstrate political courage, advance
dialogue and negotiation, and together work for lasting
peace. China will continue to make its due contributions
in this regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the Secretary
of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Mr. Hunt (United Kingdom): In March 1963,
President Kennedy predicted that as many as 25 nations
would soon develop nuclear weapons, posing what he
described as the greatest possible danger to the survival
of humankind. In the end, his bleak prophecy to never
come to pass. Seven years after Kennedy voiced his
fears, the world summoned the collective wisdom to
create the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), which now has 191 States parties. All
but a handful of countries put aside their differences
and agreed that global security — indeed, the existence
of the human race — depended on halting the spread
of nuclear weapons. Only one country signed the NPT
and then sought to withdraw from it. Only one country
promised, in the Treaty, never to develop nuclear
weapons and then did exactly that. That country is

18-300615/20

S/PV.8363

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

North Korea, which has tested six nuclear devices in
the past 12 years.
Today, the international community shares a
collective responsibility to ensure that North Korea
complies once again with the rules on which the safety
of every nation depends. Britain welcomes North
Korea’s decision to re-engage in diplomacy since the
beginning of this year. We are encouraged by the
meeting between President Moon Jae-in and Kim
Jong Un in Pyongyang last week. We hope that North
Korea’s repeated promises to denuclearize are genuine,
but we note the lack of concrete steps so far. Action
counts for more than assurances; deeds must follow
words. North Korea must comprehensively, verifiably
and irreversibly abandon its nuclear weapons and the
means to build them, in accordance with the resolutions
adopted by the Council.
Until that moment comes, Britain believes that
the sanctions agreed by the international community
should continue to be rigorously enforced, reflecting
our shared belief that North Korea’s nuclear ambitions
threaten the safety of all of our peoples. The Council
adopted the relevant resolutions as one and we should
enforce them as one until the conditions that caused
their adoption have decisively and irrevocably changed.
Britain will continue to play our part in this effort.
We are supporting the work of the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) and the United Nations Panel of Experts. The
onus rests on the whole Council to prevent North Korea
from evading sanctions, particularly the controls on
refined petroleum products. We support the assessment
presented by Secretary of State Pompeo and the
United States, which demonstrates that North Korea
has systematically violated the controls placed on the
import of these products. Indeed, the annual cap for
2018 has already been broken.
This year, Britain sent two Royal Navy ships, the
HMS Sutherland and the HMS Albion, to the Pacific,
where they have helped to monitor illegal fuel transfers.
A third ship, the HMS Argyle, is due in East Asia
later this year. The members of the Security Council,
especially the five permanent members, have a duty
to uphold and enforce the sanctions contained in the
resolutions, which we ourselves supported. We must
not allow the authority of the Security Council to
be undermined.
6/20

27/09/2018

Today, North Korea’s leadership has a choice to
make. In a country where 200,000 children are acutely
malnourished, half of all schools have no access to
running water, and only 3 per cent of roads are paved,
the regime has squandered the nation’s resources and
deepened the poverty of its people by pursuing an
illegal stockpile of nuclear weapons. Far from bringing
prestige or security, this arsenal has only increased
tensions in East Asia and brought upon North Korea
the most extensive economic sanctions ever imposed by
the Security Council in the twenty-first century.
As recently as 1973, North and South Korea had
about the same gross domestic product per capita. Since
then, decades of communist economic failure in North
Korea have opened up a 20-fold disparity. Today, North
Korea’s gross domestic product per capita is less than
5 per cent of South Korea’s.
But it is not too late to change course. Just as
President Kennedy’s prediction turned out to be
pessimistic, there is nothing inevitable about the road
along which North Korea has so far travelled. Before
his regime wastes even more resources, creates yet
more poverty and triggers still greater confrontations,
Kim Jong Un could decide to allow his country to
flourish in peace and safety. He could choose to heed
the will of the Security Council, keep his own promises
and relinquish the nuclear arsenal that has brought only
misery and tension. The decision rests on his shoulders.
Until then, the Security Council should hold fast to the
resolutions we have passed.
The President: I give the floor to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.
Mr. Blok (Netherlands): I thank the presidency for
organizing today’s meeting on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, a subject that is at the top of our
agenda. It is an issue of vital importance to peace and
security in the region and to the world at large. We
have come a long way in the past year. As Henry Ford
once said, “coming together is the beginning, keeping
together is progress, working together is success”.
The Security Council has worked hard to achieve
success by optimizing its strengths, striking the right
balance between two main ingredients — pressure and
dialogue. I think it is safe to say that we have succeeded,
thanks to our unity, which is a vital component that
should never be underestimated. Our show of unity was
of course brought about by the gravity of last year’s
events: the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
18-30061

27/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

multiple ballistic-missile tests and nuclear tests and its
development of a nuclear and missile programme that
posed a threat to regional and global security and to the
global non-proliferation regime. These events gave us
a shared sense of purpose and highlighted the urgent
need to bring the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea back to the negotiating table.
In response, the Security Council has worked
together tirelessly and with clear results. It adopted
three far-reaching resolutions — resolutions 2371
(2017), 2375 (2017) and 2397 (2017) — within the space
of five months, resulting in the most comprehensive
sanctions regime ever. This forced Pyongyang to come
back to the negotiating table and created a window
of diplomatic opportunity that still exists today. The
Republic of Korea and the United States seized this
opportunity in 2018 by organizing high-level talks.
President Moon, President Trump and you, Secretary of
State Pompeo, rose to the occasion, and we are grateful
for that.
The international community should maintain the
pressure until the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
meets its international obligations. We should never
underestimate the power a united Council can wield.
A united Security Council will keep up the pressure on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. A united
Council will ensure full and effective implementation of
sanctions and pave the way for complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
And a united Council will support diplomatic talks and
reassure the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
that we are willing to engage with it once it has taken
concrete steps towards denuclearization.
To achieve that, a well-functioning Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) is
essential. It can play a key role in taking action against
sanctions violations and in minimizing the humanitarian
impact. As Chair of the Committee, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands will continue to do its utmost to this end.
We need a Panel of Experts that can do its job in an
effective, independent and secure manner.
Last but not least, we need to be persistent. It will
not be easy, but no effort should be spared in seeking
a peaceful solution. There is simply too much at stake.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues
to evade sanctions in order to advance its nuclearweapon programme, often with the possibly unwitting
assistance of other countries. The Democratic People’s

S/PV. 8363

Republic of Korea might still be moving towards a
deployable nuclear intercontinental ballistic missile.
There is still a risk of the further spread of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
and delivery-system technology. This would further
undermine the global non-proliferation regime.
In conclusion, let me say this — failure is not an
option. Failure benefits no one. If we act in unison and
fully implement the Security Council’s resolutions,
historic breakthroughs are possible. The world is
watching, and the Council must act in unity, because
unity is strength.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia.
Mr. Negewo (Ethiopia): I thank the United States
presidency for organizing today’s ministerial-level
meeting on an issue that has serious implications for
regional and international peace and security.
A year ago, I presided over a meeting of the Security
Council during the Ethiopian presidency at which we
discussed the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
issue (see S/PV.8053). We all recall the tense situation
that was prevailing in the Korean peninsula at that time.
Since then, we have come a long way in de-escalating
the situation. Determination and diplomacy, coupled
with all our united measures at the Security Council,
have led to three summit-level meetings between
the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and another between the United
States and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
More importantly, it has resulted in the Panmunjom
Declaration and the Pyongyang Joint Declaration.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
latest commitment to dismantling a missile-engine
test site and launch platform as well as the permanent
dismantlement of the nuclear facilities in Yongbyon in
the presence of experts, as set forth in the Pyongyang
Joint Declaration, is indeed a step in the right
direction. The important steps taken by the Republic
of Korea and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea at the Pyongyang summit, particularly military
confidence-building measures and an agreement to
reduce military tensions along the two sides’ heavily
militarized border, will also significantly contribute to
reducing tension and avoiding any miscalculations on
the Korean peninsula. We hope that these commitments
and steps will lay the basis for the denuclearization of

18-300617/20

S/PV.8363

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the Korean peninsula and the advancement of peace in
North-East Asia.
Finding a comprehensive, peaceful, political and
diplomatic solution to this long-standing issue and
ensuring the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula requires
continued dialogue. It is in that context that we welcome,
Mr. President, your readiness to travel to Pyongyang to
continue dialogue and possibly make more progress on
the issue.
In the meantime, we recognize the importance of
ensuring full compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. We note implementation gaps in relation to
the sanctions imposed by the Security Council. That
requires the continued cooperation of Member States,
and I would like to reaffirm Ethiopia’s commitment to
fully implementing the relevant Council resolutions.
Overall, the recent developments that we have all
been observing on the political track, and the efforts to
ensure the full implementation of Council resolutions
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, require
the continued support of the international community.
That is why we support the call made by the SecretaryGeneral last week in that regard. The parties should
be encouraged to maintain the momentum in their
endeavours to achieve sustainable peace, security and
the complete and verifiable demilitarization of the
Korean peninsula, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Lastly, preserving the unity of the Council also
remains crucial, and we hope to continue to do so in
facilitating the quest for a comprehensive diplomatic
solution to the issues surrounding the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, with the ultimate
objective of achieving the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): I would like to thank
Secretary of State Michael Pompeo for his briefing
on the efforts to denuclearize the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Poland greatly appreciates today’s
timely debate, as well as the transparent and open
approach to this important subject.
A few months ago, we were all pleased to hear
that one of the most complicated problems of nuclear
8/20

27/09/2018

proliferation affecting regional and international
security might be resolved peacefully, thanks to
goodwill, a spirit of cooperation and common interests.
We all agree that long-lasting peace on the Korean
peninsula can be achieved only through peaceful
means. We therefore welcome the continued progress
in the inter-Korean dialogue. We are pleased to note
that the third summit organized this year between the
leaders of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the Republic of Korea, which took place a few days
ago, was another important step in invigorating and
maintaining the dialogue on the peninsula.
We also welcome the diplomatic process related to
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, marked
by the historic summit in Singapore earlier this year.
We hope that further steps in that regard can be made
following the intensive contacts between the United
States and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
In that context, we all welcomed the announcement
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on the
suspension of its nuclear and intercontinental-ballisticmissile tests. Another step in the right direction was the
destruction of a nuclear-weapon-test site in Punggye-ri.
Nonetheless, it remains to be seen if that threat will
continue in the future. It will be crucial to maintain the
momentum, keep the window of opportunity open and
move forward on a path to de-escalation.
The denuclearization of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea must remain a top priority for the
entire international community. Despite the positive
developments, Pyongyang’s nuclear and missile
programmes are still a threat to international security
and stability in the region. We are also deeply concerned
about the risk posed by the potential proliferation of
sensitive goods and technology to other States or
non-State actors. Pyongyang continues to defy Security
Council resolutions in an increasingly sophisticated
manner. We reiterate our position that despite the
political and legal difficulties that may be involved,
it is mandatory for all States, without exception, to
comply with their obligations arising from the relevant
Council resolutions. We are well aware that lasting
peace cannot be achieved without the complete and
irreversible denuclearization of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in compliance with Security Council
resolutions. Despite the encouraging developments
and declarations, the process has not yet started. We
must therefore remain united in maintaining consistent
pressure on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
18-30061

27/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We call on other Security Council members to show
their collective intention to fully implement sanctions,
end the efforts of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to circumvent United Nations sanctions and
prevent other Member States from undermining them.
Council members should recommit to implementing
all existing and future sanctions so as to put maximum
pressure on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to take immediate and meaningful steps towards
denuclearization. The progress made so far has been
possible thanks to the common and concerted action of all
States. We hope that that same spirit of cooperation and
unanimity will characterize future activities in this area.
Positive developments will have profound implications
and beneficial consequences for international relations,
including enhancing the credibility and reliability of the
international non-proliferation regimes for weapons of
mass destruction. In that regard, as the sole sponsor of
General Assembly resolutions on the implementation of
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, we would like to express our
hope that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
will soon adhere to the Convention, filling a gap and
bringing it close to universalization.
Another crucial step for Pyongyang towards
de-escalation and confidence-building would be signing
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. I would
like to remind the Council of the Treaty’s effectiveness
in helping us to deal with the nuclear tests conducted
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, even
though it has not yet entered into force.
As a member of the Neutral Nations Supervisory
Commission, Poland has been actively supporting
international efforts to promote peace and stability in
the region. We will continue to engage in all activities
that can lead to the permanent denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula. That also means supporting
further initiatives and actions aimed at reducing
tension and facilitating dialogue. Poland will continue
its engagement in international bodies, as well as
in other global and regional initiatives. Examples
of our engagement in that regard include our recent
chairmanship of the Preparatory Committee for
the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic
Missile Proliferation, as well as ongoing international
partnerships for nuclear-disarmament verification.

S/PV. 8363

In conclusion, let me express our deep conviction
that the current momentum will not be wasted. The
list of activities is long: denuclearizing North Korea,
strengthening the universalization of non-proliferation
regimes, securing verification mechanisms, implementing
good practices and tightening international cooperation
in the field. If we want to be successful, we must
stand united.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In the past few months, considerable progress
has been achieved in resolving the problems on the
Korean peninsula. The region has seen a significant
reduction in tensions as a result of the moratorium
declared by Pyongyang in April on missile launches
and nuclear tests, the closure of the nuclear-weapon-test
site in Punggye-ri and the decision by the United
States and the Republic of Korea to postpone their
summer military manoeuvres indefinitely. We would
like to point to the successful implementation of the
inter-Korean agreements detailed in the Panmunjom
Declaration of 27 April and the September visit to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by President
Moon Jae-in of the Republic of Korea, during which
the Pyongyang Declaration was signed. It states the
Korean parties’ intention to broaden the scope of their
cooperation, as well as Pyongyang’s obligations to
dismantle the Tonchan-Ni missile range and close its
nuclear facilities in Yongbyon, which gives us hope that
the situation in this part of the world can be stabilized.
Russia actively supports a rapprochement between
South and North Korea and a settlement of the problems
on the Korean peninsula in general. For a long time
now we have been urging our partners to work on this,
including within the framework of implementing the
road map established by Russia and China last summer,
which isnow de facto being implemented. We believe
that building trust is the key to finding a political and
diplomatic path to resolving the issues on the Korean
peninsula. The agreement reached in Pyongyang
between the two Koreas on the restoration of rail and
road links is an important step in that direction. We
call on Council members to support Pyongyang and
Seoul’s initiatives, which fully respond to the spirit of
our resolutions. Any possibility that the sanctions on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea can become
an instrument of collective punishment is absolutely
unacceptable. Any lack of trust between Washington

18-300619/20

S/PV.8363

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

and Pyongyang is an obstacle to developing joint
measures that both sides could undertake simultaneously
and gradually with a view to advancing the overall
settlement process. We suggest working together to
consider a system of international security guarantees,
which would be a definitive prerequisite for resolving
the task of denuclearizing the Korean peninsula.
In view of the willingness that Pyongyang has
shown to cooperate and the positive progress it has
made in stabilizing the situation in the region, the
policy of Western partners aimed at further sanctions
crackdowns on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea seems increasingly ill-timed. Considering that
Pyongyang has taken a number of important steps
towards denuclearization, it would seem logical to
support those efforts and propose something in return
in order to maintain this positive momentum. In that
connection, I would like to hear some of our colleagues
in the Council explain their reasons for obstinately
rejecting any possibility of a positive signal from the
Security Council regarding Pyongyang’s steps towards
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

27/09/2018

of sanctions on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has already gone beyond measures to block the
channels for financing Pyongyang’s banned nuclearmissile programmes and is threatening North Korean
citizens with social, economic and humanitarian
hardships that are simply unacceptable. Incidentally, it
is relevant to remember here that besides a sanctions
component, all Security Council resolutions in this
area include provisions for measures for achieving a
political and diplomatic settlement of the situation on
the Korean peninsula, and ignoring them is tantamount
to non-compliance with the Council’s consensus
agreements on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.

We would like to point out that any negotiation is
a two-way street. The steps taken by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s towards gradual
disarmament should be accompanied by reductions in
sanctions. Actions deserve reactions. That is essential
if we are to avoid situations like the one, for example,
that arose with the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action when our American colleagues invented a
pretext for withdrawing unilaterally from the Iranian
nuclear deal, thereby violating their obligations under
Security Council resolutions. The institutions and
mechanisms of the United Nations and its Security
Council should work to support the settlement process
and the inter-Korean dialogue, not to become obstacles
to them. Only then will it be possible to talk about an
effective solution to the issues that have accumulated
in the region, including the nuclear issue, on a basis of
mutually acceptable agreements.

The so-called autonomous, or secondary sanctions
imposed by the United States and some of its allies on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and other
States, and going around and over Security Council
sanctions, are even worse. Such unilateral restrictions
not only undermine the sovereignty and legitimate
interests of Member States and contradict the norms
and rules of international trade, they also undermine
the integrity of the Security Council’s own agreed
restrictions. We once again urge the countries imposing
them to stop this practice. We are increasingly seeing
them become a tool for unfair competition and for
scaring business operators away from third countries.
The example of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in that regard is very instructive. It is
extremely difficult to conduct business even when the
Security Council sanctions regime does not forbid it,
thanks to the existence of these illegal practices and
entrepreneurs’ fear of ending up on a banned list. Any
attempts to bless such restrictions by invoking the
authority of the Council or its Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), or to question one or
another country’s sticking to the strict implementation
of the Council resolutions on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, are unacceptable.

Achieving that with sanctions and pressure would
be difficult if not impossible. The extreme lengths
that the Council’s sanctions instruments have gone to
already mean that Member States and international
organizations are often unable to support in a normal
regime even humanitarian, sports and diplomatic
links — which have nothing to do with the development
of nuclear missile programmes — to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The further expansion

We support both the Council and its 1718 Committee
in making every possible effort to find political
and diplomatic solutions to the issues on the Korean
peninsula and to help to establish a multilateral security
mechanism in North-East Asia. We also consider it the
right moment for the Security Council to send a clear
message in support of the positive trends in the situation
regarding the Korean the peninsula. That could be done,
for example, by adopting a corresponding resolution, a

10/20

18-30061

27/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

draft of which we would like to prepare and submit to
the Council for discussion.
We also consider it important to regularly assess the
advisability of reviewing some of the restrictions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as Pyongyang
makes progress towards renouncing its nuclear weapons.
It would be possible to come up with at least some
small steps, for instance. Security Council resolutions
allow for a review of limitations in the case of political
advances. As I already mentioned, the parties to the
Panmunjom and Pyongyang Declarations, for example,
affirmed their interest in implementing joint economic
projects. If we all welcome those agreements, we
should think about having the 1718 Committee come up
with special conditions for considering applications for
exemptions from the sanctions regime for the purpose
of implementing inter-Korean cooperative projects
agreed on by Pyongyang and Seoul.
Russia is ready to work as closely as possible
with all interested countries with the aim of ensuring
peace, stability and a comprehensive settlement of the
problems of the Korean peninsula on a basis of equal,
non-discriminatory negotiations with the participation
of all interested parties.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of France.
Mr. Le Drian (France) (spoke in French):
North Korea continues to represent the most serious
proliferation crisis that the international community
has had to deal with in the early years of the twentyfirst century. It is a major challenge to our collective
security, and I would like to thank Secretary of State
Michael Pompeo for organizing today’s meeting.
What is the situation? The process that has been
launched between South Korea and North Korea, on
the one hand, and between the United States and North
Korea, on the other, has helped to reduce the tensions
in the Korean peninsula since the beginning of this
year. The Singapore summit, initiated by the United
States, was an important event in that regard, and we
should certainly welcome it, especially in the light of
the mistrust that prevailed throughout 2017. We have
taken note of the commitments made by North Korea
on 19 September in the Pyongyang Declaration aimed
at easing tensions and bringing about a rapprochement
between the two Koreas. In that regard, I welcome the
diplomatic efforts of President Moon, which were also
on view again at last week’s inter-Korean summit.

S/PV. 8363

However, we must not lose sight of the fact that as
long as North Korea has not given up its nuclear and
ballistic programmes, they will continue to pose a
threat to the region and the whole world. The Council’s
priority should be to induce North Korea to display a
significant willingness to retreat from its ambition
to build an operational nuclear arsenal and to make
concrete moves in that direction. As a matter of fact,
the International Atomic Energy Agency recently
pointed out that North Korea had continued its nuclear
activities in the past few months, as did the United
Nations Panel of Experts assisting the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). We should also
highlight the fact that North Korea has not ratified
the Chemical Weapons Convention and continues to
maintain military chemical and biological capabilities.
The investigation conducted following the death of
Kim Jong-nam in February 2017 in Kuala Lumpur
established links with North Korea.
As a result, and despite the welcome reduction in
tensions, the situation remains a threat to international
security. As long as North Korea’s nuclear and
ballistic programmes continue to exist, any incident
is capable of provoking an escalation. Furthermore,
while this programme continues, there is always a risk
of secondary proliferation from North Korea to other
countries, and even to non-State entities, which will
persist until North Korea’s arsenal has been eliminated
and its nuclear and ballistic experts have been converted
back to civilian sectors.
The Council’s task must be to keep up the pressure
so that this time North Korea keeps to its commitments.
For the process to be successful, it must be based on
concrete measures, and North Korea must demonstrate
a genuine willingness to dismantle its nuclear and
ballistic programmes in a comprehensive, verifiable and
irreversible manner in line with Council resolutions. We
expect it to go above and beyond what are admittedly
symbolic and reversible gestures, such as announcing
the destruction of its nuclear test site. In that regard,
the International Atomic Energy Agency will certainly
have an important role to play, for which it is actively
preparing. Experts from the nuclear-weapon States
should be at the forefront in verifying the most highly
sensitive activities. France will be ready to assist when
the time comes. A first concrete step could be making
a complete and accurate inventory of North Korea’s
nuclear and ballistic programme.

18-3006111/20

S/PV.8363

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

27/09/2018

How should we approach this? First and foremost,
we should support the existing dialogue, because it
is vital to restoring confidence and making progress
towards denuclearization. At the same time, we must
collectively maintain a firm policy with regard to North
Korea by rigorously applying the Security Council
sanctions. Sanctions are not an end in themselves but
rather a strategy for applying pressure in the pursuit of
a political solution. I think that the Security Council
must remain united on the fact that the sanctions
remain essential. We should continue to be particularly
vigilant in ensuring that we all respect our obligations
under international law. In that regard, I commend the
remarkable work done by the Panel of Experts and the
Sanctions Committee, both of which are essential tools
for verifying the effective application of sanctions, and
here I want to highlight the importance we attach to the
independence and impartiality of the work of the Panel
of Experts.

my dialogue with my colleague from North Korea will
be meaningful.

As several previous speakers have already
mentioned, we must combat the strategies deployed
by North Korea to circumvent the sanctions through
various illicit activities ranging from money-laundering
to ocean trans-shipment operations of oil and coal.

Our robust steps to achieve denuclearization were
a testament to strong political will, and they succeeded
thanks to the exemplary cooperative efforts of the
Russian Federation and the United States. I believe
that such practical, pragmatic and mutually beneficial
collaboration could be used in other, new circumstances
for tackling new threats emerging in our world today.
We are also deeply grateful to the United Kingdom,
France and China for their constructive support to
our anti-nuclear endeavours. It is indeed remarkable
that all five nuclear Powers simultaneously signed the
Protocol to the Central Asian nuclear-weapon-free
zone treaty, also known as the Semipalatinsk Treaty.
It is a good example of mutual goodwill, indicating
that despite the differences among the five permanent
members of the Security Council, there can be further
joint efforts on important issues aimed at strengthening
non-proliferation.

President Kim Jong Un says that he wants
denuclearization, and he has asked us not to doubt his
intentions. For our part, we will judge him by his actions,
and we call for a united and determined response from
the international community that respects the decisions
of the Council. The credibility and sustainability
of our collective security architecture — and of
non-proliferation in particular — are at stake. That is
the path that France wishes to see the Council take here.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We are grateful
to the United States presidency and to you personally,
Secretary Pompeo, for this opportunity to consider
further steps for achieving the complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Kazakhstan knows first-hand that nuclear
disarmament is a complex and comprehensive process
that demands a step-by-step approach, with incredible
effort, immense patience, mutual concessions and
good faith on the part of all stakeholders. That is why
we invite the leadership of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to follow the successful experience
and bright path taken by Kazakhstan, and I hope that
12/20

As we all know, despite the great temptation to
become a new nuclear Power upon our independence
in 1991 and the unpredictable geopolitical uncertainties
in our region at that time, my President, Nursultan
Nazarbayev, made the momentous decision to abandon
the fourth largest nuclear arsenal in the world, which
we had inherited, as well as to shut down the world’s
second largest nuclear test site, at Semipalatinsk. We
steered that ship successfully through uncharted waters
and eventually became a trusted and reliable partner for
the world community, which in turn has invested in us,
resulting in many economic gains for both our nation
and our people. Today Kazakhstan is a progressive,
stable and prosperous State with the ambitious goal
of becoming one of the world’s 30 most advanced
economies and countries in the next few decades.

Our invaluable experience says that disarmament
is the best way to build confidence. Having chosen a
nuclear-free path, we went further, together with our
four neighbouring fraternal countries, in creating
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. It is the
first and still the only one of its kind in the northern
hemisphere, flanked by two large nuclear Powers and
not far from some other actors in this area.
Our President also initiated an extremely important
project aimed at establishing trusting and trustworthy
cooperation in Asia on a broad scale. In 1992 we created
the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
18-30061

27/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Measures in Asia (CICA), which now unites 27 States
in the region and works to avert threats to stability in
the region by successfully tackling many challenges. It
is a unique regional structure in which Iran and Israel,
India and Pakistan and other States with complex
relations sit at one table, side by side, to negotiate
measures in mutual respect and goodwill. We would
therefore gladly receive the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and Japan into CICA membership so
that we can welcome North-East Asia into our fold and
lay new ground for solidarity and trust. My President’s
experience and further ideas on confidence-building
measures were shared with the Council in January at
the signature event of Kazakhstan’s presidency of the
Security Council (see S/PV.8160).
Today’s developments on the Korean peninsula
demonstrate the relevance of this approach. We
commend the two Korean States for their meaningful
efforts and joint projects to restore an inclusive
dialogue. We also greatly appreciate the decision of
the United States and the Republic of Korea to suspend
their regular joint regional military exercises. All
of these steps encourage the parties to continue with
the peaceful political and diplomatic measures that
made possible the historic Singapore summit and the
continuing inter-Korean summits. We strongly support
such endeavours and welcome the outcome of the
third meeting of the two Korean leaders, with further
important agreements contained in the joint Pyongyang
Declaration. The continued friendly political dialogue
and mutually beneficial projects between Pyongyang
and Seoul have the potential to become the most
effective way for the long-term settlement of tensions
in the region, resulting in mutually acceptable solutions
for full, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.
How can the Security Council better contribute
to that noble cause? First of all, unity in the Council
must be preserved and harnessed to achieve that key
overarching task. We hope that there will be a speedy
settlement to some of the remaining disagreements
among the members of the Council on the basis of
mutual trust and endurance.
Kazakhstan understands the serious concerns
regarding the continued violations of Security Council
resolutions and related sanctions requirements from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and others. It has
to be realized that our constructive actions are based on
good intentions, with an understanding that sanctions

S/PV. 8363

are interim measures designed to solve problematic
issues by peaceful, political and diplomatic means.
Based on its practical experience, Kazakhstan
advocates for transparency and a gradual process in the
massive task of disarmament, which must give equal
consideration to the concerns of all parties and include
a mutual realization of the commitments pledged.
My President noted during the January meeting that
providing security assurances to the disarming party
is an important sine qua non for moving forward (see
S/PV.8160).
In that specific context, Kazakhstan suggests
considering the possibility of developing a road map for
the phased denuclearization of North Korea, with solid
security guarantees from the five permanent member
of the Council, in return for the full implementation
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of all
of its obligations and its return to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The compulsory
implementation of that course of action could be
enshrined in a relevant Council resolution, with clear
consequences if not fulfilled.
Kazakhstan is ready to share its experience
and provide technical expertise to realize a phased
and transparent process of denuclearization. We are
confident that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea will be able to replicate our success and even
go beyond by setting a practical example to inspire the
North-East Asia region to become the second nuclearweapon-free zone in the northern hemisphere. Such
zones should be necessarily encouraged by obtaining
security guarantees from the five permanent members
of the Council. In that regard we reiterate our hope
the Central Asia nuclear-weapon-free zone will be
endorsed by the final remaining member of the group
of five permanent members.
Finally, the situation today on the Korean peninsula
is much improved and more favourable than ever
before. It prompts us to focus more on working with
determination and to redouble our goodwill, patience
and political will to successfully advance towards the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. That, in turn,
will result in new stability for the region and the world
at large, on the understanding that peace in one country
is an investment in global peace, for we are all bound
together by a common humanity and shared destiny
for all.

18-3006113/20

S/PV.8363

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire is grateful to the United States
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
briefing on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery. The topic of
today’s debate is all the more relevant as it comes in a
context marked by recurrent violations of international
treaties and Security Council resolutions that aim to
ban the production, stockpiling, transfer and use of
weapons of mass destruction.
As a State party to all treaties prohibiting nuclear,
chemical and bacteriological weapons, Côte d’Ivoire
shares the concerns of the international community in
the face of the worrying erosion of the non-proliferation
regime and the serious threats posed to international
peace and security. Persistent security tensions on the
Korean peninsula, fuelled by North Korea’s nuclear
ambitions, as well as reports of violations of the
Security Council’s sanctions regime, are representative
of the threats posed by the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction .
In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire asks that North Korea
respect its obligations, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We encourage the North
Korean authorities to take all the necessary measures
for the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Côte d’Ivoire commends the recent measures taken by
Pyongyang to that effect, the most significant of which
remains the dismantling of its main nuclear test site at
Punggye-ri. We urge North Korea to do even more in
order to create an environment of mutual trust with all
States in the region, as well as all stakeholders to the
North Korean nuclear issue.
My country welcomes the calming of the situation
that resulted in the return of the remains of American
soldiers who died during the 1950-1953 Korean War,
and the historic summit of 12 June between President
Donald Trump and President Kim Jong Un. Lasting
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula will be
possible only through the commitment of all States
in the region to favour dialogue and the peaceful
settlement of their differences.
My country believes that stakeholders need to
build trust between each other. In that regard, we are
happy to note the improving relations between North
and South Korea, as manifested by the third summit
14/20

27/09/2018

in one year between their respective Presidents, which
was held in Pyongyang in September. The summit was
another step towards the much-desired reconciliation
of the two Korean States and the realization of a
common ambition for a zone of permanent peace. The
summit also consolidated the Panmunjom Declaration
on Peace, Prosperity and Reunification of the Korean
Peninsula, which was signed on 27 April, as well as the
achievements of the two previous summits, particularly
the reduction of political and military tensions,
inter-Korean cooperation and denuclearization.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the willingness of
the Korean leaders to engage in mutually beneficial
economic and humanitarian cooperation. We pay
tribute to the sponsors of that progress, notably the
United States of America and China, and we hope that
the ongoing dynamic of collaboration will lead to the
signing of a peace treaty and the total denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.
The Security Council has a duty to support and
accompany the ongoing normalization process. Its
firmness will also be decisive in the implementation
of the sanctions regime and its unity of action in
promoting respect for international treaties against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its conviction that only
a collective commitment by the Council to support
dialogue among all parties will result in the resolution
of the current crisis on the Korean peninsula. We
also reaffirm our commitment to the virtues of
multilateralism and call for the strengthening of
international frameworks, within which consensual
solutions to contemporary challenges are developed.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Peru.
Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this briefing and highlight
the importance of addressing the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula at the Security Council. We
would also like to thank Secretary of State Pompeo for
the important information provided and convey Peru’s
support for the important efforts that his Government
has been making.
My country notes with deep concern the serious
threat to international peace and security posed by
the nuclear and ballistic missile programmes of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. As has been
18-30061

27/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

mentioned, that threat constitutes a flagrant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations, the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and the specific mandates of
the Council.
In that regard, we emphasize that North Korea’s
programmes and their related activities must be
abandoned in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner. We believe that, for as long as that does
not happen, the sanctions imposed by the Council
must remain in force and be strictly implemented by
all States.
Peru complies with implementing those sanctions
within its jurisdiction and considers that the Council
must remain vigilant in determining and sanctioning
any possible non-compliance, wherever it occurs. We
wish to emphasize the unanimous commitment of
the members of the Security Council on that issue.
Peru attaches the greatest importance to maintaining
unity with a view to achieving denuclearization on
the Korean peninsula. In that regard, we would like
to commend the high-level diplomacy deployed by
the South Korean and United States authorities,
including you, Mr. Secretary of State, and we hope
that the latter can begin to produce concrete results on
denuclearization. This is clearly a complex issue, which
dates back to the Korean War. That is why we value
the progress made in recent months, which has so far
served to alleviate tensions, build confidence, reduce
the risk of misunderstandings or miscalculations and
ultimately lay the foundations for denuclearization.
We welcome the agreements that were achieved
at the third inter-Korean summit, held last week in
Pyongyang, which include concrete measures aimed
towards the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
and reflect the intentions of both countries to create a
new platform of trust with a view to achieving peace.
In the light of those developments, we believe that the
sanctions regime imposed by the Council has proved
to be an effective means of bringing the North Korean
Government closer to the negotiating table, without
leading to a deterioration of the humanitarian situation
for the country’s civilian population. In that regard,
we would like to acknowledge initiative of the United
States, under whose leadership the sanctions regime
has been strengthened, and to stress once again the
importance of multilateralism, international law and
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes to
face threats and challenges that are common to us all.

S/PV. 8363

Peru, as a country committed to the nuclear
non-proliferation regime, is party to all the relevant
international instruments. That includes the Treaty
of Tlatelolco, which makes Latin America and the
Caribbean a region free of nuclear weapons, and the
most recent United Nations Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons. We aspire to a world free of the
threat posed by such weapons, and I would therefore
like to conclude by reaffirming Peru’s full and constant
readiness to contribute to all the efforts being made to
achieve the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Equatorial Guinea.
Mr. Esono Angue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, the delegation of Equatorial
Guinea would like to thank Secretary of State Mike
Pompeo and the Government of the United States of
America for convening this debate and congratulate the
United States on its excellent work as President of the
Council this September.
The non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and global nuclear disarmament is one of
the main purposes and missions of the United Nations
and Equatorial Guinea. In that regard, my Government
maintains a firm policy of rejecting and strongly
condemning any action involving launching ballistic
missiles, carrying out nuclear tests, developing a
military nuclear programme, as well as violating
the relevant Council resolutions that strengthen
international sanctions against the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction.
The nuclear and ballistic programmes of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea do not simply
represent a regional concern, but a global one, as the
consequences and effects of any accidental or intentional
nuclear detonation would be catastrophic at the global
level. Equatorial Guinea has always maintained that
sanctions themselves are not an objective; rather, they
are a means to an end. They must therefore be applied
with proportionality and prudence under the premise
that all peaceful means have been exhausted, which
prevents them from causing damage to the weakest and
most vulnerable sectors. It must be clear that, when
sanctions are imposed by the Council, all States must
comply with them.
But we cannot presume that the current sanctions
mechanism of the Committee established pursuant to

18-3006115/20

S/PV.8363

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

resolution 1718 (2006) is currently the most effective.
Equatorial Guinea is in favour of improving that
mechanism; establishing stricter criteria for verification
of evidence; strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation
regime through international cooperation and
consultation; deterring in order to maintain the
moratorium on nuclear tests; setting explicit time limits
for resolutions adopted by the Committee; drawing up
a protocol of action for Committee members; taking
practical and effective measures to disseminate and
make universally known the 1718 sanctions regime, on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea; seeking the
possibility of sanctions that cause fewer humanitarian
crises and have a lesser impact on third countries; and
helping developing countries strengthen their capacity
to enforce and implement sanctions.
We are witnessing both rare opportunities and
serious challenges to achieving the lasting peace and
common development of human society. An example
of that is the peace and complete and verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, which
remains a main theme of the Council. The latest
developments in 2018 regarding the situation of the
Korean peninsula are a sign of hope. I am referring to
the high-level inter-Korean negotiations between the
leader of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Kim Jong Un, and the President of the Republic of
Korea, Moon Jae-in, and to the summit that took
place in June in Singapore between the President of
the United States of America, Donald Trump, and the
leader of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
which, if crystallized, would represent profound and
hopeful changes for the international community.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the actions
of those three statesmen, who have put the supreme
interests of their peoples and humankind ahead of their
ideological convictions.
We have before us a unique opportunity that
should not be missed to achieve the pacification
and non-proliferation of the Korean peninsula. The
third inter-Korean Summit, held on 19 September
in Pyongyang between Kim Jong Un and Moon
Jae-in is a thread of hope. The agreements that were
reached therein are another sign of the will to pursue
rapprochement and good intentions in the search for
peace and understanding. The intention of the two
Koreas to present a joint bid to host and organize the
2032 Olympic Games is a sign of a step in the right
direction. Equatorial Guinea can only celebrate and
16/20

27/09/2018

encourage the two brother countries to continue their
efforts in the search for understanding with the final
objective of signing a peace agreement. We also
encourage the two countries to continue to promote
encounters and contact between families separated by
the Korean War — a welcome step, as evidenced by
the emotional and moving inter-Korean family reunion
event in August.
Finally, Equatorial Guinea likewise calls on
the countries involved in the crisis on the Korean
peninsula, those with influence in the region and the
international community to refrain from any act that
might hinder the negotiations. On the contrary, they
should do everything possible to reach a satisfactory
solution for all and avoid a situation where there are
winners and losers. We call on the authorities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply with
the resolutions of the Security Council so as to achieve
the complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement
of its nuclear and ballistic programmes and make that a
success and a milestone in history.
Equatorial Guinea stands ready to provide its small
contribution in finding a definitive solution by offering
our territory, with its excellent facilities, as a neutral
site for a possible future meeting among all the parties
involved in the crisis on the Korean peninsula.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): I am sure members
vividly remembered when world leaders gathered here
in New York one year ago for the General Assembly.
The tensions on the Korean peninsula were alarmingly
high and dangerous. Since then, positive historic
progress has been made and we have new momentum,
but substantial challenges remain. As much as we would
like, this is neither a quick nor a simple process; it will
take time. The unity of the Council has been decisive
for the progress made so far, and continued unity will be
critical. Your personal engagement, Secretary Pompeo,
is very important. We thank you for that.
The Security Council has shown strong resolve
regarding the situation on the Korean peninsula,
including by adopting numerous substantial resolutions
by consensus. Sweden contributed to those efforts,
including by consistently pushing for diplomatic
solutions. Our resolve must now be geared towards
making further progress with the two pronged approach.
18-30061

27/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

First, we need to effectively implement the six
existing sanctions until the demands of the Council
are met. There a widespread violations of the sanctions
regime in a range of areas, including arms exports, the
petroleum trade and financial transactions. We call on
all Member States to fulfil their obligations and ensure
full implementation.
There is no doubt that the responsibility for the
dire humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea fundamentally rests with the
Government. At the same time, there are concerns about
indirect negative impact of sanctions. Enhanced efforts
are therefore needed to ensure that the humanitarian
exemptions are safeguarded. A generation of North
Koreans must not be lost due to malnutrition and lack
of medicines.
Secondly, we must continue to encourage and
support diplomatic efforts. Progress in the inter-Korean
dialogue is very encouraging. Important agreements,
including most recently in the summit in Pyongyang
last week, have been achieved, and the summit between
the United States and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in Singapore in June was indeed significant.
All parties must now work to maintain momentum and
build trust and confidence. A step-by-step approach is
needed to achieve complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization. For the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea that means translating its commitments into
concrete undertakings without delay. It is important
that the International Atomic Energy Association be
given a role early in the process.
Creative diplomacy will continue to be critical,
and the parties should explore ways to move from
the armistice towards a peace agreement. The need
for regional collaborative arrangements, including on
security, as we have heard others say here, is evident. An
international framework that deals with all the different
aspects and can contribute to sustainability is essential.
We welcome the support of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations system. My country, with its
presence in Pyongyang, and as a long-standing member
of the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission, will
continue to assist diplomatic efforts.
The situation on the Korean peninsula has farreaching implications for international peace and
security. It is also vital for good neighbourly relations
in North-East Asia. Recent progress has shown that it
is possible to diffuse tensions through dialogue and

S/PV. 8363

cooperation, and that should be recognized by the
Security Council. The newfound opportunity should
be seized. We must now work together and stay united
towards a peaceful, prosperous and nuclear-weapon-free
Korean peninsula.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): On this occasion, as President
Evo Morales Ayma said in yesterday’s meeting (see
S/PV.8362), the issue of the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons is one of the most important on the Security
Council’s agenda, and therefore of special importance
for my country. Bolivia is part of the first densely
populated region in the world to declare itself free of
nuclear weapons, just over 50 years ago, through the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America — the Treaty of Tlatelolco. Moreover, Bolivia
has enshrined in its Constitution the prohibition of
the manufacture and use of chemical, biological and
nuclear weapons on the Bolivian territory, as well as
the internment, transit and deposit of nuclear and toxic
waste. In that regard, we have signed the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. For that reason, we
reiterate our call on all States that have not yet done
so, in particular the so-called nuclear-weapon States,
to sign that important Treaty, because the best way
to fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is by guaranteeing their total prohibition by
all State and non-State actors.
Bolivia once again calls on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to stop and dismantle its programme
for the development of nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles, with the ultimate goal of achieving complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of the entire
Korean peninsula.
The year 2017 was one of the most intense
years in the Security Council regarding the issue of
non-proliferation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. After the nuclear test in September of that year
and multiple ballistic missile tests, the Security Council
unanimously adopted three resolutions, which not only
imposed increasingly harsh sanctions on that country
but also expressed the prevailing need for peaceful
solutions to the conflict on the Korean peninsula. In that
context, we consider that the imposition of sanctions is
fulfilling part of its objectives to create opportunities
to bring the parties to the negotiating table in order to

18-3006117/20

S/PV.8363

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

resume the dialogue to reach a peaceful, diplomatic and
political solution that leads to the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. Bolivia reiterates its commitment to
comply with those resolutions and all resolutions issued
by this organ.
Since the beginning of 2018, and thanks to the
political will of the different parties involved, the
situation in the Korean peninsula has undergone positive
changes. Bolivia, as a pacifist state, promoter of the
culture of dialogue and peaceful settlement of disputes,
welcomes the strengthening of the inter-Korean
dialogue, which so far this year has already had three
high-level meetings between Presidents Moon Jae-in
and Kim Jong Un. The result of those meetings, which
were based on sincere dialogue based on mutual respect,
were very remarkable. For example, the Panmunjom
Declaration for Peace, Prosperity and Unification of
the Korean Peninsula, which calls to suspend all hostile
acts in all areas, is a very powerful manifestation of
the will of the parties in building mutual trust and
in strengthening relations that seek peace, harmony
and prosperity.
We must point out that those conversations had
more concrete results, such as the halting of ballistic
missile tests, the dismantling of the Punggye-ri Nuclear
Test Site and the reunification of families separated for
more than 60 years as a result of conflict, among others.
More recently, at the Pyongyang summit, they agreed
to permanently dismantle the Tongchang-ri ballistic
missile engine and launch-test site, and the Yongbyon
Nuclear Scientific Research Center. That opened up the
possibility of a fourth meeting between both leaders in
the city of Seoul, which would be quite an event and a
clear sign of the strengthening of mutual trust.
We highlight the holding of the summit between
the Chairman of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the President of the United States last June in
Singapore. I reiterate that such rapprochement should
serve to build mutual trust between the parties with
the ultimate goal of achieving the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula and building a lasting and stable
peace regime, to which the suspension of military
exercises will contribute.
With regard to sanctions, we insist that they should
not be an end in themselves; in that respect, we express
our concern about the possible adverse effect that they
could have on the population of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Any action by the Council must not
18/20

27/09/2018

diminish the living conditions of local populations,
while highlighting the important work done by the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) and facilitating exceptions for
the importation of products for humanitarian purposes.
Likewise, we reiterate our rejection of any unilateral
action and any type of imposition of unilateral sanctions.
In conclusion, we emphasize again that there is
no military solution to this conflict; only a diplomatic
solution based on dialogue and consultations will
allow us to achieve the complete and verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and allow us
to build a sustainable peace regime in that region.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea.
Ms. Kang (Republic of Korea): I thank you very
much, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and
for the opportunity to speak to the Security Council.
As you state, Mr. President, we are indeed at the
dawn of a new day with regard to the challenge of
North Korea’s denuclearization. It is useful to take a
step back and to realize just how new a day it is. Barely
a year ago here in the Council, we were counting the
numbers of North Korea’s nuclear tests and ballistic
missile launches and calling for united action to bring
North Korea to the right side of history. At the time,
the thought of President Trump and Chairman Kim
Jong Un shaking hands and holding a summit would
have been considered a daydream. It would have been a
fantasy to imagine President Moon Jae-in and Chairman
Kim Jong Un on top of Mount Paekdu taking photos
together. But here we are, and we have a different set
of numbers to ponder: three inter-Korean summits and
the first-ever United States-North Korea summit in a
matter of five months, with more likely to follow in the
months to come.
Allow me to quickly recap the milestone
developments on the Korean peninsula that have
brought us to this point. They started with North
Korea’s participation in the 2018 PyeongChang
Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games, in February
and March, to which the North Korean leader sent a
high-level delegation. That was quickly followed by
the visit of President Moon Jae-in’s special envoy
to Pyongyang in early March, who came back with
first-hand confirmation of Chairman Kim’s intentions
on denuclearization.
18-30061

27/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

In April, North Korea took a step forward by
announcing that it would discontinue nuclear tests as
well as ballistic missile tests of intercontinental range.
It also announced that it would dismantle its nuclear
test site, which it did a month later. On 27 April, the
two Koreas held an inter-Korean summit — the first
in more than a decade. In the outcome, the Panmunjom
Declaration, the two sides agreed to actively cooperate
for the establishment of a permanent and stable peace
regime on the Korean peninsula, and confirmed
the common goal of realizing a nuclear-free Korean
peninsula through complete denuclearization.
At the first-ever United States-North Korea
summit, on 12 June, the top leaders of the two countries
also confirmed the common goal of building a lasting
and stable peace regime on the Korean peninsula, and
the North Korean leader reaffirmed his commitment to
complete denuclearization.
Last week, President Moon Jae-in visited Pyongyang
for his third summit meeting with Chairman Kim. They
discussed at length the denuclearization challenge,
including concrete ways to bring it about. For the first
time in his own voice, the North Korean leader stated
his commitment to turn the Korean peninsula into a
land of peace, free of nuclear weapons and threat — and
that at a joint press conference with President Moon
Jae-in, which was broadcast live to the rest of the world.
More specifically, in the Pyongyang Joint
Declaration, North Korea announced that it will
permanently dismantle its Dongchang-ri missile engine
test site and launch platform under the observation
of experts from relevant countries, and indicated its
willingness to take additional measures, such as the
permanent dismantlement of the nuclear facilities at
Yongbyon, as the United States takes corresponding
measures. Hopes are now high that the upcoming
United States-North Korea negotiations will produce
more concrete outcomes.
The international community has been able to
bring North Korea back to the dialogue through a wellmeasured combination of diplomatic tools. In particular,
the Security Council played a critical role. The Council
unanimously adopted a series of sanctions in response
to North Korea’s nuclear and missile provocations,
and the international community acted unity in fully
implementing them, thereby sending a clear message
to North Korea that the pursuit of its nuclear weapons
programme will never be accepted. But at the same

S/PV. 8363

time, the door for dialogue was kept open to bring North
Korea back to the negotiating table. Eventually, the will
of the international community prevailed, and North
Korea changed course and came to the path of dialogue
and peaceful resolution. In the past few months, it has
taken a series of “for the first-time” actions that were
unthinkable only a year ago.
As for the Government of the Republic of Korea,
we are committed to continuing to work with the
international community to ensure that the Council’s
sanctions are implemented faithfully, even as we
continue to engage North Korea to facilitate substantial
progress towards complete denuclearization. We are
also furthering inter-Korean dialogue to solidify the
momentum for reconciliation and better relations. That
includes implementing the comprehensive military
agreement signed in Pyongyang, which aims to eliminate
the threat of war and prevent accidental clashes.
Last week, while in North Korea, many of us joined
President Moon Jae-in and Chairman Kim on their visit
to Mount Paekdu. As the highest point on the Korean
peninsula, that mountain bears a very special meaning
for all Koreans. The microclimate of Mount Paekdu
makes the weather very unpredictable — sunny and
clear one moment, but foggy and drizzly the next. We
were there in stunningly clear sunny and clear weather.
But that was probably the exception rather than the
norm. Our path to the complete denuclearization and
the establishment of a permanent peace on the Korean
peninsula might prove likewise — uneasy periods of
uncertainty and weariness interspersed with moments
of a step change in progress and clear visibility towards
our goal.
But, in the longer scheme of things, comparing
where we were a year ago and where we are today, the
situation has definitively become clearer and visibility
has been greatly enhanced. The change has been
possible because of bold, far-sighted and determined
leadership, much of which has rested on you, Secretary
Pompeo, and the unity of the international community.
As long as we stay this course, I am confident that the
months ahead will take us even closer to our shared
goal of realizing a nuclear-free Korean peninsula that is
permanently at peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Japan.
Mr. Kono (Japan): I would first like to extend my
sincere gratitude to you, Secretary Pompeo, for your

18-3006119/20

S/PV.8363

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

tireless efforts on North Korean issues. You have not
only brought this meeting together to reaffirm our
collective determination to tackle these pressing issues,
but you have also been selflessly dedicated to achieving
the complete denuclearization of North Korea for the
good of us all. I would also like to pay tribute to my
counterpart from the Republic of Korea, Minister
Kang, for her leadership and hard work.
Japan welcomes and supports the ongoing
diplomatic efforts, including the historic United StatesNorth Korea summit held in Singapore in June, as well
as the three inter-Korean summits held this year, as
a step towards reaching a comprehensive resolution
of outstanding issues involving North Korea. It is
my greatest hope that those efforts will lead to the
complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantling of all
weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles of
all ranges by North Korea, which is a common goal that
we all share in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Japan will spare no effort to realize
that goal.
Nevertheless, we are acutely aware that the most
recent report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency expressed grave concern that North Korea is
continuing its nuclear programme. What we seek is for
North Korea to seize this unprecedented opportunity
and take decisive and irreversible steps towards
complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement.
The international community should come together
to assist the diplomatic efforts that are under way and
encourage North Korea to make a strategic decision to
fulfil its international obligations and commitments.
In doing so, it is critical for us to remain united so
as to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
resolutions that the Council has unanimously adopted.
I am convinced that there is no better way for us to
support the current diplomatic process.
We should also be aware of several important
incidents. The Government of Japan shares the view of
the United States Government and some other partner
countries that the 2018 annual cap for petroleum
products has already been breached. It is important
that all Member States immediately stop supplying
those products to North Korea, pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions. There are also continued
reports of increasingly sophisticated efforts to evade
and circumvent measures based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including through what

20/20

27/09/2018

are known as ship-to-ship transfers and the selling of
fishing rights. The very authority of the decisions made
by the Council is at stake. It is our obligation to stop
sanction-evasion activities.
Last but not least, between Japan and North Korea
lie issues that must be resolved immediately. Japan is
determined to directly engage with North Korea and use
every possible means at our disposal towards achieving
the immediate resolution of the issues. North Korea is
blessed with great potential and is well placed to shape
a brighter future for itself if it takes the right path.
North Korea enjoys an abundance of resources and a
hardworking labour force. This is an important moment,
and I strongly urge North Korea to seize this unique
opportunity. Only North Korea that can make that
happen. In order to achieve lasting peace and stability
in North-East Asia and beyond, while protecting the
current international non-proliferation regime, it is
absolutely imperative to realize the complete, verifiable
and irreversible dismantling of all weapons of mass
destruction and ballistic missiles of all ranges by North
Korea. To that end, let us unite in renewing our clear
and unwavering commitment to the full implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The President: Before adjourning this last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
September, on behalf of the United States, Ambassador
Haley and our entire delegation here in New York, I would
like to express our sincere appreciation to the members
of the Council, the Permanent Representatives, their
respective staff, the Secretariat’s staff, the interpreters,
the recorders and security for the excellent assistance
they have provided during this very busy but highly
productive month. We also greatly appreciate members’
support of our goal of transparency during this month,
while keeping our briefings and discussions open and
available to the world to see and hear.
Ultimately, the Council is accountable to every
citizen in the international community as we strive to
foster stability, maintain security and preserve peace
across the world. Our open proceedings will allow
history to judge us fairly and truthfully and, we hope,
with an understanding of the sincerity of our endeavours
here. I therefore thank everyone once again. As we end
our presidency, I wish the delegation of Bolivia good
luck for the month of October.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

18-30061
