104

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

submit to their respective governing bodies or legislative organs, as a ma_tter of priority and with the active
co-operation of the Organization of African Unity,
concrete proposals for the full implementation of the
relevant United Nations decisions, in particular specific
programmes of all possible assistance to the peoples in
colonial Territories and their national liberation movements, together with a comprehensive analysis of the
problems, if any, confronted by these agencies and
organizations;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare for submission to the relevant bodies
concerned with related aspects of the present item, with
the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system, a report on the action taken since the circulation of his
previous report in implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including the present
resolution;
( b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
11. Draws the attention of the Economic and Social
Council to the present resolution as well as to the related discussions in the Special Committee and the
relevant documentation on the item, particularly ihe
reports submitted by the Working Group on the Implementation by the Specialized Agencies and the International Institutions Associated with the United Nations
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and Other Relevant
R~so_lutions of_ the United Nations and by the Special
M1ss1on estabhshed by the Special Committee at its
912th meeting, on 14 May 1973;
12. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
contin~e to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-ninth session.

2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973
3119 (XXVIII). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
in particular resolution 2981 (XXVII) of 14 December
1972 in which it expressed its firm conviction that the
provision of assistance for the education and training of
persons from the Territories concerned is as essential
as ever and should not only continue but also be
expanded,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the Programme for 1972/73,48
46 A/9240.

Taking note with satisfaction of the further increase
in contributions to the Programme and the corresponding increase in assistance, in the form of individual awards, to persons from the Territories concerned to further their education,
Recognizing. however, that additional funds are required if the Programme is to continue in operation
and be expanded,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa;
2. Once again urgently appeals to all States, organizations and individuals to make generous contributions
to the Programme;
3. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa, established in pursuance of paragraph 2 of General Assembly
resolution 2431 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968, for
the work they have accomplished during the period
under review in connexion with the Programme;
4. Takes note with approval of the further efforts
made to strengthen co-operation between the Programme and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Ref~gees, the specialized agencies, the Organization of
Afncan Unity and other agencies assisting persons
from southern Africa, and hopes that those efforts will
be continued with a view to the co-ordination of their
activities in the field of education and training for persons from the Territories concerned;
5. Decides that, as a further transitional measure
provision shall be made, under the regular budget of
the United Nations for .the financial year 1974. for
an amount of $100,000 to ensure continuity of the
Programme pending the receipt of adequate voluntary
contributions;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Ge~~ral Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on the
activity and progress of •the Programme.
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973
3120 (XXVIII). Offers hy l\lember States of study
antl trainin~ facilities for inhabitant!! of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2982 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facili~ies _for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territones,4' prepared under General Assembly resolution
845 (]X) of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the need to provide increased educational and training facilities at all levels for the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
41 A/9241

and Add.l.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Requests those States offering scholarships to inform the Secretary-General of the details of the offers
made and the scholarships granted under this programme and. whenever possible, rto provide travel funds
to prospective students;
5. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
intensify widespread and continuous dissemination in
the Territories under their administration of information
relating to offers of study and training facilities made
by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to
enable s,tudents to avail ,themselves of such offers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973

3155 (XXVIII). Question of Niue

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Niue,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 48
Having heard the statement of the Leader of Government of Niue, 0
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resoJutions 2868 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 and 2986 (XXVII) of 14 December
1972,
Recalling the report of the United Nations Visiting
Mission to Niue, 1972,50
Noting with satisfaction the outcome of the constitutional talks between the administering Power and a
Niuean Government delegation which was embodied in
a joint communique issued at Wellington on 2 March
1973, 51
Noting further that a time-table has been established
for the completion in 1974 of the final steps which will
enable Niue to achieve self-government,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all help to the people of Niue in their efforts
freely to decide their own future,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Niue to self-determination in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
• 8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/9023/Rev.l ), chaps. III
and XVI.
4 9 lbid., Twenty-eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 2067th
meeting.
IIO Ibid., Twenty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 23 (Al
8723/Rev.1), chap. XVI, annex J.
51 Jbid., Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/
Rev.1), chap. XVI, annex, para. 19.

105

2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Niue 52 and endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Committee on the question;
3. Notes with approval that, during the period since
the United Nations Mission visited Niue in June 1972,
the Government and people of Niue resolved to achieve
self-government in 1974 and that agreement has been
reached with the Government of New Zealand, as the
administering Power, on a specific time-table for the
free exercise by the people of Niue of their right to
self-determination;
4. Welcomes the invitation extended by the administering Power to the Secretary-General for the
United Nations to observe the act of self-determination
in Niue in 1974;
5. Requests ·the Special Committee, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Government of
Niue, to appoint a special mission to Niue in 1974
which will observe the proceedings relating to the act
of self-determination by the people of Niue and to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
6. Requests the administering Power and the Government of Niue, as well as the Secretary-General, to
provide all the necessary assistance and facilities to
the special mission in the discharge of its task;
7. Requests the Special Committee to report on this
question to the General Assembly at its twenty~ninth
session.
2202nd plenary meetinf?
14 December 1973
3156 (XXVIII). Question of American Samoa,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Guam, New
Hehrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles
and Solomon Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Gi_lbert and Ellice Islands, Guam, New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles and Solomon Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 53
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
!ndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the programme of action for the full impl~mentation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its previous resolutions relating to the
Territories listed above, in particular resolution 2984
(XXVII) of 14 December 1972,
Noting with concern that many of the provisions of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, as
weU as the related recommendations of the Special
Committee, remain largely unimplemented as regards
those Territories, in particular with respect to the
establishment of a specific time-table for the exercise
52 fbid., chap. XVI.
~;i !bid

char,. IH, V, X, XV. XVH :nd .XVI.H
