S/PV.7870

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7870

th meeting
Thursday, 26 January 2017, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Tachco
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
(S/2017/58)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-02075 (E)
*1702075*

S/PV.7870

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015) and 2332 (2016) (S/2017/58)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Amir Mahmoud Abdulla, Deputy
Executive Director of the World Food Programme;
and Mr. Peter Salama, Executive Director of the World
Health Organization Emergencies Programme.
Mr. Salama is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/58, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016).
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

We met to discuss the implementation of resolution
2336 (2016) and the Astana meeting last week. We look
forward to taking stock, post-Astana, and discussing the
important upcoming United Nations-led Geneva talks
with Special Envoy de Mistura next week. Therefore,
today we focus on the humanitarian situation in order
to try to give it the due attention it deserves.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: We witnessed devastation
and suffering in Syria in 2016 at levels that defy
comprehension. We witnessed people dying of
starvation, with the pictures of emaciated, starving
children from the besieged town of Madaya staining
our conscience. There were the constant, harrowing
images of bombs and mortars raining down on schools,
medical facilities, internally displaced settlements,
public markets and critical water networks. We saw
a shocked, blank stare from five-year-old Omran
2/10

26/01/2017

Daqneesh, his silent face covered in blood and dust after
being pulled from the rubble caused by an air strike
in eastern Aleppo. We are still horrified by reports
of rescue and medical workers teams, Syrian Arab
Red Crescent volunteers and humanitarian personnel
attacked while on duty. We witnessed the destruction
in Darayya, dubbed “Syria’s capital of barrel bombs”,
and the relentless demolition of eastern Aleppo. We
saw towns besieged, bombed and then emptied. We saw
buses, intended to evacuate civilians, burning outside
of Fo’ah.
We have seen the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) recapture the ancient city of Palmyra. And
we have watched as these actions brought with them
an atrocious, incalculable human toll. The SecretaryGeneral, myself and my colleagues have called the
situation a slaughterhouse, a complete meltdown of
humanity, the apex of horror. There is no pretending;
that is what daily life was like for millions of civilians
across Syria throughout 2016 — so much suffering in
just 12 months, and all of it under our collective watch.
And yet, as we start 2017, and as hard as it is to
imagine, there are some emerging reasons to hope.
Since 30 December, a nationwide ceasefire continues
to hold, despite some breaches. That has provided a
rare moment of respite for many, and we must all do
everything in our power to see that it is consolidated
and extended. I have also just returned from Helsinki,
where the world came together to support Syrians and
the region. Even with continuing dire humanitarian
needs, I took away a sense of hope from my meetings in
Finland, none more so than in the steady determination
of Syrian non-governmental organizations, with whom
I had the honour to sit alongside as we discussed the
humanitarian priorities for the coming year. Together
with the European Union, the United Nations will host
a conference on Syria in the beginning of April. That
will be an opportunity for the international community
to reiterate and pledge their commitment to support the
Syrian people.
I also take hope in recent developments on the
political track. This week we saw those who, despite
years of fighting, were willing to set the past aside to
sit alongside one another in Astana. The agreement by
Russia, Turkey and Iran in Astana to establish a trilateral
mechanism to observe and ensure full compliance
with the ceasefire is a welcome development. Saving
Syrian lives is the shared priority of all of us, and
the United Nations stands ready to assist in the
17-02075

26/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East

establishment of this mechanism. It is also our hope
that further consolidation of the ceasefire will help to
create a supportive environment for the resumption of
intra-Syrian negotiations in Geneva, under the auspices
and lead of the United Nations, as per relevant Security
Council resolutions. Special Envoy de Mistura has
just attended the Astana meeting and he will brief the
Council, as the President mentioned, more fully on the
political track, on 31 January.
As we move towards United Nations talks,
the collective hopes of the world are for a political
solution based on resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). There is
no other solution, neither humanitarian nor, indeed,
military — however emboldened some parties may feel
following the full evacuation of eastern Aleppo. We
all owe it to the people of Syria, who have suffered so
much, to do everything in our power to see the political
process succeed and to see their hope restored.
Sadly, in recent months, we have too often been
unable to translate hope into humanitarian action.
From the formation of the Task Force on Humanitarian
Access, as part of the International Syria Support
Group in early 2016, up until September last year,
we saw unprecedented access to those most in need
in Syria. By September of last year, over one and a
quarter million people were reached via inter-agency
convoys to besieged and hard-to-reach areas, compared
to just 487,000 in all of 2015. Such access was not easily
achieved, but took the hard work of the United Nations
team in Damascus and in Geneva, with the support of
influential Member States — especially the Russian
Federation and the United States. Frustratingly, and with
dire humanitarian consequences, significant challenges
with cross-line access have re-emerged. Sadly, access
has currently returned to the levels we saw before the
humanitarian task force came into effect.
That diminution in access is, in part, because
the two-step approval process agreed by the Syrian
authorities has become, in practice, a ten-step process.
Despite high rates of in-principle approvals, only one or
two approved convoys have reached their destinations
in each of the last three months. In December, one —
just one — inter-agency convoy delivered assistance to
6,000 people out of a total of 930,250 people requested
under the December inter-agency convoy plan. This is
less than 1 per cent of what we aimed to achieve, and
even in this one instance when we could deliver, over
23,000 medical items were removed from the United

S/PV.7870

Nations inter-agency convoy. So far, in January the
situation is not much better, with only one inter-agency
convoy deployed to Moadamiya, on 7 January, reaching
40,000 people; however, this was a location that we had
requested under last November’s plan.
In both December and January, the Syrian
Government did respond within the agreed seven
working days to our monthly inter-agency convoy
plans, but subsequent administrative delays on the
part of the Government — including in the approval
of facilitation letters, approval by local governors and
security committees, as well as broader restrictions on
the part of all parties — continue to hamper our efforts
and deprive the most vulnerable civilians of muchneeded assistance.
Let me be perfectly clear. We have a humanitarian
task force whose sole purpose is to ensure access, and
since 30 December we have had a ceasefire that has
improved security in many areas. And yet, despite
these two positive factors, we continue to be blocked
at every turn by lack of approvals at the central and
local levels, disagreements on access routes, and the
violation of agreed procedures at checkpoints by parties
to the conflict. Are these important? Yes. We cannot
“just plough on” or “just get on with it”, as I have heard
one member sitting around this say table to me, because
if one brave aid worker drives through the check point
without these facilitation letters and the command is
then transmitted down the line, the checkpoint guard or
their sniper takes the shot.
On 11 January, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator in Damascus
sent a note verbale to the Syrian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs with a list of practical suggestions to speed up
access, simplify procedures and get convoys moving.
No response has yet been received. We have the
capacity to deliver to hundreds of thousands of people
in besieged and hard-to-reach areas every month,
and we are ready to move should access be allowed
by the parties to the conflict. We call on all Council
members with influence over the Syrian authorities
and on members of the humanitarian task force to do
more to ensure the support of the Syrian Government
to deliver life-saving assistance through the existing
structures and mechanisms. I say without, I hope, being
seen as defensive, that the fault is not at the door of the
United Nations or the non-governmental organizations
(NGOs); it is the Syrian Government and the local
governors who are responsible. I would ask Council

17-020753/10

S/PV.7870

The situation in the Middle East

members to direct their irritation and influence at
them. We need to be allowed to pass — not as a favour
but as a right — and safely.
On the ground, despite enormous challenges,
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners in
Syria continue to deliver life-saving assistance and
support to millions of people across the country every
month. For example, the World Food Programme
(WFP) — which the Council will hear more from in
a few minutes — reached over 4 million people with
food commodities in December alone. The World
Health Organization, which the Council will also hear
from this morning, along with UNICEF, implemented
their accelerated routine immunization campaign in
northern Syria, vaccinating some 104,000 children in
Jarablus and other parts of Aleppo governorate. Over
the course of 2016, over 4 million non-food items were
distributed across Syria, nutrition items were provided
to some 3 million, and shelter was provided to nearly
300,000 people.
Moreover, the vital humanitarian cross-border
activities continued to represent a crucial element of the
United Nations response. Since cross-border operations
began in July 2014, following the adoption of resolution
2165 (2014), the United Nations has conducted more
than 467 cross-border convoys, or nearly four a week
on average. This has allowed United Nations partners
to deliver medical supplies sufficient for 9 million
treatments, including for 2 million people to be
vaccinated. Some 3 million have been fed, many on a
monthly basis. Assistance has been delivered to various
parts of Aleppo, Idlib, Lattakia and Hama governorates
in Turkey, and Dar’a and Quneitra governorates in
Jordan. These operations complement the critical
role played by international and Syrian NGOs, which
provide assistance and services to millions more from
neighbouring countries.
In addition, the United Nations has completed 294
airlifts to Qamishly, delivering 10,000 metric tons
of food; water, sanitation and hygiene products; and
nutrition, education, shelter and non-food assistance on
behalf of humanitarian actors, including 120,000 full
food rations. I will leave the WFP Deputy Executive
Director to provide more context and reports on our
United Nations airlift and air drops capacity, and
activity, particularly at Hasaka and Deir ez-Zor.
I pay a complete tribute to all the extraordinary
steadfast
and
unflinchingly
courageous
aid
4/10

26/01/2017

workers — those from NGOs, Syrian, regional and
international; those working cross-border from both
Jordan and Turkey, as well as those within Syria;
those across the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, and my colleagues in the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA); those
with the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent, the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies; and the local
communities and families that have set aside so much
to help others. They can rest assured that their actions
have saved many lives of their fellow Syrian and global
citizens, protecting them wherever possible and never
desisting, despite relentless setbacks, threats and
danger. And, if I may, let me pause to take a moment
to honour all those humanitarian aid workers who have
been killed in their duties.
As was noted last month, with the evacuation of
eastern Aleppo the number of those besieged in Syria
was reduced. Following a comprehensive review by the
United Nations, it is now estimated that as of January
some 643,780 people are living in 13 areas under siege.
Three locations were removed from the previous list of
16 locations, where some 974,080 people were unable
to move freely. The eastern neighbourhoods of Aleppo
were removed following their full take-over by the
Government of Syria in December. Madimayet Elsham
in rural Damascus was delisted due to the significant
improvement in humanitarian access and freedom
of movement over the past three months following
the signing and subsequent implementation of a local
agreement. Hajar al-Aswad, in rural Damascus, was
also removed due to the access that has been available
through Yarmouk, Yelda and Al-Qadam.
Further, population figures have been adjusted for
other locations based on the latest and most accurate
information received from the ground. This includes
a reduction of 1,200 people for Fo’ah and Kafraya, in
Idlib, following their evacuation from the two towns
in December. Adjustments were also made for areas in
the eastern Ghoutah enclave due to movements within
the enclave, as well as for Zabadani and Khan al-Shih.
The reduction in numbers, however, should not
be mistaken for progress in addressing the scourge of
besiegement. Parties continue to use siege as a weapon
of war, and in each of these cases we saw protracted
periods of restricted aid, as well heavy fighting and
bombing, as a precursor to the agreements that brought
the areas back under Government of Syria control. I
17-02075

26/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East

continue to call for an immediate end to all besiegement
by all parties in this conflict. The act of besiegement
does nothing other than to punish civilians, who already
bear the brunt of this terrible conflict.
Let me provide the Council with an update on four
locations in Syria where humanitarian action remains
greatly needed and, sadly, often contested: Aleppo,
Deir ez-Zor, rural Damascus and Raqqa. I shall address
each of these in turn.
First, in Aleppo, humanitarian needs continue to be
staggering. Since 24 November, nearly 160,000 people
have been at least temporarily displaced from formerly
besieged neighbourhoods of eastern Aleppo. This
includes over 120,000 people displaced to Governmentcontrolled areas in and around Aleppo city or having
stayed in eastern Aleppo, and over 36,000 people
evacuated to non-State armed group-controlled Idlib
and rural western Aleppo. The humanitarian situation
for many of those who have been displaced or have
stayed has been difficult, and the cold winter has
exacerbated the situation further. Following the cut-off
of running water to the some 1.8 million in Aleppo due
to a technical problem — as we understand it — whose
solution lies in ISIL-controlled territory outside of
the city, the humanitarian situation has become even
more difficult.
Last month, OCHA provided Council members
with a detailed overview of our response to those
36,000 people who evacuated into rural western
Aleppo and Idlib. Those 36,000 people were provided
with immediate life-saving assistance that is now part
of the regular cross-border humanitarian programming
that assists some 900,000 internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in Idlib, as well as elsewhere in the north.
I will now brief the Council on the United Nations
response in each of the main areas in which those
affected by the Aleppo crisis have been displaced or
returned to across the city itself. The United Nations
has had an ongoing presence in Aleppo since 2014 and
responded immediately to the additional humanitarian
needs caused by the displacement of so many. The level
of assistance was immediately increased and the United
Nations has since continued to address the needs of
those people displaced from or returning to eastern
Aleppo, alongside the brave humanitarians working
for the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and International
Committee of the Red Cross, as well as other national
and international non-governmental organizations.

S/PV.7870

Nearly 90 per cent of the supplies distributed
by all partners are provided by the United Nations,
and just last week $19 million was released from the
OCHA-managed Syria Humanitarian Fund to support
immediate life-saving and early recovery assistance for
thousands of people. Those funds will provide responses
to immediate needs, assist with the rehabilitation of
basic services and removal rubble and undertake other
necessary steps to create the conditions where people
can safely return to their homes.
In eastern Aleppo, a total of over 65,000 people
have been officially registered as having returned to
or having stayed in the eastern districts of the city.
Most now live in damaged houses or are scattered
across various neighbourhoods, with Hanano hosting
the largest number of returnees to date. Other
neighbourhoods that registered high levels of returnees
include Tariq Al-Bab, Al-Kalaseh and Bustan Al-Qaser.
In those areas, the United Nations has been active
in providing immediate relief. Food items, medical
services, protection and education support have all
been provided to those in need.
I am deeply concerned about reports relating to the
stockpiles of humanitarian supplies found in eastern
Aleppo since the evacuation. I take that extremely
seriously. We need to establish the facts and, as I
speak, we are following up on those reports urgently.
I emphasize to the Council that such matters draw into
stark relief the need for unimpeded access of the United
Nations and humanitarian partners to all areas in Syria,
not only to allow us to deliver, but to monitor the needs
and the appropriate distribution of assistance, even
after materials have been pre-positioned.
On the outskirts of eastern Aleppo city, there
are 5,077 people who have been displaced to the
Jibreen collective shelter. Parts of the shelter remain
in need of rehabilitation, particularly winterization.
The United Nations and its partners have provided
hundreds of stoves and other essential winterization
items. Furthermore, the United Nations is supporting
communal kitchens that provide hot meals for
thousands, and a static clinic and, in coordination
with the relevant authorities, commenced with the
distribution of personal identity documents.
In western Aleppo, over 50,000 are being supported
as part of increased regular programming activities
already being delivered on a daily basis to support the
over 400,000 IDPs inside western parts of the city.

17-020755/10

S/PV.7870

The situation in the Middle East

That includes regular distribution of food and non-food
items. The United Nations has recently provided 250
metric tons of medical supplies — enough for 300,000
treatment courses — to Aleppo city, and in December
provided enough medicine for 430,000 treatments.
UNICEF continues emergency water trucking and
the provision of fuel for operating wells, which
together benefit nearly 1 million people — 400,000
people from water trucking and 600,000 people
from public wells — across the city. And together
with the Aleppo Department of Education, UNICEF
and non-governmental organizations have provided
education support to thousands of children and youth.
We must make sure that the record and the
positive balance are put in the public domain. The
United Nations and others will remain committed
and actively engaged in assisting all those in need in
Aleppo who we can access, working tirelessly with our
humanitarian partners to ease suffering and provide a
basis for recovery.
Secondly, I promised to provide an update on
Deir ez-Zor. I am deeply concerned for the safety
and protection of an estimated 93,500 people in the
besieged western side of Deir ez-Zor in Syria following
reports of ISIL attacks, resulting in the death and injury
of scores of civilians. Since 15 January, ISIL reportedly
took control of several areas including the main road
and the Deir ez-Zor airport and is gaining ground in
several more areas, splitting the besieged enclave in
two. Beyond the temporary suspension of air drops by
the World Food Programme, the Al-Assad National
Hospital was temporarily closed. Water has reportedly
also been cut for thousands of people living in ISILcontrolled areas around Deir ez-Zor due to fighting
damaging power generators in the area. Mobile
communication has reportedly stopped throughout
the area.
Thirdly, I turn now to rural Damascus, where
the situation remains deeply troubling. Fighting in
the Wadi Barada area, just outside of Damascus city,
continues and has already displaced an estimated
17,500 people. Water remains cut off from the
main source since the fighting began, affecting the
primary water supply for some 5.5 million people in
Damascus and surrounding areas, who now only have
minimal access to water. In response, technical teams
comprising the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and water
authorities, entered the Wadi Barada area on 13 and
14 January for a preliminary assessment of damages.
6/10

26/01/2017

However, following the assassination of a member of
the reconciliation committee, fighting was rekindled
and the assessment mission suspended before the repair
works could commence. Should such deprivation of
water to civilians be determined to have been deliberate,
those responsible may have committed a war crime.
Accountability must be ensured for the perpetrators of
such acts.
Fourthly, I would draw the Council’s attention
to the military operation in Raqqa district, where I
have serious concerns for the safety and security of
over 400,000 people in need, including over 150,000
internally displaced people. So far, some 35,000 people
have been displaced as a result of the fighting, although
many have returned to their homes since the fighting
has subsided.
Humanitarian partners are providing a response to
those displaced to the north towards Tell Abyad. The
majority of the population of Raqqa district is reportedly
facing critical problems in meeting immediate needs.
Fighting has had an adverse impact on infrastructure
such as water and power stations, affecting people’s
ability to access basic services. Food insecurity is also
considered a major problem. Access to Raqqa by the
United Nations has been highly constrained due to
insecurity and ISIL’s restrictions on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, with the last United Nations
inter-agency convoy to Raqqa taking place in October
2013. Access and security permitting, which they
currently do not, the United Nations and humanitarian
partners do stand ready nonetheless to respond to
further large-scale temporary displacement as military
efforts to push ISIL out of Raqqa continue.
After nearly six years of senseless and brutal
conflict, we have all been longing for a glimmer of hope
that the suffering of the Syrian people might finally be
coming to an end. The past few weeks have seen far
fewer civilians killed and injured since the ceasefire
came into effect on 30 December 2016. In some parts
of the country at least, it has given a respite for people
who have told us loud and clear that all they want is
to be safe and for their families to be protected from
violence. But the ceasefire alone is not enough. We
must maintain our outrage at what is occurring in Syria
and what is being perpetrated against the Syrian people.
Now is the time for advocacy and now is the time for
renewed determination. I call on the States members
of the Council to do all in their power, collectively and
individually, to see the following implemented.
17-02075

26/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East

First, they must ensure the current ceasefire is
sustained, and that it results in increased access after
months of stagnation. We need full implementation
of the monthly access plan to reach all those in need.
Secondly, they must ensure that all parties protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure and abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, they must recommit to ensure that the barbaric
act of besiegement is immediately lifted across the
entire country. Fourthly, I ask that we all rally behind
Staffan de Mistura’s tireless efforts on behalf of the
Secretary-General to find a political solution that
brings an end to the conflict and meets the aspirations
of the Syrian people. After a chronicle of missed
opportunities, this is the time for the various parties
to come together and bring an end to this horrendous
chapter in Syria’s history.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abdulla.

S/PV.7870

farmers with most of its commercial and large-scale
agricultural base eroded.
Food prices have steadily risen, reaching an
increase of 43 per cent in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas to which the World Food Programme (WFP)
and other humanitarian organizations have no regular
access. The highest cost for staple foods was reported
in the besieged part of Deir ez-Zor city, in which more
than 90,000 people are struggling to survive. The
situation remains precarious in other besieged locations
in which many people are struggling to get just one
meal per day. To date, approximately 4.6 million
people, including an estimated 2 million children, live
in areas throughout Syria that are very hard to reach.
They receive only sporadic humanitarian assistance,
and as Under-Secretary-General O’Brien just said,
more than 640,000 people are living in 13 besieged
locations across of Syria, deprived of the most basic
needs, especially food.

Yet, today, despite some cause for optimism, the
situation remains perhaps even more grave. Six years
into the crisis, the humanitarian and food-security
situation in Syria continues to deteriorate. Seven
million people in Syria are already food insecure and an
additional 2 million are at risk. That is 9 million people
inside Syria — half the current population — who are
in need of food, agriculture and livelihood assistance.
Four out of five Syrians now live in poverty, with
almost 80 per cent of the households across the country
struggling to cope with food shortages.

During the first several few weeks of 2016,
following the Munich agreement, access to besieged
and hard-to-reach areas improved considerably. Despite
those improvements, recent outbreaks of fighting,
insecurity and delays in obtaining the necessary
approvals have meant that millions of hungry Syrians
were cut off from supplies and left without predictable
food deliveries. As an example, in the third quarter of
last year, WFP sent food to hard-to-reach and besieged
areas through 23 inter-agency conveys; however, only
12 such conveys took place during the last quarter of
2016. Our persistent efforts to improve access continue
to be challenged by numerous obstacles, and those were
outlined earlier by Under-Secretary-General O’Brien.
Access has been our challenge in Syria since the first
days of the conflict. WFP continues to consider all
options. We have consulted with many partners in world
exports. We have considered airdrops, helicopters and
delivering food by drones, but, in the end, it always
comes down to access and ensuring safety.

An alarming fact is that food production has hit
a record low as widespread insecurity continues to
hamper access to land, farming supplies and markets.
Fuel is in short supply and infrastructure, such as
irrigation systems, is often in a state of damage, all
of which make it increasingly difficult for farmers to
produce and maintain their livelihoods. The wheat
harvest is at an all-time low, estimated at less than
50 per cent of the pre-conflict averages. As such, Syria
is in danger of becoming a country of subsistence

I would like to add a few words with regard to Deir
ez-Zor and some of the airlifts to which Mr. O’Brien
referred. Deir ez-Zor has been unaccessible to
humanitarian workers since it fell under the control of
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in March 2014.
In April 2016, WFP, together with numerous partners
and much assistance, began a complex, high-altitude
parachute drop, which, as I will explain, delivered quite
a lot. But the recent aspects of the security deterioration
that Mr. O’Brien mentioned in Deir ez-Zor city, which

Mr. Abdulla: Last year, the Executive Director
of the World Food Programme, Ertharin Cousin,
reported to the Council (see S/PV.7612), stating her
grave concern about the deepening humanitarian crisis
in Syria and the increasing hardship faced by people
the in besieged areas. She warned then that they were
falling into despair, malnutrition, starvation and death.

17-020757/10

S/PV.7870

The situation in the Middle East

was effectively cut in half, and fighting between
Government forces and ISIL forced a suspension of
that operation on 15 January. That operation had been
providing a life line for that besieged population. Yet,
before the operation was suspended, we had carried out
177 airdrops delivering food rations, as well as many
other supplies, such as medical and hygiene supplies
on behalf of all the other humanitarian agencies, to
93,000 people. That amounted to more 3,300 tons of
relief items on 4,500 pallets using more than 10,000
parachutes in an unprecedented, highly technical and
regrettably high-cost operation.
In another operation in July 2016, we began an
airlift operation to the Al-Hassakeh governorate, with
planes taking off from Damascus airport and landing
in Qamishly airport. Those airlifts were also costly
with limited cargo capacity but, again, were the only
option to provide emergency assistance to the most
vulnerable and insecure people in the Governorate.
To date, we have completed 294 airlifts to Qamishly,
delivering 10,000 tons of many food items as well as
numerous other humanitarian supplies. Those airlifts
have enabled those supplies, food assistance and many
other urgently needed items to reach approximately
64,000 people and are part of an inter-agency operation
that, I have to advise, is running short of funds.
As I conclude, I would like to say a few words
and convey a key message in Arabic, the language of
the region.
(spoke in Arabic)
Access to besieged areas cannot be arbitrary,
improvised or accorded only after our repeated requests.
Access to all areas that require assistance should be
reasonably safe and consistent. Access should not be
subject to an unreasonable approval process.
(spoke in English)
The Council may rest assured that the World Food
Programme will continue to do its utmost to overcome
setbacks and challenges to provide life-saving
assistance. Together with partners, we continue to
look towards new and innovative ways to reach people
while hoping that a permanent ceasefire will be put in
place to allow for increased, immediate and, above all,
sustained access.
But ultimately peace and security are the only
solution to the Syrian crisis. As Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien said, there is no humanitarian solution
8/10

26/01/2017

to the crisis. A new political commitment to peace is
needed so that we can then focus all our energy and
efforts on the future of Syrian families, thereby helping
them rebuild their lives and livelihoods.
The President: I thank Mr. Abdulla for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Salama.
Mr. Salama: I thank the Council for this
opportunity to brief members on the impact of six years
of war on the health of the Syrian people. The war in
Syria has taken a devastating toll on the people of Syria
and the health workers, hospitals and clinics intended
to serve them. The war has obviously had a direct
impact on the civilian population, with more than half
a million people killed and 1.5 million injured. Indeed,
until the recent security developments, we estimate
that approximately 30,000 people were sustaining
war-related injuries every month. Furthermore, in
many parts of the country, the war has virtually gutted
a once-strong health system. More than half of the
country’s public hospitals and primary care centres
have either closed or are only partially functioning.
Approximately two-thirds of health workers have fled
the country. Tragically, in 2016 there were reports of
more than 100 attacks on hospitals and clinics across
the country.
Not surprisingly, the inability or unwillingness
of the warring parties to safeguard basic health care
has resulted in acute shortages and barriers to access,
including for life-saving services, such as trauma care
for the injured, medical treatment of common chronic
diseases and basic prevention programmes, such as
vaccination programmes for children. It is estimated
that now one in two children is not protected against
major infectious disease killers and that one in four
children is at risk of developing serious mental health
disorders, with their associated long-term impacts on
the children themselves and on the society to which
they contribute. More than 300,000 women are not able
to get the urgent care they need for a safe pregnancy and
delivery. Indeed, the indirect toll on civilian lives may
eventually far outweigh the direct toll due to bombs and
bullets.
As with our other United Nations and
non-governmental organization partners, in the health
sector WHO has been challenged to find new and
innovative ways to deliver services in that complex
context, whether through mobile health clinics or
through cross-line and cross-border programmes. In
17-02075

26/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East

2016, WHO and partners such as UNICEF and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent were able to vaccinate more
than 2.5 million children against polio, measles and
other diseases; deliver more than 10 million treatments
and train more than 16,000 health workers; and assist in
medical evacuations of the critically sick and injured.
The credit for those results rests with the courageous
Syrian health workers, who continue to deliver
health care for their people under the most difficult
circumstances imaginable.
Unfortunately, in 2017 the ceasefire has not yet
translated into sustained improvement in access to
health care in the majority of hard-to-reach and besieged
areas. As noted by Mr. O’Brien, we are particularly
concerned by the situation in Deir ez-Zor, where people
are struggling to survive in the besieged enclaves. The
Al-Assad University Hospital has temporarily been
out of service due to clashes in the area, necessitating
the air evacuation of the wounded and the sick. WHO
and its partners, such as the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
stand ready to deliver medical supplies sufficient to
cover the needs of the population for three months in
Deir ez-Ezor should there be access and a logistics
system in place to deliver them.
We also recognize the urgent un-met health care
needs in and around Aleppo following the intense
hostilities late last year and the resulting population
displacement. WHO and its partners are already
scaling up our existing primary health-care and other
programmes. We are aware of the reports of medical
supplies found in warehouses when the Government of
Syria regained control over eastern Aleppo. We look
forward to receving further details on the quantities and
types of supplies in order to determine the appropriate
action with the relevant authorities.
Finally, we have four major requests of the Council
today aimed at saving lives and underscoring the
sanctity of health workers. First, we must ensure that all
parties to the conflict permit the evacuation of critically
ill and wounded patients and their families from all
hard-to-reach and besieged areas of Syria. Secondly, we
must ensure that medical teams are granted sustained
and unconditional access to all parts of Syria in order
to assess needs, monitor programmes — including the
distribution of supplies and trained staff — as well as
provide direct medical care. Thirdly, we must ensure
that essential health supplies, including trauma and
surgical supplies, which have been systematically
removed from United Nations and Syrian Arab Red

S/PV.7870

Crescent convoys, are consistently allowed into hardto-reach and besieged areas.
Finally, the pernicious attacks on health care
workers and clinics must end. The perpetrators must
be held accountable. These attacks undermine the very
foundations of peace and security and have been the
subject of previous Security Council deliberations.
Equally unacceptable is any use of health-care facilities
for military purposes. We should join together to
condemn such egregious violations of international
humanitarian law and find a practical mechanism
to stop them once and for all. Ultimately, the Syrian
health-care system will need to be rebuilt, with serious
and sustained investment and the support of the entire
international community. We will save that discussion
for a more hopeful time, which we hope is not far off.
The President: I thank Mr. Salama for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to thank our briefers — Under-Secretary-General
Stephen O’Brien, Mr. Amir Abdulla and Mr. Peter
Salama — for the valuable information they have given
us today.
The situation in Syria continues to be shameful. The
country continues to be immersed in a bloody civil war
that, after six years, has left it in ruins and destroyed
the own roots of its society. However, for the first time
in many months, there seems to be some improvement.
The end of the military conflict in eastern Aleppo, the
swift evacuation of its population and the cessation
of hostilities at the end of December, reflected in
resolution 2336 (2016), have made it possible to reduce
substantially the levels of violence in some areas,
giving its inhabitants necessary respite.
In addition, the meeting in Astana that took place
this week makes it possible to hope that next month in
Geneva the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, will manage, based on
those exchanges, to give significant new momentum to
the political process to put an end to conflict. All of
us here trust in the ability of Mr. De Mistura to bring
the parties together, reduce tensions and still-existing
distrust and to work on the road map charted by
resolution 2254 (2015) to achieve a process of political
transition that would benefit the Syrian people. He has
our full support.

17-020759/10

S/PV.7870

The situation in the Middle East

Nevertheless, we are still seriously concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Syria which, as pointed out
by the briefers today, presents quite a different picture
than the political process. Although the end of the siege
of eastern Aleppo was a necessary relief, which made
it possible to reduce significantly the total number of
people residing in besieged and hard-to-reach areas,
almost 700,000 people remain there, subsisting with
extreme needs, their situation aggravated by the hard
winter conditions.
It is neither acceptable nor tolerable that, in spite of
the tremendous effort made by humanitarian workers
of the United Nations and its partners in the field, in
December barely 1 per cent of the total of the population
could be reached. Neither is it acceptable or tolerable
that none of the convoys included in the January plan
were able to reach the recipients, with the exception of
one that arrived in Muadamiyat Al-Sham on 7 January
as part of a plan approved in November.
It is also highly worrying that, despite the cessation
of hostilities in force and the end of the seige of eastern
Aleppo, humanitarian access seems to be worsening
instead of improving. Also, with regard to deliveries
by air in Deir ez-Ezzor, and after the excellent work
undertaken by the World Food Programme, which
has completed 177 deliveries to date, unfortunately,
on 15 January operations were suspended due to the
intense fighting in the area. We hope that they can
restart shortly.
I wish to briefly mention the situation in Wadi
Barada. Let it be clear: the sabotage over the past
month of the water supplies that serve the capital,
Damascus, and surrounding areas — whoever may be
responsible — should be considered a war crime, one
of many suffered daily by the Syrian people. We hope
that soon a cease fire will be achieved that will make
it possible to quickly re-establish access to drinking
water for more than 5 million people.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the priorities
of Uruguay with regard to substantially improving
the Syrian humanitarian situation. It is necessary that
the cessation of hostilities be consolidated throughout
the territory; that all parties to the conflict continue
to protect and improve the protection of citizens,
infrastructure, hospitals and medical and health-care

10/10

26/01/2017

staff; that all sieges be lifted; that, in accordance with
the monthly plans submitted by the United Nations,
immediate and sustained humanitarian access be
granted throughout the country; that the fight against
terrorism in all its forms be continued; and that
progress be made towards reaching a political solution
to the conflict.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of Bolivia
would like to thank the representatives of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Food Programme and the World Health Organization
for their briefings today on the tragic situation facing
the Syrian people.
Bolivia would also like to emphasize the fact that
the ceasefire instituted by Russia, Turkey and Iran has
been effective and has had a direct impact not just on
the possibility of improving the humanitarian situation
but also, as the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/58)
states, on reducing the level of violence in the country.
It represents a step in the right direction for reaching
a political outcome that can end the violence, prevent
further bloodshed among civilians and provide them
with immediate humanitarian access. We welcome
the efforts of all the humanitarian organizations on
the ground, including the work of the Red Crescent,
in conditions that have been described as extremely
difficult. In that regard, we urge all parties to abide
strictly by international humanitarian law in order
to ensure the success of the ceasefire, the protection
of civilians and civilian structures, the lifting of
the sieges and, of course, a political solution to the
conflict. We also welcome the fact that, according to
the communiqué issued after the meeting in Astana, the
parties are seeking a political outcome and a ceasefire
that will contribute to “reducing violence, building
confidence [and] ensuring unhindered humanitarian
access swiftly and smoothly”. That is of course a step in
the right direction for an intra-Syrian political process
conducted under the auspices of the United Nations,
aimed at ending this tragic conflict once and for all.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
this subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

17-02075
