A/RES/76/307

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 September 2022

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 124
Strengthening of the United Nations system

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 8 September 2022
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/76/L.87)]

76/307.

Modalities for the Summit of the Future
The General Assembly,
Recalling our declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, 1 in which we recognized that our challenges are
interconnected and can only be addressed through stronger international cooperation
and reinvigorated multilateralism with the United Nations at the centre of our efforts,
in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling also our pledge to strengthen global governance for the sake of
present and future generations and our request to the Secretary-General to report back
with recommendations to advance our common agenda and to respond to current and
future challenges,
Welcoming the submission of the rich and substantive report of the Secretary General entitled “Our Common Agenda” 2 as a basis for further consideration by
Member States,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming
our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a
comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and transformative
Sustainable Development Goals and targets, and its commitment to working tirelessly
for the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,
which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda, supports and complements it, helps to
contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete policies and actions
and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing,

__________________
1
2

22-21687 (E)

Resolution 75/1.
A/75/982.

150922

*2221687*

A/RES/76/307

Modalities for the Summit of the Future

including its international architecture, and creating an enabling environment at all
levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Recognizing that the collective well-being, safety, security and prosperity of our
nations and peoples are deeply intertwined, which requires us to work urgently and
together in accordance with the Charter to address global risks and challenges, find
viable solutions and accelerate the implementation of agreed frameworks, including
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development
Goals and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, as well as the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change 3 and its Paris Agreement, 4
Recognizing also that several recommendations from the report entitled “Our
Common Agenda” can contribute to and accelerate the timely implementation of the
2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals and the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda,
Reaffirming the request to the Secretary-General 5 to inform Member States and
to engage in broad and inclusive consultations with them, all parts of the United
Nations system and other relevant partners on his proposals in the report as they relate
to the Summit of the Future, including through providing concise, action-oriented
recommendations for the consideration of Member States as an input into the
intergovernmental preparations for the Summit,
Taking note of the summaries of the informal thematic consultations held und er
the auspices of the President of the General Assembly in connection with the report
of the Secretary-General entitled “Our Common Agenda”,
Affirming the importance of the modalities of the Summit of the Future being
developed by Member States,
1.
Decides that the Summit of the Future has an important role to play in
reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations, reinvigorating multilateralism,
boosting implementation of existing commitments, agreeing on concrete solutions to
challenges and restoring trust among Member States;
2.
Also decides that the theme of the Summit shall be “Summit of the Future:
multilateral solutions for a better tomorrow”;
3.
Further decides that the Summit will be held on 22 and 23 September
2024, in New York, preceded by a preparatory ministerial meeting to be held on
18 September 2023;
4.
Decides that the Summit will adopt a concise, action-oriented outcome
document entitled “A Pact for the Future”, agreed in advance by consensus through
intergovernmental negotiations;
5.

Also decides that the Summit will consist of:

(a)

Plenary meetings from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.;

(b) Interactive dialogues from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m., to be
held in parallel with the plenary meetings;
6.

Further decides that the Summit will have:

(a) An opening segment on the first day, which will include the adoption of
the outcome document followed by statements from the President of the General
__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
5
See resolution 76/6.
3
4

2/4

22-21687

Modalities for the Summit of the Future

A/RES/76/307

Assembly, the Secretary-General and youth representatives to be selected by the
President of the General Assembly in consultation with Member States;
(b) A closing segment on the second day from 8.30 to 9.00 p.m., which will
feature a statement from the President of the General Assembly;
7.
Encourages Member States and members of United Nations specialized
agencies to be represented at the level of Head of State or Government, or at the
highest possible level, and to make statements in plenary of up to five minutes ;
8.
Invites entities having received a standing invitation to participate as
observers in the work of the General Assembly to participate in the Summit;
9.
Invites the United Nations system, including the funds, programmes,
specialized agencies and regional commissions, as well as the Bretton Woods
institutions, to participate in the Summit;
10. Invites representatives of non-governmental organizations that are in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council to participate in the Summit
in accordance with relevant rules and procedures of the General Assembly;
11. Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of
representatives of other relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society
organizations, academic institutions and the private sector who may participate in the
high-level Summit of the Future, taking into account the principles of transparency
and equitable geographical representation, with due regard for gender parity, to
submit the proposed list to Member States for their consideration on a non-objection
basis 6 and to bring the list to the attention of the Assembly for a final decision by the
Assembly on participation in the Summit;
12. Invites representatives listed in paragraphs 8 and 9 above, time permit ting,
to make statements in plenary of up to three minutes;
13. Invites representatives listed in paragraphs 7 to 11 above to participate in
the interactive dialogues;
14. Encourages all Member States and members of the United Nations
specialized agencies to facilitate the participation of youth in the Summit;
15. Encourages all representatives invited in paragraphs 8 to 11 above to
facilitate the participation of youth in the Summit;
16. Requests the President of the General Assembly to appoint co-facilitators
no later than 31 October 2022, one from a developed country and one from a
developing country, to facilitate open, transparent and inclusive intergovernmental
consultations on the preparatory process of the Summit, and decides that the
intergovernmental preparatory process of the Summit shall consist of:
(a) Consultations to determine the scope of the Summit, topics and
organization of the interactive dialogues and the process of negotiations to conclude
the outcome document;
(b) Negotiations to conclude the outcome document with adequate time for
the negotiating sessions;
17. Encourages major groups and other stakeholders to participate and engage
in the preparatory process of the Summit;
__________________
6

22-21687

The list will include proposed as well as final names. The general basis of any objections, if
requested by one or more States Members of the United Nations or States members of the
specialized agencies, will be made known to the Office of the President of the General Assembly
and the requester.
3/4

A/RES/76/307

Modalities for the Summit of the Future

18. Decides that the Summit of the Future should be well coordinated with,
and complementary to, the Sustainable Development Goals Summit (the high -level
political forum on sustainable development, convened under the auspices of the
General Assembly), and requests the President of the General Assembly to ensure that
the two Summits are well coordinated;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to provide adequate support within
existing resources to the organization of and preparations for the Summit of the
Future;
20. Encourages States and international donors, as well as the private sector,
financial institutions, foundations and other donors to support the participation of
representatives of developing countries in the Summit and its preparatory process;
21. Decides that the Summit shall be webcast, and encourages the President
of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to give the highest visibility to
the Summit, including during its preparation, through all relevant media platforms
and information and communications technologies.
102nd plenary meeting
8 September 2022

4/4

22-21687
