110

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the· Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
2431 st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3424 (XXX). Question of Brunei

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Brunei,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,25
Having heard the statement of a petitioner, Mr. A. M.
Azahari, President of the People's Party of Brunei
( Partai Rakyat Brunei), 26 which, in the 1962 election,
received 98 per cent of the votes cast,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as
well as other relevant resolutions and decisions of the
United.. Nations relating to the Territory, including in
particular the consensus on the question adopted by
the General Assembly on 13 December 1974, 27
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people
of Brunei to self-determination and independence in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Brunei;
3. Calls upon the administering Power, consistent
with its responsibility as the administering Power, to take
all steps within its competence to facilitate expeditiously
the holding of free and democratic elections by the
appropriate government authorities in Brunei in consultation with and under the supervision of the United
Nations, in accordance with the inalienable rights of
the people of Brunei to self-determination and independence, and further calls, prior to the elections, for
the lifting of the ban on all political parties and the
return of all political exiles to Brunei so that they can
participate freely and fully in the elections;
4. Calls upon the administering Power, in conformity with the provisions of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions, to extend full co-operation to
the Special Committee;
5. Requests the Special Committee to keep the situation in the Territory under review and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-first
session.
2431 st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3425 (XXX). Question of '.\lontserrat

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
25 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtierh Sessio11, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.1), chap. XX.
.
26 Ibid., T!1irtieth Session, Fourth Commi1tee, 2167th meeting.
2; Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631),
p. 117, item 23.

Independence to. Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territory,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 28 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in
May 1975 at the invitation of the administering Power,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, 29

Having heard the statement of the administering
Power,3?
Having also heard the statement of the Chairman of
the Visiting Mission, 31
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Comm~ttee on the Situatic::m with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Montserrat; 32
2. Notes with satisfaction the conclusions and rrcommendations of the United Nations Visiting Mission
dispatched to the Territory in May 197533 and expresses
its appreciation to the members of the Visiting Mission
for the constructive work accomplished and to the
administering Power and the Government of Montserrat for the close co-operation and assistance extended to the Mission;
3. Requests the administering Power to continue to
take all necessary measures to expedite the process of
decolonization in the Territory in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
4. Endorses the view of the Visiting Mission that
measures to promote the economic development of
Montserrat, within a framework of regional co-operation, are, inter alia, an important element in the process
of self-determination, and expresses the hope that the
administering Power will continue to intensify and
expand its programme of budgetary and development
aid;
5. Requests the administering Power, in the light
of the conclusions and recommendations of the Visiting Mission, to continue to enlist the assistance of the
specialized agencies and the organizations within the
United Nations system in the development and strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
full examination of this question at its 1976 session in
the light of the findings of the Visiting Mission, including the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Montserrat at an appropriate time, in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2431 st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
28 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 ( Al 10023/
Rev .1) , chaps. IV and XXVIII.
29 Jbid., chap. XXVIII, annex.
so Ibid., Tl,irtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2166th meeting.
a1 Ibid., 2170th meeting.
32 Jbid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (Al 10023/
Rev.l), chap. XXVIll.
as Ibid., annex, paras. 101-124.
