UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2457th

MEETING:

NEW

28 JULY

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

....................................

1

...............................................

1

agenda (S/Agenda/2457)
of the agenda

The situation

in the occupied

Letter dated 5 November
to the United Nations
(S/15481);

Arab territories:

19g2 from the Permanent Representative
of Morocco
addressed to the President of the Security Council

Letter dated 9 November
1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Niger to
the United
Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative
of Qatar to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent
Representative
of Democratic
Yemen to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15890)
. ..*....................................................

S/PV.2457

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Officiaal Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2457th
Held
President: Mr. LING

MEETING

in New York on Thursday,

28 July

Qing (China).

Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Char@ d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security comlcil (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983. from the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United ‘Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Democratic Yemen to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15890)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2457)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

1983, at 3.30 p.m.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): In
accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings
on this item [2401st, 2412th to 2414th and2438th meetings], I
invite the representatives of Algeria, Cuba, Democratic
Yemen, Egypt, the German Democratic Republic, Greece,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kuwait, Lebanon,Maii,
Morocco, Niger, Qatar, Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, Yemen and Yugoslavia
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber; I invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at the Council table.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the ChargC
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
.Representative of Qatar to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Democratic Yemen to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15890)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr, Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen),
Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic).
Mr. Dountas (Greece), Mr. Krishnan (India), Mr. RajaieKhorassani (Islamic RepubIic of Iran), Mr. Abulhassan
(Kuwait), Mr. Fakhoury &&anon), Mr. Traore (Mali), Mr.
Mrani Zentar (Morocco), Mr. Oumarou (Niger), Mr. JamaI
(eata@, Mr. Sat-r& (Senegal), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab
Republic), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr. Al-Qasimi (United Arab
Emirates), Mr. Sallam (Yemen) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia)
took the places reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber; Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organizution) took
a place at the Council table.

The meeting was called to order at 4.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda ‘was adopted

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received from the representatives of Afghanistan and
Malaysia letters in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);
1

10. In regard to the occupied ‘Arab territories, Israeli
policy has two major aspects: establishment of settlements on the land; and violation’of the human rights of
the indigenous civilian population of the land. The two
aspects are complementary.
The displacement of the
Arab population from its land is the first step towards
depopulation
of the Arab territories to bring in more
Israeli settlers.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarjf (Afghani:tan) and Mr. Zainal Abidin (Malaysia) took the places
.reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from Chinese):
Members of the Council will recall that the Council last
took up this matter at its 2438th meeting, on 20 May. The
Council is now continuing its consideration of the item
pursuant to the request contained in the letter dated 27
July from the representative of Democratic Yemen
addressed to the President of the Council [ZVl589a).

11. On more than one occasion the Council has discussed the question of Israeli settlements in the occupied
Arab territories, as well as the magnitude of the Zionist
settlement activities, which have intensified recently. It
has noted Israel’s cancerous methods. The members of
the Council have also had the opportunity to realize the
moral, political and economic dimensions of these activities, which are destructive to the Palestinian Arab
people and to the occupied Arab territories and have
adverse effects on peace and security in the region.

4. Members of the Council also have before them documents S/15869 and S/15886, which contain the text of
letters dated 13 and 26 July, respectively, from the representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Council.
5. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic): At
the outset I should like to quote what Mr. Menachem
Begin, the Prime Minister of Israel, said in 1981, at the
opening of the Ariel settlement, south of Nablus, in the
West Bank. He said, as reported by Ian T. Lustick in his
article “Israeli Politics and American Foreign Policy” in
the Winter 1982/83 issue of Foreign Affairs:

12. Although the Council expressed its position on this
question in resolution 465 (I980), in which it declares
these settlements illegal and illegitimate and considers
their existence and their continued construction
a
serious impediment to peace and calls for their dismantlement, some basic facts concerning this question must
be recalled and emphasized. They are as follows.

“I, Menachem, the son of ze’ev and Hasia Begin, do
solemnly swear .that as long as I serve the nation as
prime minister we will not leave any part of Judea,
Samaria, the Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights.‘**

13. First, Israel’s policy of establishing settlements is
illegal and illegitimate
and violates all international
norms and laws concerning war and occupation. The
permanent nature of these settlements has been proven
and is explicitly
acknowledged
by Israel. The
establishment of settlements is a means of seizing land
through the creation of a fait accompli by using military
force and coercion. I need not recall that such conduct is
in complete contravention of the Charter of the United
Nations and the provisions of international law, which
declare inadmissible the acquisition of the territories of
others by force. No wonder Israel does not deny that its
aims are diametrically
opposed to the aims and
objectives of the United Nations. All the legal arguments
advanced by Israel and its supporters cannot negate the
sixth paragraph of Article 49 of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949,’ which states:

6. Those words are an accurate interpretation of Israel’s
foreign policy and of its policy in the occupied Arab territories with regard to the legitimate Arab inhabitants and the
land. That statement by the current Israeli Prime Minister
and many similar statements and promises made by Israeli
officials and leaders clearly indicate the priorities of the
Israeli Government and the objective of its military and
political activities in the region. The annexation of the
occupied Arab territories, especially the West Bank, is the
central aim of the policy of the current Israeli Government.
7. To achieve that central aim, Israel has consistently
pursued various policies, all of which point in one direction, culminating in the facilitation of such annexation
and minimization of the cost and the risks of this process.
8. Israel has realized that the real impediment to its
assimilation of the Arab territories that would prevent the
so-called unity of Eretz Yisrael is a just and lasting peace.
It has sought by various means to oppose that peace, and
it has spared no effort to frustrate all endeavours that
tend to promote it. Resistance to peace and the foiling of
all attempts at its realization have become another central
aim of the Israeli policy.

“The Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer
parts of its own civilian population into the territory
it occupies.“*
14. The number of Israelis transferred by Israel to the
. occupied Arab territories since 1967 has now reached
more than 150,000, and they have been settled in a total
of 145 settlements built on about 60 per cent of the West
Bank, excluding the Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights.
Israel makes no bones about its intention to settle more
than 200,000 people in the occupied Arab territories by
the end of the decade in an embodiment of the Judaization undertaken by Israel in those areas. This represents
only some of Israel’s actions in carrying out this destructive settlement policy. Israel does not confine itself to

9. Paving the way tor me annexation of the Arab territories occupied in 1967-that is the focus of all Israeli
military and political actions inside the occupied Arab
territories and abroad.
*Quoted

in English by the speaker.

2

violating the sixth paragraph of Article 49 of the abovementioned Geneva Convention through the transfer of
its citizens to the occupied Arab territories in the context
of a programme of comprehensive settlement; it goes
.further m the violation of that Convention by using all
means to remove the indigenous Arab population from its
“homes, villages and cities and to deport it to neighbouring
States, thus violating the first paragraph of Article 49,
which provides .as follows:

tional security zones to protect its new zones, and on
and on, until the question of Israel’s security turns into a
continuous process of expansion at the expense of its
neighbours.

19. Fourthly, Israel’s settlement policies have forced it
to follow an expansionist, militaristic logic as it seeks to
expand its security zone for those settlements, first
within the borders of neighbouring
States and then
beyond, seeking living resources outside the borders of
“Individual
or mass forcible transfers, as’well as
the occupied territories, especially with regard to water,
deportations of protected persons from occupied terri- 3 which is one of the most important elements in the
tory to ,the territory of Occupying Power or to that of
Arab-Israeli conflict. Israel’s desire to realize an ancient
any other country, occupied or not, are prohibited,
historical myth based on its need to support agricultural
regardless of their motive.*‘*
settlements makes water one of the most important
resources for Israel, a resource that it must secure-even
15. What happened recently in Al-Khalil ‘(Hebron) and
from beyond its borders-if
it is to continue to support
what has happened there in the past, as well as the current
its failed agricultural
sector. Hence the organic link
between the Israeli settlement process and the growing
systematic terrorism being carried out in the towns of the
West Bank, the Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights, represecurity requirements that process entails. As a result,
sent steps towards the systematic emptying of those areas
the demarcation line between the requirements of secuby Israel, steps that are being taken in. full view of the
rity, on the one hand, and expansionism, hegemony and
world and with the possible approval and blessing of
aggression, on the other, has become blurred. Israel is
some.
the only ‘State in which security borders differ from political borders. It is also the only State that refuses to
.
define its political borders while establishing its security
16. Secondly, an accurate monitoring of the manner in
borders
on the territories of neighbouring States, and
which the settlements have been sited in the occupied Arab
even
others,
thousands of miles away.
territories clearly reveals the long-range strategic aims
Israel is seeking to achieve. The settlements have been built
20. Fifthly,‘ those who study the pace of Israeli settleaccording to an overall plan designed to disrupt any ecoment in the occupied Arab territories can clearly see an
nomic, geographic or demographic continuity between the
obvious relationship
between the failure of various
villages and cities in the occupied Arab territories. One of
peace
endeavours
and
the escalation of the settlement
Israel’s aims in its settlement strategy is to sap the unity
programmes. Israel realizes that there can be no peace
and the geographic, demographic and economic continuity
unless land is exchanged. That is why, on every occasion
of those lands and their populations in order to transform
on which concrete efforts have been made to give a real
the Arabs who remain in the area, in spite of the humiliaimpetus to the peace.process, Israel has sought to abort
tion and terrorism to which they are subjected by the
such a process by intensifying its settlement activity. It is
occupying Power, into creatures trapped like insects in a
an open secret that Israel’s repeated declaration of its
bottle, as Raphael Eytan, the former Chief of Staff of the
settlement policies and the magnitude they are to
Israeli army, stated before the Knesset Foreign Affairs and
assume over the next 5 to 10 years is a tactic designed to
Security Committee when he resigned his position. Mr.
use the settlement process to undermine peace efforts
Eytan’s statement exposed ‘the awful face of racism inherand to sow doubts with regard to their viability. In order
ent in the Israeli settlement p’olicy. It laid bare the true’face
to
foil the prospects for peace and to undermine any
of Israel’s‘policies with regard to the Arab nation, policies
justification for it, Israel has sought, since it first occuit tries .to camouflage with Talmudic and histdric argupied the Arab territories, to desecrate the sanctity of the
ments or pretexts of security.
Christian and Islamic holy places without any regard for
the feelings ,of the .millions of adherents of those two
17. Thir$ly, the use by Israel of religious and ‘historic
religions. It has planned and abetted the many attempts
pretexts or security concerns to justify its settlement policy
made to burn down the Al-Aqsa mosque, and to conis to engage in a distortion of facts. Acquiescence in such a
struct in its place the *second Temple. Every attempt to
heresy is a negation of history and of the progress of hisburn
down and desecrate this holy place has been cartory, as well as of the role of mankind and its ability to’
ried out either through Israeli plans or with its
control its destiny. It implies acquiescence in a kind of
encouragement.
fatalism that has no moral foundation.
‘.
. ,‘..I
21. This destructive settlement policy pursued,against
18. The settlements Israel claims are security zones
Arab territories and against the Islamic and Christian
require ‘further security zones around them, ,and they
holy places is accompanied by another inhuman policy
have turned into a source of friction with neighbouring
pursued’by Israel against the indigenous Arab populaArab States. Israel may well proceed to ask for addi:
tion of those territories. Israel has put the maximum
psychological and material pressure on the Arab citizens
*Quoted
in English
by the speaker.
in the occupied territories to force them from their
3

lands, so as to enable it to realize its aim of making the
26. Israel’s policy of oppression and settlement, aimed
whole of Palestine a land without people. The acts of
at realizing the dream of annexing the occupied ‘Arab
oppression carried out in the Arab city of Al-Khalil, the
territories, has been coupled with an external policy just
latest example of which was the 26 July attack ‘on the
as bad and foolhardy. Israel’s quest to swallow up the
Islamic University in Al-Khalil by Israeli settlers and
occupied Arab territories has made it necessary to
their murder of three civilians and wounding of 40 othpursue a foreign policy based on two principles: first, the
ers, were but the other half of Israel’s expansionist polimpossibility
of achieving peace and, secondly, the
icy. Israel assigns these acts of murder and aggression to
necessity of denying the existence of the Palestinian
its citizens in order to camouflage the truth, that it pracArab people and their legitimate rights on their own
tises State terrorism against the Arab citizens in the
soil. As a consequence, Israel is forced to undermine
occupied Arab territories, but this conduct deceives no
those people. To that end, it set out on a dangerous
one. Everyone realizes that these settlers are part of the p mission to take over the whole area, in keeping with its
official machinery of the occupation authorities and that
expansibnist; bloody policy, which includes the aim of
they are playing their central role of organizing and
fragmenting and dismembering the Arab world through
implementing
terrorist activities in a deliberate manner
exploiting the various political and social discrepancies
conducive to creating a social and psychological climate
there.
in which it is difficult for the Arabs to stay in their
homes, with the result that they are forced to leave Pal27. Israel’s intransigence and its denial of the right of
estine, giving it up for new Israeli settlers.
existence of the Palestinian Arab people, as well as of
that people’s right to self-determination
on its national
22. No fewer than half the articles‘that make UD the
territory,
in
Palestine,
have
led
Israel
to
its
present politiUniversal Declaration of Human Rights have bee; vi-&
cal
and
strategic
situation,
making
it
necessary
for it to
lated by Israel in carrying out its policy of occupying and
pursue
an
external
policy
towards
its
Arab
neighbours
Judaizing the Arab territories and displacing and fragand the Palestinian Arab people based on violence and
menting the Palestinian Arab people. But that policy has
the
use of force and on war as the only option. Israel
exceeded even the limits of violating human rights. It has
started
to act on the basis that it was easier for it to
come to be detrimental to the very existence and presence
destroy
the Palestinian Arab people and its supporters
of the Arabs in Palestine. However, certain circles that
than
to
recognize that people’s rights and to have diaclaim to protect human rights reject the denunciation of
logue with it. Therefore, Israel’s dealings with the Arabs
these Israeli practices and reject mention of the Palesand the Palestinians have been limited to two optionstinian Arab people when citing the victims of aggression
capitulation or destruction. Thus, as a result of its own
and external domination, oppression, arbitrary acts and
logic, Israel has imposed on the whole region a state of
the rule of terror.
tension and violence, keeping for itself the political and
military initiative through the excessive use of the latter.
23. Sixteen years of repugnant occupation, terror and
This has resulted in Israel’s indulgence in a policy of
oppression have cut the Palestinian people to the quick.
hegemony . and expansion, imposing fairs accomplis
The cases of poisoning which mysteriously occurred
instead
of following the path of coexistence and
among schoolgirls in the West Bank last March* and the
understanding.
mass anxiety that ensued among the civilian populations
are considered a moral and political condemnation of
28. In its attempt to justify its destructive external polIsrael’s oppressive policies and inhuman practices. They
icy
morally and legally, Israel has sought to perpetuate
are also considered a warning signal that should move the
two
myths: first, the alleged Arab threat to its existence,
international conscience and alert it to this odious. OCCUa threat which Israel created and expanded; and,
pation imposed on the Palestinian Arab people by the
secondly, the invocation of the legitimate right of selfoccupier.
defence. Thus, it is through its false claim that the Arabs
wish to destroy it that Israel has sought to justify its
24. The inability of the United Nations and the internaaggressive policies and its expansionist wars waged
tional community, and particularly of the Security Counagainst the Palestinian Arabs under the pretext of selfcil, to respond appropriately to the situation causes great
defence. But it has now become crystal-clear to all,
concern. What more is needed to move the international
including the members of the Council, that Israel is tryconscience than the despair, repression and suffering of
ing to destroy the Palestinian Arab people and to bring
the victims of occupation, which culminated in symptoms
to heel and dismember the Arab nation by invoking this
of mass hysteria among the civilians suffering under the
false threat to Israel’s existence posed by the Arabs.
yoke of occupation?
29. There is no need for me to delve into the details of
the organic relationship between Israel’s central aim-to
destroy the Palestinian Arab people and dismember the
Arab nation-and
its use of the pretext of self-defence.
Everyone knows that Israel has chosen to assume that it
may be permitted or admissible for a given State to place
its requirements for existence above the interests of the
international system, and it has used this as a pretext for

25. This shows the repugnance and invidiousness of the
occupation and the extent of the moral and political
responsibility borne by the United Nations’ for the Palestinian Arab people.
* An error
than “March”,

in the mimeographed
text, which said “February”
rather
gave rise to a controversy
at the 2461st meeting.

4

its expansionist policy. To round out its false claims, it
was necessary to invent the myth of a Palestinian and
Arab‘threat against the presence of Israel. The fact is
that Israel is seeking not to protect itself against the
Palestinians, but rather to destroy them. In this light, it is
obvious that selfdefence becomes, above all, a legitimate
right for the Arabs.

order to evacuate the Arab citizens and intimidate them
into leaving their homes and towns so that new Israeli
settlers can take their place.
35. We believe that the credibility of any peace initiative will depend on its clear acknowledgement
of the
situation and on its clear declaration of the illegality and
illegitimacy
of the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Arab territories. It must also take a, firm position
regarding Israeli practices such as those now being carried out in Nablus and Al-Khalil, aimed at emptying the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip of their legitimate landowners and populations and at arranging new mass
evacuation operations. These evacuation operations
now planned by Israel-the
beginnings of which we
have witnessed in Al-Khalil and Nablus-jeopardize
the
national security of Jordan as well as that of other:
neighbouring States. Such practices also pose a permanent threat to any hopes or aspirations for peace. Therefore, the credibility and seriousness of any call for peace
depend directly on its being characterized by commitment and responsibility regarding these practices and
the policies iinked to them, and on its rejection of those
practices and the granting to the international community of the opportunity to express its position on these
practices, through the Council. Failure to comprehend
the gravity of the situation would strike a fatal blow at
all possibilities for peace in the region and would lessen
the impact of any international or other peace initiative
aimed at resolving the problem of Palestine and the
Arab-Israeli conflict.

30. In order to achieve its policy, Israel has attempted,
making use of a sophisticated propaganda machine, to
distort and efface most of the genuine calls for peace and
appeals for moderation issued by the Arabs.
31. It is on the basis of this nolicv that what is called the
theory of Israel’s security hascoke into being. That theory is founded on aggressive, expansionist concepts and
principles. The first claim on which this theory is based is
for an incredible expansion of boundaries in the interests
of Israel; these embrace an area extending from North
Africa in the west to China in the east, as was stated by
Ariel Sharon, former Israeli defence minister. Another
facet is the attempt to hold a complete monopoly on military superiority and to pursue a policy of preemptive
war and surprise attack-in
other words, a total dependence on war as the only option in the relationship between
Israel and the Palestinian Arabs. Further, there is its continued expansion aimed at creating rings of security and
buffer zones around Israel in the shape of settlements or
other entities linked to Israel’s political-military
machine beyond the borders of the occupied Arab territories. Finally, we must not forget the political use of the
myth of an Arab threat, of which I have already spoken.

36. Finally, all of Israel’s claims and all its military
adventures cannot conceal two main facts: the illegitimacy of Israel’s occupation of the Arab territories, and
the impossibility of achieving peace unless that occupation is ended within the framework of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

32. That is the context within which we should assess
Israel’s claims regarding security and its unstinting efforts
to fight against peace and to reject compromise and moderation, as well as its creation of settlements, which are
used not only to serve its own interests incarrying out its
expansionist strategy but also to fight against peace,
undermining its principal pillar: the territory as set out in
Council resolution 242 (1967).

37. Because of its commitment to this position, Jordan
has, during the recent period, been working with all
seriousness and sincerity, in co-operation with all the
parties, to put an end to the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories, to liberate that land and its people from the
yoke of foreign rule through a comprehensive and just
peace based on the withdrawal of Israel from all the
occupied Arab territories, including Al-Quds, and the
realization of all the legitimate national rights of the.
Palestinian Arab people as well as its right to live in
peace within recognized borders. This will remain the
aim of Jordan’s foreign policy regardless of the obstacles placed in the path of peace. We hope that all the
parties will discharge their historical responsibilities
before it is too late.

33. This fatal policy has led tb the present stalemate in
the Middle East. Further, it has frustrated all the sincere
efforts aimed at saving the region from the evils of war
and destruction. It is this expansionist policy which dictated the terrorist acts against Palestinians in the West
Bank, in preparation for a wide-scale evacuation operation planned by the Israeli occupation authorities.
34. Objectively and frankly, we believe that Israel would
not have gone so far in the pursuit of its expansionist
policies had the Council been able to discharge its responsibilities as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
and had the great Powers, especially those with direct
responsibility, shouldered their duties regarding Israel’s
intransigence and its persistence in creating settlements in
the occupied Arab territories and in terrorizing the Arab
citizens in order to force them to flee their homes, as is the
case now in Al-Khalil. The recent events in Al-Khalil are
the beginnings of a systematic terror operation similar to
those carried out in Deir Yassin and other Arab cities in

38. In conclusion, I wish to express our admiration
and appreciation for all the efforts you, Sir, have made
during the period of your presidency of the Council.
.-

39. The PRESIDENT
(interpreration from Chinese):
The next speaker is the representative of Democratic
5

Yemen, who wishes to make a statement in his capacity,
as Chairman of the Group of Arab States at the United
Nations for the month of July. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

all the deadly weapons at its disposal, including those
that are internationally
prohibited, against the Lebanese
and ,Palestinian peoples. It perpetrated the massacres of
Sabra and Shatila, which claimed the lives of defenceless
Palestinians-women,
children and the elderly. Students
in cities of the West Bank have been poisoned. In the
last few days there have been deliberate military actions
by Israeli soldiers and Jewish ‘settlers against university
students in Nablus and Al-Khalil which claimed the lives
of a number of defenceless Palestinian students and
injured many others. These actions ‘are following one
after another: This morning’s papers inform us that Israeli
soldiers opened tire on Palestinian students, wounding
four of them. _

40. Mr. AL-ASHTAL
(Democratic Yemen) (interpreta-.
tion from Arabic): Allow me.at the outset to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for this
month. I need not list your outstanding qualities and wide
experience as the representative of a friendly country
which supports the just Arab causes, especially that of
Palestine. The past weeks have shown your great’competence in successfully conducting the Council’s business.
Also, I extend thanks to you and, through you, to the
members of the Council for the prompt response in convening this meeting at the request of the Group of Arab
States, over which I h&e the honour of presiding this
month. Perhaps this immediate response by the Council
reflects its recognition of the gravity of the ‘developments
in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories and’the
dangerous escalation of an already volatile sittlation’ in
the Middle East, posing a.threat to international peace
and security. We cannot but express thanks and appreciation to the representative of Zimbabwe for his able leadership of the Council during the month ‘of June..
.m

,_‘,
.-

44; All these developments emphasize the reality of the
Israeli policy aimed at depopulating the Palestinian teri
ritories, terrorizing the Palestinians and forcing them
out of their lands, and compromising
the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
and the establishment of their independent State. These terrorist
practices have recently assumed- a new dimension, since
they have spread to a large number of occupied Arab
and Palestinian cities and villages. They have also
assumed a certain vindictiveness under some false historical pretexts.

41. The grave -developments in the ocdupied Arab and
Palestinian territories are the natural result of what Israel
45. Israel would not have defied the international comhas represented since its establishment: ‘an expansionist
munity and persisted in its policy of aggression and
settler State in the heart of the Arab homeland. Itirael has
expansion but for the unlimited support it receives from
usurped the territories of Palestine and annexed the Golan
the United States, since the magnitude of United States
Heights and Jerusalem. It is also building settleinents in the
assistance increasei after each act of aggression Israel
occupied Arab and Palestinian territories and practising
commits against the Palestinian and other Arab peoples.
various forms of racist oppression against the Palestiuian
The United States Government has no qualms about
people. It. is confiscating that people’s territories, possesproviding’ Israel with all types of sophisticated military
sions and waters. It is seeking to annihilate, terrorize and
equipment and weapons. It stands alone in the Council
displace it. It also seeks to undermine the character, culture
in exercising the right of veto against draft resolutions
and historic landmarks of that people’s territories. All the
aimed at ending the aggression and achieving the withpractices of Israel in the occupied Arab and .Palestinian
drawal of Israel. It sides completely with the aggressorterritories confirm its expansionist policy, which is aimed at
Israel-and
protects its expansionist aspirations. It is
strengthening its hold, continuing its occupation, annexing
clear .now that there is a political identification
of the
the land and displacing the Palestinian people.’
United States with Israel which has culminated in the
‘.
Israeli-American
strategic alliance.
42. ‘We need not recall the categorical evidence that
Israel’s policy is directed against the land and the people.
46. ‘The vicious imperialist onslaught, under the leadThis policy has been confirmed by the public statements of
ership of .the United States and with the participation of
Israel’s leaders. The so-called security of Israel has ‘no geoIsrael, against the Palestinian people and the other Arab
graphical boundaries; it is a pretext to justify the exgansionpeoples is a desperate attempt to push through imperial-‘
ist and colonizing nature of that policy. In the context of this
ist conspiracies to place the entire Arab region under
Israeli policy, Palestinian and Arab territories have been , American control. The expansion of American military
seized by force and the Golan Heights and Jerusalem have
bases and the American military buildup in the region
been annexed. We have often warned that these steps are
fall within these schemes.
but a prelude to the annexation ofthe West Bank, the Gaze
*,
I
Strip and other occupied Arab territories. The invasion of
47: “Peace is indivisible’and
justice is not confined to
Lebanon by Israel in the summer of 1982 was fresh evidence
any one people. The question of Palestine represents the
‘of Zionist expansionist aspirations.
’
essence of the struggle in the Middle East. There can be
no lasting, comprehensive and just peace without total
43. Israel has escalated its brutal, arbitrary policy of
Israeli withdrawal from the Arab and- Palestinian terriannihilating
the Palestinian people. It has expanded’its
tories, including -Jerusalem, and the realization of the
settlements and persisted in the physical liquidation of
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including its,
the Palestinians and the practice of organized terrorism.
right to’return, to self-determination
and to the estabIn its aggression against Lebanon last year; Israel used
lishment of its own independent national State, under
6.

_.

the leadership
sentative.

of the PLO,

its sole legitimate

repre-.

48.’ If the Council is to uphold the. seriousness of its
resolutions and shoulder its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations, then it must condemn
Israel’s expansionist policies and practices in the occupied
Arab and Palestinian territories, which represent a flagrant violation of the principles of international law concerning the protection of civilians in occupied territories,
especially the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949.’ We also call upon the Council to take immediate
practical steps to deter the aggressor and put an end to
Israel’s flouting of the Council’s resolutions-in
this case,
especially resolutions 465 (1980) and 466 (1980), which
emphasize the illegality of the Israeli settlements.
49. Today the Council ‘is facing a critical and’difficult
test: either it shoulders its responsibilities in maintaining
international peace and security, or the Arab peoples,
foremost among whom are the Palestinian people, will
lose confidence in the ability of the Council to deter the
Israeli aggressor and terminate the policy of terrorism and
oppression; the situation in the region would then deteriorate to a point where it would be very difficult to control
the course of events.
50.

Will the Council make a move?

51. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprerurionfrom Chinese): The
next speaker is Mr. Massamba Sarre, the representative of
Senegal and Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
which the Council; at the 2401st meeting, extended an
invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
52. Mr. SARRl? (Senegal) (Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights, of the Palestinian People) (inter-returionfrom
French): I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, and, through you, the members
of the Council, for having been kind.enough to allow me
to take part in this debate on the situation at present
obtaining in the occupied Palestinian territories.
53. I should also like to congratulate you. Sir, on acceding to the presidency. You-represent a great country,
China-which
I visited quite recently as part of a peace
mission from the United Nations-a
country with which
my own country has the advantage of enjoying excellent
relations of co-operation based on mutual respect. Aware
as I am of your deep attachment to the noble purposes of
peac.e-and justice as defined in the Charter of the United
Nations, I am quite certain that the work of the Council
will be crowned with success. I should also like to pay a
tribute to your predecessor, the representative of Zimbabwe, who conducted the work of the Council during the
month of June with such tact and intelligence.
54. Two weeks ago, as Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian

People, I addressed both to you and to the SecretaryGeneral a letter in which I drew attention to the growing
tension in occupied Palestinian territories as a result of
the incidents which had taken place there. In that letter I
also requested you to take appropriate steps to restore
peace and tranquillity to those areas. Today, once again,
high feelings and emotion have prevailed over reason.
Violence has now become the law; innocent victims have
fallen. Unfortunately, at this rate one cannot but predict
other regrettable acts.
,
55. The Security Council, whose essential purpose is to
promote and safeguard peace, international security and
justice, should now more than ever be equal to its responsibility in helping to prevent such acts. Indeed, more than
that, the Council should avail itself of this opportunity,
thus responding to the appeals of ,the General Assembly
and other international bodies, to debate in greater detail
the question of Palestine as a, whole in order to find a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution. These constant
outbreaks which we have witnessed for some time now
are rooted in the fact that the Palestinian question has not
yet been settled.
,_
j.56. I have had frequent occasions to repeat before the
Council that to have the advantage of arms and force is
not the best way to settle a dispute or a conflict. Rather,
what we should do is to promote a ,climate of mutual
trust which would make it possible for all parties concerned to set aside their emotions and resolutely get
down. to the process of seeking peace, as defined by.the
United Nations and other appropriate bodies. In, this
context, I am thinking particularly of the recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People which advocate,
inter alia: Israel’s withdrawal from all Arab territories
occupied since 1967, in pursuance of Council resolution
242 (1967); implementation
of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people as defined in General Assembly
resolution 3236 (XXIX), namely, the right of- the Pales-,
tinians to return to their homes, the right to selfdeterminatiqn without external interference and the right
to independence and national sovereignty; the involvement of the PLO in any process that touches upon the
future of the Palestinian people; and, finally, the right of
all the States of the region to live in peace within recognized and secure frontiers.
57. --At the present stage, and in view of all the initiatives that have been taken in recent years, and which
presumably will continue in the future, bearing in mind
the conference that is soon to. be held at Geneva-a
conference for negotiation
and dialogue-nothing
should stand in the way of the implementation
of these
recommendations,
which are, furthermore, in harmony
with the purposes and principles of the Charter.
:
58. I have deliberately not gone into the history of the
.question of Palestine here in the Council; it is quite well
known. On behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the,Palestinian People, I simply
wish to say that the acts of violence we have witnessed in

. .I

recent months indicate the urgent need to put an end to
a situation that has continued for too long, a situation
whose consequences for international peace and security
are more incalculable than ever before.

the Nazis in Europe? What do we expect of those who
sank a ship, the Patria, that was carrying survivors from
the concentration camps in Europe? This is their nature. I
am referring to those racist Zionists who happened to
invade our country and cause ail these problems.

59. Those, briefly, are the remarks I wished to make at
this time, when the Council is considering the incidents
that have occurred in Al-Khalil. I am persuaded that, in
its desire to remain faithful to its mandate, the Council
will take those steps that will finally throw open the doors
to peace and justice for the Palestinian people as well as
for all the other peoples and States of the region.

65. As all members have read in the press, the Israeli
soldiers opened fire on students from the.Bir Zeit University. As a matter of fact, the reports tell us that a number
of tourists from Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway, the
Federal Republic of Germany and the United Kingdom,
who were visiting in occupied Palestinian territory and
were on a pilgrimage to the Holy City of Jerusalem,
decided to stage a sit-in on the premises of the International Committee of the Red Cross in Jerusalem. There is
still a lot of hope in human nature.

60. The PRESIDENT
(interphztion
from Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I now call.
61. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr. President, at the outset I should like to recall the
comradely and friendly relations between the great people
of China and the Palestinian people and between the
Government of China and the PLO. It is a historic fact
that China was among the first nations that granted diplomatic recognition to the PLO, if, indeed, the first such
recognition did not come from your great nation. I really
do not feel I can sufficiently praise your competence, Sir,
and your high qualities in conducting the work of the
Council.

66. Tulkarm was also under restrictions, and the Mayor
of Tulkarm had only this to say:
“This is a dangerous escalation by Zionist extremists
whom the enemy’s Government protects. In this case,
those primarily and ultimately responsible are the occupation authorities.”
67. The Mayor of Nablus, Mr. Shaka’a, who not
only was expelled by the Israelis but had his limbs
blown off-the Council dealt with that case-has spoken
of

62. It is a very sad and inhumane occasion that has
caused the Council to meet once again to consider the fate
of more than 4 million human beings known to some as
Palestinians. To us, it is the fate of our people, our nation,
our land.

.‘_
_‘,
,-_
._
,<_
_‘_
‘_
:_
_‘_
‘_
‘_
_‘_

“this increased colonization plus the spirit of hatred
and crime in attacking national and historic rights and
the facts of our people’s life in the occupied
territories.‘*

63. The 27th of July was supposed to be the day when
Ilham Abuzaru, a 20-year-old university student at the
Al-Najah University, was to be married. ‘Instead, her family had to bury her. She had died as a result of the actions
of the Zionist aggressors who shot her when she demonstrated against Zionist brutality against her colleagues at
Hebron University. But Ilham was only one more victim
of those crimes. Her three colleagues were killed the previous day in a dastardly act of genocide committed
against Hebron University when Israeli troops-as we
know, every Israeli is a member of the Israeli armed
forces-raided
the university, throwing hand-grenades
and gas bombs and using machine-guns and American
M-16 rifles, killing three students, young university undergraduates, and wounding ,30 others. One would say that
this was the behaviour of Nazi occupation forces. But
what is still more inhuman-if
there is room for humanity
any more-is the fact that those’ three victims were denied
normal burial. Their parents were called in the middle of
the night and were given the bodies. The parents and the
driver and a contingent of Israeli forces took the bodies
and, instead of burying them ‘with all respect, the order
was given to dump the three corpses in a graveyard. So
the Palestinian is denied even the right to be buried and be
accorded the normal burial ritual.

68. _ The Mayor also said that the occupied territories
were undergoing a profound and harsh ordeal as a result
of constant threats from the racist occupation forces. He
added:
“What happened yesterday expresses the occupation authorities’ continuation, with American cover,
of their crimes against our Palestinian people, in violation of human rights and international
laws and
conventions-in
the absence, of course, of international will to defend these civilized criteria that we
have achieved.*’
I take it that the Mayor was addressing himself to the
Council, and, as the representative of the Palestinian
people, I have thought it my duty to bring his message
across in the hope that our consciences here might
immediately
respond to his appeals.
69. What happened today, 28 July? Israeli troops
attacked demonstrators and 12 students were injured by
the army. When the ambulances rushed to transport the
wounded to hospital, they were prevented from doing so
by the military reinforcements that were dispatched to
Bir Zeit and onto the campus. In addition, the Director
of the Rafidia Hospital in Nablus was arrested by the
occupation authorities,
his crime being treating the

64. But, after all, what do we expect of those criminals
who killed their own people when they collaborated with
8

Palestinians who were wounded in the demonstrations.
He was ordered not to treat any injured demonstrator
without first obtaining written permission from the mil.itary government. I do not see how any doctor can carry
out his responsibilities and remain faithful to his oath if
he must wait until the sergeant in command shows up and
authorizes him to remove a bullet from someone’s leg or
abdomen or head.

the most viable parts of the West Bank and by the
expansion of others already in existence, as well as the
long-term planning of still more settlements.” ‘[SJ
13679, para. 46.1

70. The Secretary-General has responded and has issued
a statement. I wish to thank him for having responded
immediately, within his powers, to these acts. As is well
known, the Secretary-General issued a statement in which
he expressed his shock at the killing of three Palestinians
and the wounding,of 28 others at the Islamic University in
Hebron. He deplored this criminal act of violence and
urged the occupying Power to take immediate steps to
apprehend the perpetrators and ensure the protection of
the local population.
I wish to say to the SecretaryGeneral that the apprehension of the perpetrators seems
somewhat impossible in view of the fact that the perpetrators of the bombings of the cars of the Mayors of Ramallah and Nablus, an incident that the Council considered,
.
have not yet been apprehended.

II:

.

72. In commenting
on that ‘report, the Council
expressed the opinion that the Israeli Government had
to bear responsibility for the settlement programme that
it was implementing
as official policy. Of course, the ..
way Israel bears its responsibility is to show complete
disregard and contempt. And why should it do otherwise, since the Council has been prevented from taking
any concrete action and from exercising and invoking
the powers vested in it by the Charter of the United
Nations which we have adopted and to which we are
committed? ;
73. To turn to the issue before us, the problem in
Hebron began in 1968 when Moshe Dayan first permit:
ted and entered upon the process of Judaization of the
mosque in that city. For those who may not know it, the
mosque was built upon the’Machpelah Cave in Hebron
by the Muslims out of respect for the Patriarch Abraham, a clear evidence of their respect for him. This
mosque is still standing after 13 or 14 centuries. The
recent occurrence there was an escalated provocation by
the settlers, who wanted to expand. The Government of
Israel, which is the occupying Power, using the pretext of
security needs, occupies a building and then eventually
hands it over to the settlers. On the pretext of security,
therefore, the Israelis can expropriate without having to
go through any legal process. It is security, after all.
.
74. Then, on 10 July 1983, the Deputy Prime Minister,
a certain David Levi, who is also the Minister for Housing, told reporters that the Israeli cabinet had decided
on a two-stage plan for the construction of a Jewish
quarter in Hebron. That plan projected the settlement ‘in
the next three years of 500 Jewish families in .the commercial heart of the city. Establishing that number of,
residences or houses for those people would entail the
eviction or expulsion of the population-or
its eliminai
tion; should it insist on defending its right to survive and
to stay in its own homes, the Israelis would have only
one way to deal with that, and that is physical elimination. That campaign of intimidation,
the campaign of
terror, would eventually become a real campaign of
physical elimination
of the Palestinian people.
.
75. Of course, some Israelis might say: “Oh, but this is
done by those fanatics who want, to be in Kiryat Arba,”
or whatever it is, but we know that the Nahal, the army
units that cqmbine settlement activities with military
service, also are involved in this process. They are planning to establish nine ‘military settlements in Judaea and
Samaria within the next few months. Thus, the Council
can see that one cannot really draw a distinction between
an illegal fanatic group ‘and the Nahal and in the final
analysis what is known as the Israel Defence Forces,
which is in fact a Nazi blitzkrieg group.
.
76. Then the Israelis thought that the Municipal Council of Hebron was not really accommodating,
and all of
:

71. What is taking place in the occupied Palestinian territories is nothing new. At’the meeting of 22 March 1976
[Z&93& meeting], the attention of the Council was called
to the very grave and explosive situation prevailing in the
occupied territories. Military occupation engenders resistance, and resistance is a sacred right and duty. I think that
all of our colleagues present here who have been under
foreign occupatiow- whether colonial, imperialist, N&i or
neo-Nazi, all who have fought against foreign occupation,
know that they must exercise their right to resist it and
that it is their duty to do so. At that meeting, we drew the
Council’s attention to’ a tendency that was becoming
clearer with time. A certain rabbi by the name of Moshe
Levinger had appeared on Israeli television on 19 March
and had exhorted the townspeople to shoot to kill. The
rabbi was occupying part of Hebron at that time. He was
reported to have said that he had issued the order because
the Arabs had to be taught a lesson and put in their place
[ibid., para. 531. By shooting them, one presumes that
“putting them in their place” means killing them and
dumping them in one of the pits over there. The situation
in those territories has not changed in any way for the
better. How could it, with occupation by neo-Nazis? The
Council had had the matter before it for quite a long time,
and in March 1979, in resolution 446 (1979), it established
a commission to examine the situation relating to settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967, includ- ,
ing Jerusalem. A report submitted by that commission,
which was not permitted to investigate what was happening on the spot or on site, contained the following
statement:
,
“In complete disregard of United Nations resolutions and Security Council decisions, Israel is still pursuing its systematic and relentless process of colon&
tion of the occupied territories. This is evidenced’by the
stated policy of constructing additional settIements in
9

:
.

a sudden. they decided that the Mayor and the Council
., should be expelled. What is the charge there? According
to The Jendem
Post: “The court has issued an interim
injunction barring any further demolition or construction in the Jewish quarter. Among Al-Natshe’s”-AlNatshe is the name of the Mayor of Hebron--“‘administrative irregularities’
and ‘criminal -offences* which
justified his dismissal was the fact that he had petitioned
the court.” The fact is that Al-Natshe’ petitioned the
High Court of Justice and that is where he received that
injunction, simply because he had exercised a right to go
to the court in a so-called democratic State. I emphasize
“democratic”.
Anyone who goes to the High Court of
Justice is fired. I think that the next move would be that
he would be fired on and eliminated.
:

82. Is this all accidental7 It is not, because Interior Minister Yosef Bu.rg has made it very clear that the right of
Jews to live in Hebron is “above any discussion”.
.
83. Moshe Arens, the exdiplomat in Washington, now
visiting Washington as Defence Minister, has said that
Israel, with one of the world’s best armies, does not need
and’ will not have private militias. Mr. Arens, a graduate
of Massachusetts Institute of Technology-a
superfabricant of sophisticated planes, etc.-says that Israel
does not need those militias, yet members of them even go
to their Friday night religions ritual with machine-guns,
simply because they know that they are trespassing.
84. The question remains: what is the job of the Israeli
military governor in the occupied Palestinian territories?
It has not changed. In February 1982, the professor who
was a general, or the general who became a professor
and ‘who was a military
governor-he
eventually
resigned because he realized that he was really committing a crime against humanity-said:.

77. Another of the accusatrons on the basis of which he
was fired was that he had been receiving enemy funds.
What were those enemy funds? .It is true that the Arab
world and our Arab brothers and the Palestinians away i
from Palestine contribute to the development, of their
home towns. Natumlly, Hebron. receives contributions
from sister municipalities,
from ‘Palestinians who, live
away from there and make some money. Because the city
of Hebron receives some money for local development
and for a local development programme, the Mayor. is
expelled.

‘?I’here is an understanding that the separation of
executive functions between military
and civilian
affairs would better suit the needs of the population
and the policy aims of the Government.
But, of
course, we hope and believe that the atmosphere in
the area will be such that moderate people, pragmatic
people, will be encouraged to join the peace process,
and in that respect we may be in a sense preparing a
political atmosphere which may be conducive to the
full implementation
of, the Camp David accords.”
:
He continued, saying that it is

78. What is a travesty of justice hereis that neither tbe
first charge nor the second was brought to court. The man
was summarily tired. According to The Jerusalem Postand it has a nice comment here: “One does not have to be
a lawyer to know that publishing such charges without
proving them is a libel.” Thii libel is committed by the
Government of Israel against Palestinians.
79. The JerusaIerh Post had a long editorial on this travesty
of justice. My eye was caught ‘by a passage saying that the
answers given by the.Israeli authorities would not “solve the
basic problem posed by Jewish settlers in the heart of
Hebron who were regarded as, illegal by Prime Minister
Begin’s first govemment”~ I repeat that word, “illegal”: the
settlements are illegal. Maybe not only would Prime Minister Begin’s firstgovernment reiterate that, but Washington
would again understand that even the Israelis consider
those settlements .to be illegal, so I do not see what the
United States is defending there. Because the United States
is defending the .Israelis, the Israelis have no reason to heed
and abide by Security Council resolutions.
80. ‘On the day that the young Aharon Gross was killed
in Hebron, the Mayor of Hebron himself issued a statement in which he said: “Such’acts create disturbances and
instability; violence does not serve the inhabitants, but
rather makes life tenser.” That was the comment bf the
Mayor of Hebron when young Aharon, Gross, an American citizen ,who ‘was there to settle, maybe in the house of
an Arab, was killed in the streets of Hebron. ;81. It was aiieged in the press that Israeli ‘soldiers stationed nearby did not run to help Aharon Gross because
they thought he was an Arab. So, when an Arab is stabbed,
one can let him bleed and die. So what? ,
‘.
:

“only through legitimatron from within that we can
help realize the Zionist dream, subjugate the Palestinians and seek acquiescence from the neighbouring
Arabs”.
85. Mr. Milson, the military general who became ,a
professor, realized that what he had written and said
was not true because there was no way for him. to
encourage people to live in peace and join the peace
process. His mission was subjugation, and the Palestinians under occupation will certainly not be sitting ducks
but will resist, ,for that is their right and their duty.
86. The Council is meeting; what do we.really expect
from this meeting? The Council is in a position-and
has the power under the Charter-to
ask for an immediate termination of the occupation. After all, there is
unanimity that that occupation is illegal. Why, then,
should the Council not take action to see to it that that
occupation is brought to an end? If a State Member of
the United Nations refuses to comply, then the Council
can, of course, apply the provisions of the Charter.
There is no room in the United Nations for people who
reject the decisions of the Council, especially when that
rejection brings so much misery and bloodshed into the
y country-my
country.
10

a

87. As to the role of the United States, I am not fooled
by statements that it condemns some terrorist acts somewhere. I cannot explain a condemn&ion
of a terrorist
act when a Government like that of the United States
has donated to Israel, from 1948 to 1982, $24 billion.
Since 1974, almost half of Israel’s military assistance
from the United States has been in the form of grants;
since 1975, economic aid has taken the form of cash
transfers, meaning that ftmds are ilot linked to specific
programmes or commodity import requirements. So we
can see that the financier of all these crimes is the United
States Government. I should not like to tell the United
States how it can use the American taxpayer’s money for
better purposes.

i

_

and Jerusalem. I do not think that the Council will have a
problem with that. The problem for the Council will be
how to implement such a resolution. I am not here to
suggest or prescribe a formula, but I think that the Council
should be enabled to do this. If not, the Council will be
condemning the region to perpetual bloodshed and to
perpetual crimes against the Palestinian people and the
Arab people.
94. We trust and we hope that, before these meetings end,
such a decision will be taken.
95. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): Sir, since this is the
first time I am addressing the Council under your presidency, I wish to join my colleagues who have done so
befofe me in offering our congratulations to you on your
assumption of this high office for the month of July. The
skill and wisdom with which you have guided the important work of the Council during this month have been
exemplary. I wish also to pay a warm tribute to your
predecessor, Mr. Mashingaidze, of Zimbabwe, who conducted the work of the Council last month with great
distinction and success.

88. According to a report by the Central Intelligence,
Agency of the United States; Israeli expectations are
that the United States will fund half of Israel’s defence
budget. Israeli documents show that United States
assistance funded 37. per cent of the Israeli defence
budget for fiscal 1982.
89. That information is drawn from a paragraph which
does not appear in a report on United States assistance to
the State of Israel: it was deleted. I am shocked that this
report, prepared by the United States General Accounting
Office, was sent to the Congress-to the representatives of
the American people-with
such a paragraph deleted.
They even censor their own reports to their own people.
, Talk about democracy and freedom!

96. The Council ,is addressing itself once again today
to a grave situation in the occupied Arab territories. The
tragic events which are unfolding before our eyes deepen
the concern and anguish of the international
community. The representative of Jordan; the representative of
Democratic Yemen, Chairman of the Group of Arab
States; and the Observer of the PLO have already described in detail the spiral of violence which is gripping
Hebron, Nablus and other cities in the occupied West
Bank, as well as the recent instances of persecution and
harassment of the Palestinian population by the Israeli
occupation authorities.

90. In the State Department-and
this too has been
censored-it is believed that $1.7 biflion will become the
new minimum for aid to Israel for arms and so forth.
91. But there is-something still more drastic here. The
United States is financing the Israeli military industry,which sells to the world arms and ammunition worth more
that $2 billion. The same report-and this is another paragraph that was deleted: maybe they are afraid of their own
people; I do not know-says that:

97. The death of three Palestinians at the hands of Israeli
terrorists and. the violent means with which the Israeli
authorities suppressed the protests of the Palestinians in
Hebron and other cities are links in a chain of unrelieved
tragedy for the Palestinian people, starkly exemplified in the
massacre of the innocents at Sabra and Shatila. This violence is the direct consequence of Israel’s continued occupation of the Arab and Palestinian lands and of its relentless
policy, pursued in defiance of-world opinion, of absorbing
the occupied territories into a Greater Israel.

“The demand for Israel’s military equipment is growing. Israel’s increased capabilities in the production of
high-technology
mijitary
items and the growing
.demand for this equipment will serve to boost foreign
sales. The market for Israeli-produced equipment will
be enhanced because its effectiveness in combat was
demonstrated in Lebanon’*-poor
Lebanese people,
poor Lebanon. “The picture would brighten for Israeli
military exports even more if the United States permits
third-world transfers ‘and assists the Israelis in their
exports to the American market.”
._

98. The violence in Hebron reminds us that the situation
in the Middle East will remain explosive and the threat
posed by it to international peace and security will continue
to grow as long as Israel persists in the occupation of the
Arab and Palestinian territories and refuses to respect the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to freedom and
nationhood.

92. I do not think I need any further proof.of the collusion, the complicity, of the United States in these &ninal
acts against our people and against the stability of our
region.

99. The Council must fulfil its responsibility to protect
the Arab and Palestinian population of the occupied
territories and save them from the systematic campaign
of harassment and threats which is being carried out
with the sole objective of driving them out of their
homeland to make pIace for new Israeli settlers.

93. Once again: what do we expect from the Council? We
expect some action and that the action should come in the
form of very clear-cut language demanding that Israel
withdraw immediately and unconditionally from the occupied territories: the Palestinian and other Arab territories
11

100. The Israeli settlements in the occupied territories are
the principal vehicIe of the Israeli policy of annexing those
territories and expelling the Arab and Palestinian inhabitants. The settlements have also become the main source of
violence and conflict. Not only have they been established
on usurped Arab land and property but settlers are allowed
to carry arms, which is a constant source of harassment and
provocation to Arab inhabitants, inevitably leading to tension and clashes.
101. The events in Hebron are a grim reminder of the
consequences of the Israeli decision to create a settlement in
the heart of that city. This is not an isolated decision. Israel’s
relentless pursuit of its settlement policy is evident from
information contained in a letter dated 25 May from the
representative of Jordan concerning Israeli settlement activities during the months of March and April 1983 [S/1.5810,
annexes 1 and 1.. In those two months, the Israeli occupation authorities established three new settlements and confiscated 33,050 dunums of land in the West Bank. The letter
also points to an Israeli scheme for the establishment of 15
new settlements around the city of Jerusalem [ibid, annex
IIIJ
102. It is well known that, within the broader perspective
of the fundamental prerequisites for peace in the Middle
East, an essential step required of Israel is to abandon its
policies of repression and halt the establishment and expansion of its illegal settlements in the occupied territories.
103. The Council pronounced itself unequivocally on
the illegality of Israel’s settlement policy in resolution 252
(1968). Subsequently, in resolution 465 (1980), the Council determined that all measures taken by Israel to change
the physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure or status of the Palestinian and other
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem,
or any part thereof have no legal validity and that Israel’s
settlement policy constitutes a flagrant violation of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ and also a
serious obstacle to achieving peace in the Middle ‘East.
104. The Council must reaffirm its stand that the Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories are illegal and must
make yet another effort to compel Israel to respect the
Council’s relevant resolutions.
105. Israel must realize that peace can be achieved only
on the basis of justice and international law. Its policies of
repression in the Palestinian homeland and its wars of
aggression against Arab neighbours have demonstrated
that peace cannot be built by the use of force and terror.
The resolutions of the Council and various other peace
initiatives, in particular the peace plan adopted at the
conclusion of the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference, held
at Fez in November 1981 and September 1982 [see
S/Z55ZO, annex], have offered several opportunities to
bring the Middle East conflict to an end. Instead of grasping these opportunities for peace, Israel has responded by
a greater assertion of its military preponderance- and a
more vivid demonstration of its will to perpetuate its occupation of the Arab and Palestinian territories.’

106. In resorting to the Council, the Arab States and the
PLO have once again shown their faith in and reliance on
the United Nations for the resolution of the Palestinian
question and the settlement of the Middle East conflict.
The Council’s capacity to act in the face of Israel,‘s intransigence remains seriously impaired by the protection and
support available to Israel from powerful friends and
allies. It is these friends and allies which bear the chief
responsibility for exerting influence on Israel to abide by
the universally recognized norms of international law and
behaviour. It is they, again, whose actions will enable the
Council to fulfil its promises to the Palestinian and Arab
people in the occupied territories.
107. It must be remembered that the tragic death of innocent Palestinians in the city of Hebron, which. has caused us
to meet today, is a manifestation of the grim reality of the
deteriorating situation in the occupied territories, for which
Israel must assume full responsibility. Israel can be restrained only if the Council can fulfil its clear responsibility
to censure Israel’s conduct and condemn its policies of
repression and violence in the occupied territories.
108. In the kind of world in which we live, repeated
encounter with tragedy can breed insensitivity to injustice,
suffering and pain and induce loss of the ability to feel
moral anger. Let us not lay ourselves- open to such a
charge by failing to respond appropriately to the consequences and the fact of Israeli occupation of the Palestinian homeland and the denial of the Palestinian people’s
fundamental human rights.
109. The PRESIDENT
(interpreration from Chinese):
The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
110. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): At the outset may I
thank you, Mr. President, and, through you, the members
of the Council, for the courtesy -of having invited me to
address the CounciI.
111. I should like to take this opportunity to felicitate
you, Sir-a distinguished diplomat of outstanding qualities from a country with which India has cordial
relations-on
your assumption of the presidency for the
month of July. Your ready response to the request for
the convening of the Council to consider the recent
developments in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories is indeed a testimony to your concern and sensitivity to the enormity of the problems faced by the
Palestinians under Israeli occupation. It is our sincere
expectation that the current series of meetings under
your able presidency, combining your personal charm
and high diplomatic skill, will lead to effective action by
the Council to restore the rule of law and respect for
human rights in occupied Arab lands.
112. The Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries, which met in New York yesterday, heard
extremely moving accounts of the recent developments
in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories from the
representative of the PLO. Our feelings of-anguish and
12

indignation have been further deepened after hearing his
presentation to the Council today.

mainly due to the arrogance and intransigence of Israel,
which has deliberately defied the will of the international
community. The time has come to put an end to this
situation and to strive for a just, durable and comprehensive peace in West Asia which would enable the Palestinian people to exercise their rights in freedom and
sovereignty in their independent homeland.

113. The representatives who have spoken before me
have again placed before the Council a detailed exposC
of the recent tragic events in the occupied territories,
providing clear evidence of the increasing acts of brutality and repression being perpetrated there by the Israeli
authorities.
We have been following with increasing
concern and alarm the continuing policy of oppression
and acts of terrorism pursued by the Israeli occupation
forces in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories. We have been shocked, in particular, to learn of
the occurrences in the city of Al-Khalil (Hebron) where
armed Israeli elements raided Hebron University,
throwing hand-grenades and gas bombs while shooting
at random at the students; this resulted in the death of a
number of students and the wounding of many others.
This is not an isolated event; similar serious armed
attacks have been reported in Nablus and Bir Zeit. Raids
and indiscriminate
killing, murder, torture, imprisonment and harassment of Palestinians have become daily
occurrences. The present incidents have come in the
wake of numerous tragic incidents following the genocidal massacres at Sabra and Shatila. Israel has been
relentlessly pursuing its policy of intimidation
of the
civilian population and consolidation of its stranglehold
over the occupied Arab territories.

116. The Council should take effective and urgent action
to prevent further bloodshed and misery in the occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories. It should also condemn
the recent incidents in Hebron and other cities and fix
responsibility for these atrocities on the occupying Israeli
forces. The Council should declare again in categorical
and unambiguous terms the illegality and inadmissibility
of the policies and practices of Israel in establishing settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967 and
should secure the annulment of all measures and actions
taken by Israel in this direction. Lastly, the Council
should strive to find a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the question of Palestine on a priority basis.
India, as the current Chairman of the Movement of NonAligned Countries and as a country which has stood by
the Palestinians in their legitimate struggle for nationhood, stands ready to co-operate with the members of the
Council in their endeavours in this direction.
117. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese):
The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to speak, and I now call on him.

114. The time has come to put an immediate end to the
bloodshed and continuing harassment of the Palestinians
and to restore peace and order in the occupied territories.
The Council should take determined action to deal with
the present situation, which constitutes a flagrant violation of international
law. Israel should be called to
account for its innumerable acts of omission and commission. It is imperative that Israel should be made to discharge its obligations under the relevant international
conventions that dictate civilized behaviour on the part of
occupying Powers towards the people of occupied territories. Israel’s policies and practices of establishing settlements in the occupied territories are illegal and contrary
to resolutions of the United Nations, and, as such, they
should be denounced. At the same time, the international
community should strive for a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution to the conflict in West Asia without which
no peace can prevail in the region.

118. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr. President, I thank you for calling on me again. I
have just received the following message from Mr.
Yasser Arafat, the Chairman of the Executive Committee of the PLO. It is in Arabic because it was dictated to
us by telephone.
“The Security Council of the United Nations meets
at the request of the PLO, the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, to consider the
barbaric acts of aggression committed
by armed
Zionist groups, with the direct participation
of the
Israeli army and with the support of the Israeli
Government,
against our people in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The latest of these acts of
aggression was the horrible massacre perpetrated by
those gangs on the campus of Al-Khalil University.

115. The fundamental principles of, and the basic framework for, a solution of the conflict in West Asia already
exist in the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, in the Fez peace plan [ibid.] and
in the declarations of the non-aligned countries, most
recently the Political Declaration adopted at the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at New Deihi from 7 to 12 March
1983 [S/15675 and Corr.1 and 2, annex]. These principles
are well known and need no reiteration. No solution to
the problem of the Middle East can be envisaged without
taking into account the inalienable national rights of the
Palestinian people and the exercise by them of their right
to self-determination. Our efforts so far to find a comprehensive solution to the problem have not succeeded

“The actions of the occupying enemy are aimed at
placing our people in the occupied Palestinian territories before two options: either to die at the hands of
these criminal gangs or to abandon its territory. The
aggressors used automatic weapons and grenades and
transformed the campus of one of our largest universities in the West Bank into a battlefield containing
the bodies of our students, male and female, thus
committing another crime to be added to the annals
of their crimes and massacres, which have not ceased
against our people throughout the history of its struggle to establish its national independent existence,
with the aim of undermining the steadfastness of this
13

people, displacing it and occupying its land to expand
their aggressive entity.
“The dismissal of the Mayor of Al-Khalil and of
the elected Municipal Council and their replacement
with Israeli military personnel, in addition to the
demolition of the houses of Palestinian Arab citizens,
the desecration of our holy places in Al-Khalil, the
displacement of the people to replace them with Zionist settlers, the arrest of hundreds’of citizens and the
oppression and repression of our people in other cities, such as Bir Zeit-all
of this reinforces our conviction that the occupying invaders are persisting in their.
criminal scheme, despite international condemnation,
and riding roughshod over all international laws and
norms and resolutions of the United Nations.
‘The acts perpetrated at Al-Khalil University are a
link in the series of deliberate and planned acts of
aggressions committed
by the Israeli Government
against our educational and cultural institutions,
whether by imposing a blockade on the universities of
Bir Zeit, Bethlehem or Al-Najah,
in Nablus, or
through the dismissal of professors and the arrest of
hundreds of students, the closing down of universities
and the repeated attempts at interfering in curricula
under the pretext that those universities have been
transformed into hotbeds of support for the PLO and
resistance against the Zionist occupation.

“The PLO is confident that you stand by our people
in the face of these barbaric crimes committed by racist,
Nazi and Fascist regimes against centres of education,
culture and civilization. The PLO calls upon the international community, which you represent in the Security
Council, its living conscience, to condemn these racist
practices and to seek to ‘put an end to them and to
support the inalienable national rights of our people,
including
its right to return, its right ^ to selfdetermination and its right to establish its own independent Palestinian State on the soil of its national land.
“Our people looks forward to your meetings, fully
confident of your support for its struggle and its inalienable rights and certain that you stand strongly against
aggression and against racist aggressors.
“Wishing
victory.“*

‘you. success-it

is a revolution

The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.
:
-NOTE

Series, vol. 75, No. 973.

’ United

Nations,

Treaty

* Quoted

in Arabic

by the speaker.

until

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
thr
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dCpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations L’nirs.
Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK
k,3naHH$t

IlOJlYYMTb

M3AAHMR

Opt-aHH3aUtiti

OPTAHM3AUMM

06l.entiHettHblX

tiareiircrnaxnoncexpaT(oiiax~upa.
Mara3tiHe

HRH

nponaxe

s3nam21,

COMO

CONSECUIR

nufume

ITO anpecy:

HbtO-kiOpK

tint4

PUBLICACIONES

OEi’bELlMHEHHblX

Hauuii

MOiliHO
KytttITb
B KHtlj);HblX
HaBonHTecnpaBKH06ti3naIinrXBBaUteSlKHttX~0~l
OpraHt43aUUI
06benHHeHHblX
Haurtic,
IfCeHeea.

DE LAS NACIONES

HAUMil
Mara3MHaY

CeKUllR

no

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

90-60205-August

1991-2,050
