United Nations

PLENARY
MEETING
572nd

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

(CLOSING

Saturday,

MEETZNG)

10 November
1956,
at 10.30 c4.m

Oficial Records
FIRST

EMERGENCY

CONTENTS

SPECIAL

SESSION

New

York

sional agenda of the eleventh regular s’ession, as a matter of priority, the item now on the agenda of the first
emergency special session, which is the question conAgenda item 5 :
sidsered
by the Security Council at its 749th and 750th
Question considered by the Security Council at its
meetings. It also ref’ers to the eleventh regular session
%zh
and 750th meetings, held on 30 October
. . . . . . . . l.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1 131
for its consideration the records of the meetings and the
Transfer of the item to the provisional agenda of
documents of the first emergency special session, inthe eleventh regular session of the General
cluding the draft resolutions contained in documents
Assembly ,I......................................
131
A/3272 and A/3273.
5. I shall speak first of the transfer of this item. I am
President:
Mr. Rudecindo ORTEGA (Chile).
not quite certain at the moment whether, on constitutional grounds, an emergency special session could
validly transfer items to a regular session. I am not
quite
certain at the moment; I have not given it much
AGENDA ITEM 5
thought, but these are the points which occur to my
mind. This first emergmcy special session was called
Question considered by the Security Council at its
under rule 8, paragraph (b), of the General Assembly’s
749th and 750th meetings, held on 30 October
rules of procedure, following a request of the Security
1956
Council, by a vote of seven members. It was convened
?kANSFER
OF TNE ITEM TO THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
for the purpose of considering the question considered
OFTHE ELEVENTI-IREGULARSESSION
OB THEGENERAL
by the Security Council at its 749th and 750th meetASSEMBLY
ings. In other words the primary and sole purpose of
1. The PRESIDENT
(translated frolyl Spa&.sJzJ:
th’e convening of this first emergency special session
This meeting has been convened to decide whether the
was to consider that item, not to transfer it to another
item before this first emergency specialr,,~~~,~Q~*~~~~~~~ session, because in a constitutional and juridical sense
an emergency special session is a body distinct from a
..~~.t~n~e~~~d.,*~~“~tl~~ .p-9~isinnal,. ageada,.nf.. the eleventh
regular session of the General Assembly. That, I hope,
reela?, sessipn”,of ~,the-General, ,,&sembly. A draft resois quite clear; the two Assemblies can even coexist in
l~t~ciiTtYT’EiZ’““i&c~
hbs been submitted by the United
a legal sense. I do not: think there can be any. legal
States delegation [A/3329].
obstacle to the General Assembly’s holding its regular
2.
Mr. ‘b”f”~~~~;~~~~~iu~~o~.~~~m~~ted
LoDGE
<United-States
of America)
The
Duroose
.bv mV: delesession while an emergency special session is being
held, in other words, there is no legal obstacle to the
gatibn [A/3329]
is to bring about consider&ioi
at an
coexistence of the two bodies. That is my point. I have
early date, in the regular session of the General Assemsome doubts whether any emergency special session
bly, of the two draft resolutions which my delegation
could validly transfer for consideration by another
sponsored and which aim at a long-range approach to
Assembly items that were given to it for its own conthe problems of Palestine and Suez [A/3272, 32733.
sideration. In this respect I am expressing only my
These two draft resolutions have been pending here for
doubts ; I am not quite certain about it.
some time. I think that everyone is familiar with them
and knows that they aim at getting at the basic causes.
6. On the other hand, it is my vi’ew that the procedural
basis for this United States draft resolution [A/3329]
3. We did not want to press for action on those two
is rule 15 of th’e rules of procedure. I hope that I am
draft resolutions at this special session because we did
not mistaken in this, and I should be happy to be cornot want the actions that have been taken at the special
rected at any time by the representative of the United
session to be hampered. We wanted to be sure that
States. I have examined with some care the preparation
those actions were in fact being carried out - that the
of items for the regular session, the provisional agenda
cease-fire and the withdrawal, and all those things,
and supplementary items as governed by chapter II,
were really well established. Inasmuch as our two draft
rules 12 to 14, of the r&s of procedure; and, as I see
resolutions deal with basic causes, we wanted all delethe case, rule 15 should provide the procedural basis
gations to have time to study them, to think about the
for the inclusion of the present item in the provisional
matter and to reoeive instructions. We think it is imagenda of the regular session of the General Assembly.
portant to arrive at an equitable and just solution of
these problems which have caused the world so much
7. Rule 15 contains two parts. The first part of the
anxiety, That is the whole purpose of this very short
rule states that additional items of an important and
draft resolution contained in document A/3329 - to
urgent character - and the question coasidered by the
see that these are transferred to the regular session for
Security Council at its 749th and 750th meetings is
urgent consideration there.
certainly of an important and urgent character - may
) : The draft resolube placed on the agenda of a regular session by a majorplace on the provii$ vote of the Members present and voting, Let us
131
A/PV ,572
Page

132

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

assumethat the “General Assembly” referred to in the
first sentence of rule 15 is this emergency special session of the Assembly. Let us also assume that this
emergency special session decides, by a majority of the
Members present and voting, to plaoe the question considered by the Security Council at its 749th and 750th
meetings on the agenda of th’e eleventh regular session.
How wise would such a decisio’n be?
8. Let us examine the second sentence of rule 15. That
sentence dleals with the way in which the additional
items referred to in the first sentence may be considered by the Assembly. It states that no additional item
may be considered until seven days have elapsed since
the item was placed on the agenda, unless the General
Assembly decides otherwise by a two-thirds majority
of the Members present and voting, and until a committee has reported upon the question concerned, Let US
again assume that the item discussed during this first
emergency special session of the Assembly has been
transferred to the agenda of the regular session. How is
that item to be considered by the regular session? Under
rule 1.5, two conditions must be m’et. First, the item
may not be considered until seven days have- elapsed
since it was placed on the agenda, unless,, of course,
the General Assembly decides otherwise by a two-thirds
majority of the Members present and voting ; and,
secondly, the item may not be considered until a committee has reported upon the question concerned. These
two conditions will therefore preclude an immediate
consideration of the present item once it has been
transferred to the agenda of the regular session of the
Assembly.
9. We should not be faced with the above-mentioned
obstacles if we decided that the emergency special session should be held simultaneously
with the regular
session of the General Assembly, I therefore do not
know whether it would really be wise to adopt the
United States draft resolution and thus bring rule 15
into play. I am wondering whether it would not be
preferable to leave this extremely urgent question before the emergency special session, which could be convened whenever it was thought necessary.
10. There is another aspect of the matter which I
would request the United States delegation to consider
carefully. If we leave this item before the emergency
special session of the Assembly, with the understanding
that this session may be convened whenever the situation requires, the world will know that this urgent
question is being dealt with by the Assembly on an
emergency basis, in the exercise of the Assembly’s
emergency powers. There would thus be an important
psychological impact upon the world. The moment we
decide to transfer this item to the agenda of the regular
session, we reduce the importance and urgency of the
question ; we give it the character of an ordinary item
on the agenda, That, as I have said, is a psychological
factor which must be taken into account.
11. Furthermore,
on 2 November
the Assembly
adopted a resolution [997 (ES-I)]
calling for a ceasefire. We are still in the process of implementing
that
resolution. Now, paragraph 6 of the resolution reads as
follows : “Decides to remain in emergency session pending compliance with the present resolution”. In other
words, the Assembly decided that, so long as the terms
of the resolution had not been fully implemented, it
would remain in emergency special session. The practical effect of adopting the present draft resolution and
transferring the item before us to the agenda of the

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

regular session of the Assembly would be to nullify
the resolution which we have already adopted.
12. Hence, on the basis of procedural and psycholog&
cal considerations, I wonder whether it would be wise
to transfer the present item to the agenda of the
eleventh peg&r session of the General Assembly. I
hope that the Assembly will reconsider this matter.
13. Mr..,&O*gTFI
(Egypt) (trunsla~ed from French) :
I l~~~~~~~~~w~~~~~~~~ra~~ resolution proposed by the
United States [A/3329], which we are now discussing,
I have some doubts concerning paragraph 3 of this
draft resolution, which reads, “Xeqwsts the General
Assembly at its eleventh regular session to give urgent
consideration to documents A/3272 and A/32X?.
14. You will recall that the General Assemhly adopted
several resolutions: one during the night of 1 to 2 November [997 (ES-I)], another during the night of 3 to
4 November [999 (ES-I)],
and a third on 7 November
[IO02 (ES-I)].
In this last resolution, the General Assembly, reaf%rming its previous resolutions, “C&s once
agailz z@olz the United Kingdom and France immediately to withdraw all their forces from Egyptian territory, consistently with the above-mentioned resolutions”.
A similar request was addressed to Israel. Nothing has
so far been done to comply with these resolutions, and
so, at a time when the General Assembly is being invited to give urgent consideration to a political solution, Egypt fleels unable to discuss any political solution
as long as foreign troops remain on its soil. No country
can enter into negotiations when it is the victim of a
premeditated act of aggression like the ‘one launched
against my country. In such circumstances it would be
very difficult for Egypt to understand or Ieven discuss
such a solution,
15. There is also a somewhat technical aspect of the
question we are discussing. Certain documents can, of
course, be transmitted to the regular session of the
General Assembly, but why should the Assembly be
requested to give them urgent consideration? The regular session of the General Assembly must be left to
decide whether the question should or should not be
given urgent consideration.
16. These are the comments I wish to make this
morning, stressing the fact that the General Assembly
resolutions on the very grave question of the occupation
of my country by foreign troops have not so far been
implemented. Aggression by France, the United Kingdom and Israel continues. These States are keeping
their troops on Egyptian territory in utter defiance of
the General Assembly resblutions.
Israel delegation wil1
tion rA/33291. which
would transfer the current item from ihe’ specia emergency session to the regular session of the General
Assembly. This important procedural step requires me
to comment briefly on some of the urgent problems
which still confront the United Nations.
18. My Government is more than ever convinced that
what it has accomplished in Israel’s defence was both
necessary and right. The power of an aggressive dictatorship to terrorize the Middle East has been drastically
reduced. We have been moved by the words of many
representatives from this rostrum, who have spoken
eloquently of the violent provocations which Israel has
endured f,or the past seven years. We are sustained by
other evidences of support in wo,rld public opinion. A
moment of opportunity has been created which, if
bravely seized, could inaugurate a new system of rela-

572nd

meeting-10

tions between Egypt and Israel. Agreement has been
reached on the withdrawal. of foreign troops from
Egypt and on the dispatch of a United Nations force
which will be responsible for taking measures to prevent the renewal of acts of war.
19. My Government’s agreement to these measure:,
announced yesterday, arose fro’m its desire to contrlbute to the preservation of world peace. That agreement is founded upon the natural assumption that other
parties concerned will carry out their Charter obligations, will cease from fedayeen raids, will abandon
practices of belligerency by sea and by land, will abstain from threats against the territorial integrity and
political independence o,f any State, will, in short, refrain from those acts and attitudes out of which the
dark sequence of recent events arose.
20. Beyond the agreement announced yest,erday, my
Government is prepared to solve all outstanding problems between Egypt and itself by negotiation. We
believe that the United Nations should at an early date
call fPr such a freely negotiated settlement. For this,
and for this only, it is fo’r Egypt and Israel, and not
for others, to determine the conditions for their future
coexistence. We therefore welcome the prospect that
the United Nations might, at an early date, be discussing these fundamental elements in Middle Eastern
relationships.
21. We would recall at this stage the eloquent words
spoken last week from this rostrum by the representative of the United States, He said:
“Let us stop the futile process of patching up
previous agreements and understandings, which but
serves to provide new pretexts for further provocations. Let us face up to our responsibilities under
the Charter. Let us work together for a lasting settlement of what has become a dangerous threat to the
peace of the world.” [A/PV.563,
para. 37.1
The first responsibility of sovereign States under the
Charter is the responsibility to settle their disputes by
negotiation.
22. In conclusion, it is my duty to call the attention
of the General Assembly to dark clouds which still
hover over the Middle East. For two successive days,
fedayem bands organized by Mr. Nasser have been invading the territory o,f Israel from Syria and Jordan,
attacking the civilian population, sabotaging installations, and striking at road communicatio~ns.NOW, the
General Assembly resolution ,of 2 November [997
(ES-I)]
called not only for a cease-fire and a withdrawal of forces from Egypt, it also called simultaneously for the parties to desist from raids into neighbouring territory,
and this call was made simultaneoasly
with the call for the cease-fire and for the withdrawal
of forces fro& Egypt. It is plain that Mr. Nasser has
instigated and renewed fedayeen activities in circumstances capefully chosen to ensure that the consequences
wo~dld
fall upon others than himself. In his speech
yesterday, Mr. Nasser again publicly gloated over the
activities of f edayeen units.
23. It is obvious that the further developme~~tof this
activity would gravely threaten international peace and
security. The unprovoked crossing of Israel’s frontiers
by armed units from Syria and Jordan is a warlike
act, is a violation of the cease-fire, and is in contradiction to the resolutions which the General Assembly
has recently adopted. Therefore, all who wish for
peace in the Middle East will devotle their attention not
only to the problems of cease-fire and withdrawal from

November

1956

133

the territory of Egypt, but also to the urgent necessity
of bringing about a cessation of these continuing violations of the Charter.
‘24. My Government has also been disturbed by reports
of the recent concentratioa od offensive weapo’ns in
neighbouring countries and by certain public threats
against Israel’s integrity and existence. In September
1955 there took place a transaction for the massive rearmament of Egypt, and this, as much as any other
single cause,is the origin of the critical events through
which we have reoently passed. It is therefore my duty
to remind the General Assembly that paragraph 3 of its
resolution of 2 November [997 (ES-I)]
urges all
Member States to “refrain from introducing military
goods in the area of hostilities and in general refrain
from any acts which would delay or prevent the implementation of the present resolution”. This recommendation lays heavy responsibilities not merely on the
States of the Middle East but on all from outside
whose actions or utterances are capable of bringing
about a reduction of the dark tensions .through which
we are passing.
2&&agt,..dcxi.ca)
: I want
nt to do IS entirely consistent
with what the representative of Egypt has said. We do
not want to go i&o the long-range iactors in any way
that would interfere with the cease-fire, with the withdrawal of troops, and with the entry of the international
force. In fact, that is why we are not pressing these
draft resolutions in this special sessiontoday. We want
t,o be sure that all the decisions the General Assembly
has taken concerning a cease-fire and withdrawal of
troops and the entry of the international foroe are well
established and are being carried out before we deal
with this other matter. But once that has happened, then
we do think that we should go into the basic causesand
try to look for the underlying factors. What we want
is to get consideration of them in the General Assembly
after the phase that we are no,w in is finished.
26. In the cause of harmo~ny and in order to meet
everybody’s view as much as possible, I shall be glad to
delete paragra h 3 of the United States draft resolution [A/3329 I”. I do not want to try to commit subsequent Assemblies, and sinoe I understand that I have
the right to modify my own draft resolution, I will
delete that paragraph. That, I think, will take care of
the viewpoints that have been expressed heae.
27. The PRESIDENT
(translated from S@~~ish):
It may be useful to have a statement from the Chair
conoerning the problem under debate.
28. The representative of the Philippines has raised
two points. In the first place, he has questioned whether
on constitutional grounds an emergency special session
can validly transfer ifems to a regular session. On this
point we must refer to the provision under rule 13 of
the rules of procedure to the ‘effect that the provisional
agenda of a regular session shall include, inter alia, all
items the inclusion o,f which has been ordered b’y the
General Assembly at a previous session.The Philippine
representative has also suggested that an emergency
special session of the General Assembly might be held
simultaneously with a regular session. This procedure
would be contrary to the provisioas for the convening
of emergency special sessions, which are held solely
because the General Assembly is not in regular session. Those who drew up the provisions for emergency meetings certainly did not intend that such meetings should b,e held when the General Assembly was

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

in regular session and hence fully capable of dealing
with the items before it.
29. Jv&..~.~,~ENON
(India) : My delegation is in
agreement with “%k‘ iriientions’ and the purposes o.f the
draft resolution before us [A/3329].
In spite of statements made from this rostrum, we will not go into
the merits of the questions, which may have some
bearing on this draft resolution. We do not think this
is the appropriate occasion to do so because what we
have is a procedural draft resolution.
30. The second statement of the United States representative withdrawing paragraph 3 from the draft
resolution certainly improves it and facilitates our
position somewhat. All the same, my delegation wishes
the Assembly to take into consideration the following
matters,
31. First of all, the form of this draft resolution can
only be that this emergency special session of the
Assembly recommends to the eleventh regular session
that this item be put on its agenda, because the eleventh regular session is totally master of its own procedure. Secondly, it is not possible to put on the
agenda of an Assembly the whole contents of the draft
resolution; all that can be put on the agenda is the
question as it is formulated here: “Question considered by the Security Council at its 749th and 750th
meetings q . . ” Then when that item comes before the
eleventh r’egular session and is adopted, it will be up
to any delegation to introduce any draft resolutions
there might be. Therefore, I would say that we should
recommend that the item be placed on the agenda
and also that the records of these meetings b’e considered. But the placing of the item on the agenda
would have to follow the usual procedure of going
before th,e General Committee and obtaining the necessary number of votes,
32. If there is any apprehension that difficulties may
arise! the last paragraph would have to be modified
to wjden its provisions in this way: ‘I. . . may continue
to consider the question if the General Assembly does
not consider it” or something of that character. That
is one aspect.
33. I come now to the substance of this recommendation. This special emergency session arises from the
Security Council resolution
of 31 October 1956
[S/3721],
in which the Council considered that a
grave situation had been created by action undertaken
against Egypt. That is the subj’ect we are considering.
We are not considering the internationalization,
the
nationalization or anything else of the Suez Canal, We
are considering the grave situation created by the action
undertaken against Egypt. Then, because there was no
unanimity in the Security Council, that matter came
here. Therefore, the competence of the General Assembly is restricted to the consideration of that situation. That is one set of facts,
34. The other set of facts, to which the representative
of Egypt has referred, and with the purport and purpose of which the representative of the United States
is in agreement, is that what has now to be done is to
relnedy the situation created by action taken against
Egypt - that, or similar, phraseology is what we used
regarding the invasion of Egypt b.y the British-French
alliance and the State of Israel. To try to introduce
other matters - for example, the solution of the whole
question of the Suez Canal by a vote of this Assembly
- would in the first instance require the consent of the
Egyptian Government, whose sovereignty and integrity

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

have to be respected. I do not want to go into the
merits of those proposals. Thene are further questions
to be considered: whether a complex matter of this
kind is best decided by debate in the General Assembly
or by diplomatic negotiations ; whether the Security
Council is still seized of the matter and unless that
position is altered, whether the Assembly can consider
it at all.
35. Finally, on that particular aspect, my Government cannot accept this matter of the future of the
Suez Canal as being merely a matter for France, the
United Kingdom and Egypt. I can understand a situation in which it is very largely a matter for Egypt,
but I cannot understand how the rest of the world can
be ‘exhausted by the claims, the desires, the fears or the
apprehensions of the United Kingdom and France
alone. If they are users of the Canal, so are other
people. If the economic life of the United Kingdom
depends very largely upon the free and open navigation
of the Suez Canal, I beg to submit with respect that
the economic life and even the existence in any kind
of reasonable way of my country depends even more
on free passage through the Canal. So we cannot confine the situation to these two parties, even though difficulties have been created, either on the one hand by the
action of Egypt, or o.p the other hand by the attitude
taken by France and the United Kingdom in the first
instance, and afterward by their actual acts of aggression.
36. My delegation, therefore, agrees with the purposes of the draft resolution as it stands; that is to
say, that the Assembly, whether in special or regular
session, must continue with the matters that it has been
considering. Secondly, we want to try to rationalize
procedures somehow - that apparently is the intention
of the Unit’ed States of America - so that we do not
have the regular session of the Assembly sitting at the
same time as two other sessions of the Assembly.
I submit that this draft resolution should be altered so
that this em’ergency special session will recommend to
the eleventh regular session to place on its agenda this
particular item. When that item comes before that
Assembly, a delegation - in this particular case, the
United States - would have to bring up these matters.
Then it would be for the Assembly to decide whether
they could be taken into account at all.
37. Furthermore, nothing should be considered which
woulcl detract - and the representative of the United
States does not want to detract - from the urgency
of th’e evacuation from Egypt of foreign troops, irrespective of what the Assembly here has done. The
news about all this is conflicting. Some of it creates
some degree of apprehension because, even when it is
agreed that: these foreign troops are to be withdrawn,
there are responsible statements that they are going to
be concentrated somewhere else. That being so, if we
are to deal with the Security Council resolution of 31
October, which points out that a grave situation has
been created by the action undertaken and that remedial procedures are to be adopt,ed to meet it, we have
to take all that into account. I am afraid that the
present formulation of the United States draft resolution [A/.3329] would not meet that purpose.
38. The representative of the United States will understand that we have had this draft resolution before
us for just half an hour, while he has had the opportunity of thinking it over. But perhaps the United
States delegation will now, in the light of what has

572nd

meeting-10

been said from this rostrum, try to put this in a way
which ccmforms to procedures and which does not create all these difficulties, namely, refer to this item
as the rrQuestion considered by the Security Council
at its 749th and 750th meetings . . .” etc., and recommend to the eleventh session that the item b.e placed on
its agenda, and then save our position by amending the
last paragraph
so it will say that notwithstanding
this recommendation,
if the situation should arise that
it cannot be considered by that session or has to be
considered before that session meets, then the emergency session may continue.
39. The purpose of my putting forward these suggestions is, on the one hand, that we should not b’e bogged
down by procedural difficulties afterwards; secondly,
that we may not, even for a good purpose, break rules
that have been made to safeguard against lapses.
40. So far as the substance is concerned, we have
very grave doubts with regard to trying to put other
questions into the liquidation
of the aggression that
has taken place in Egypt.
41. I hope, and my delegation fervently hopes that
the representative of the United States will take into
serious consideration the submissions we have made
after due consideration.
42. The PRESIDENT
(transZuted @X+Z Spa&z,) :
The representative of Belgium has asked to speak on
a point of order.
43. Mr. NISOT (Belgium) (translated j%om Frenclz) :
The draft resolution befor,e us is a purely procedural
one, and leaves the Assembly’s hand entirely free.
There does not therefore seem to be any reason to
continue this discussion. I move the closure of the
debate.
44. The PRESIDENT
(trmslated from S@rtish) :
We have heard the proposal made by the representative of Belgium. Under rule 77 of our rules of procedure I may call upon two speakers opposing closure. I
call on the representative of Saudi Arabia.
4.5. Mr. BAROODY
(S,audi Arabia) : I oppose the
closure of the debate *for obvious reasons: the draft
reso1utio.n [A/3329] has entered into the substance of
the deliberations that have taken place on the Egyptian
question during the last few days. If the representatives of India and of Egypt and others have touched
upon the substance, it was precisely because the substance was embedded in that draft resolution by the
mention o,f two draft resolutions submitted by the
United States [A/3272, 32731, and not pressed to the
vote - for obvious reasons too.
46. I would, if I were to mention those reasons, be
going into the substance of the debate, and that is why
I will refrain from doing so. However, I cannot but
mention that our del,egation, among others, was dismayed at the attempts to save the faces of certain aggressors by submitting those draft resolutions at a time
when Egypt was being subjected to invasion. That is
why I believe that it is untimely to close the debate.
47. We should look at the discrepancy we find between the two procedural draft resolutions submitted
this morning [A/3329, 33301 a discrepancy which has
as its objective certain goals with which we do not
agree. We commend the withdrawal by the United
States of paragraph 3 of the draft resolution before us
now [A/3329], but it would be futile if it does not also
delete paragraph 2 of that text,

November

1956

135

48. Since I am applying myself strictly to the closure
of the debate - and I hope it will not be closed on
this procedural question - I reserve my right to speak
again to say what th’e intents and purposes od a draft
resolution which refers to the United States draft resolutions [A/3272, 32731 would have in our deliberations
when the General Assembly meets in its regular session on 12 November.
49. Mr.** ASHxSyriaJ
: I also come to this rostrum
motiZ?“made
by the representative of
gel$.iE
As we received the draft resolution only half
an hour ago, we will certainly need much more time
than that to look into it in order to ponder and see
whether it meets the situation or not.
50. This Assembly has adopted a number of resolutions. The representative of Egypt has stated that
foreign troops are still in his country. They have not
been withdrawn. The representative of India stated
that there are conflicting reports which disturb us from
time to time. I do not unclerstand the wisdom or the
sagacity of the motion made by the representative of
Belgium unless there is something being cooked up behind the scenes. I hope that that is not the case.
51. We should like to continue the consideration of
this item before us now in a calm manner and in accordance with the existing rules of procedure. For these
reasons we oppose the motion for the closure of the debate.
52. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Spani&) :
Under rule 77 we must now proceed to vote on the
motion for closure.
The motion was rejected by 27 votes to 8, with 26

abstentions.
53. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Spakh) :
As the motion for closure has been rejected, the debate
will continue.
54. Mr.
QUIROGA ““B”.=~;PJ;‘.
GALDQ, ‘delegation
5,(B~olivia) will(translated
from
s~&-“iKl”“i’w~~~
s,upport
the draft resolution nronosed bv the United States delegation [A/3329].
- *
5.5. The week now ending has been marked by two
important events which will have far-reaching effects
on international life in the immediate future. We have
witnessed the beginning of victory for the United Nations in its resistance to aggression in the Middle East.
We have seen the moral and political authority of this
Assembly, supported by the most illustrious men of
France and the United Kingdom, succeed in inducing
reflection on the part of those who disregarded this international Organization and underestimated the ef fectiveness of the moral forces of the world. Another
event whose importance should, in my opinion, be emphasized from this rostrum is the magnificent reaffirmation of confidence on the part of the American people
in the policy of peace and conciliation untiringly
pursued by President Eisenhower.
56. I think the events I have just mentioned allow us
to entertain the hope that within a very few days not a
single invading soldier will r.emain in Egyptian territory, and that the eleventh session of the General Assembly will make the necessary recommendations to .ensure that the Egyptian people will receive, as soon as
possible, the indemnity to which they are entitled for
the destruction of human life and property committed
by the aggressors and for the losses caused by the
paralysation of the Suez Canal. This is a policy of rectification which w,e should set to work on conscientiously.

136

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

We should rectify what has been done in Egypt, although there is something which can never be rectified,
which no one can rectify, namely, death.
57. Leaving aside all subtle technical considerations,
I consider that the Egyptian question, as it has been
considered by the General Assembly, should appear as
a priority item on the agenda of the el,eventh session of
the General Assembly and that later, when the status
q~lo prior to the aggression has been restored in Egypt,
we may turn, in an atmosphere of calm, to the important problems of the Middle East, on the settlement of
which the preservation of world peace largely depends.
On the understanding that this will be done, the Bolivian delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution proposed by the United States d,elegation.
58. R/r;-. TSIAN-G
(,Chin,a) : I have a v&y simple
Doint ~o”~~~??%-&
&e’ attention of the Assemblv
io the language of paragraph 1 of the United Stat&
draft resolution [A/3329],
which reads : “1. D,ecides
to place on the provisional agenda of the eleventh regular session . . .“, We can only place this item on the
provisional agenda of the regular session. We do not
determine the agenda. All. the items on the provisional
agenda will be subject to the rigid prooedures set out in
our rules of procedure. All the items on the provisional
agenda, in other words, will come before the General
Committee of the Assembly and before the Assembly
itself,
59. I therefore regard this draft resolution as proposing the simple transfer of the item to the regular session of the General Assembly, and I shall vote in favour
of its adoption.
60. Mr. UR UIA ~‘J’El-&&&rx)
(tansbted
frm
Spanish~?“%& “Ra Erz%ition wishes to refer briefly to the
procedural problem which has arisen as a result of the
draft resolution proposed by the United States.
61. My delegation is prepared to vote for this draft
resolution because it considers it absolutely necessary
that, as the General Assembly is about to meet in regular session, this first .emergency special session should
take some action with regard to the very &nportant
problem which is still before it and which has no,t yet
been resolved.
62. Objections have been voiced to paragraph 1 of the
draft resolution on the ground that the Assembly cannot, in an emergency special session, decide on the inclusion of a particular item in the provisional agenda of a
regular session. In my delegation’s opinion, the special
session cannot in strict law take any action relating
to a matter within the competence of the r.egular session, namely the agenda, even though it is provisional
and not final. We do not think that the President’s
reference to rule 13, paragraph (c), of the General
Assembly’s rules of procedure completely covers the
situation, since that provision occurs in the chapter
dealing with regular sessions. Rule 13, paragraph (c),
states that the pro’visional agenda of a regular session
shall include “All items the inclusion of which has been
ordered by the General Assembly at a previous session”,
Since this provision appears in the chapter dealing with
regular sessions, we beli’eve that, in order to be included
in the provisional agenda of a regular session, an item
must have been placed on the agenda by a regular
session.
63. We therefore find some procedural difficulty in
the idea of a specia1 session of the Assembly taking
a decision concerning the business of a regular session.

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

For that reason we would have no objection if the
wording of paragraph 1 w<ere changed somewhat, to
read as follows :
‘rThe General Assewbly
“1. Decides to recommend that the question on
the agenda of its first emergency special session be
placed on the provisional agenda of the eleventh regular session as a matter of priority.”
64. We ape not making a special point of this. We
simply wish to indicate our views concerning the law
on the subject. In any case we are prepared to support
the draft resolution, because we consider it essential
that some action should be taken on this matter.
65. Our interpretation of the law rests on the fact
that when rule 13, paragraph (c), is used by a regular
session of the Assembly to order the inclusion of a
particular item in the provisional agenda of that body
even though that agenda is provisional - then, inasmuch as the inclusion is the consequence of a decision
of the Assembly, the removal of the item from the
provisional agenda would be in the nature of a reconsideration of an earlier decision made by the Assembly
itself.
66. I repeat that we are not prepared to vote against
paragraph 1 of the United States draft resolution
[A/3329]
on that ground. As regards paragraph 2,
which has also occasioned certain objections, we consider it perfectly natural that some decision should be
reached with respect to the two draft resolutions proposed by the United States d’elegation [A/3272, 32731,
which we did not have time to consider but which apply
to the item we are discussing in this first emergency
special session of th’e General Assembly. Consequently,
if we propose that the General Assembly should continue to deal with the item, it would be natural to
transfer the documents which are pending for consid‘eration and decision to the regular session of the General Assembly.
67. With regard to paragraph 4, which would now
become paragraph 3 since the original paragraph 3 has
been withdrawn by the sponsoring delegation, we also
feel that it is natural to think that if between now and
3 o’clock on 12 November, when the regular session
of the General Assembly opens, something happens
which changes the situation in Egypt, or makes immediate action by the Assemb,ly #essential, the Assem,bly
should not be paralysed but should be able to take action
with regard to the situation in Egypt.
68. Mr. MENON
(India) : I thank the President for
his indulgence in allowing me to come back to the rostrum so soon. As I said a while ago, there really is no
difference among all of us here with regard to the
purposes of this draft resolution. My delegation, in
making the observations that it did, was not trying to
raise procedural objections, but to get this question
considered in such a way that there would be no procedural or other difficulties aft’erwards.
69. The representative of the United States has kindly
informed us that he is not insisting upon paragraph 3
of the draft resolution and also that all the words after
the words i‘special session”? in paragraph 2, can be
dropped. So that the resolution would simply read:
<l . . .
“1. Decides to place on the provisional agenda , . ,
“2. Refers to its eleventh regular session for its
consideration the records of the meetings and the

572nd

meeting-10

documents of its first emergency special session”.
The present paragraph 4 will then follow as paragraph
3.
70.

My delegation is happy to support this draft resolution in those terms and in those circumstances. Our
understanding is that its purpose is merely to enable
this item to get on to the agenda of the eleventh session. Therefore, it must be presumed that those of us
who may become members of the General Committee
will, at the first opportunity, take the initiative in
placing on the agenda of the eleventh session an item
such as “Question considered by the first emergency
session”, or whatever the language might be.
71. As I said a while ago, it is not possible to place
the whole contents of this draft resolution on the
agenda. Under the rules of procedure, an emergency
session cannot coexist with a regular session, and
therefore the present procedure is a very necessary
procedure that has to be adopted in order to take the
matter further. I would therefore recommend that this
draft resolution be accepted with the deletions mentioned, with the understanding that the normal procedures will be followsed in the General Committee, by
either the United States itself or by some or all the
members of that Committee, to place this question
which was considered by the first emergency session on
the agenda of the eleventh session.
72. I would request that w’e should now hasten our
proceedings. If that is the general view of the Assembly, I would support our proceeding to put the draft
resolution to the vote. I am not, however, moving a
nosure of the debate. I think we have reached a stage
where we can accept this draft resolution without
spending further time in discussing matters which can
be discussed thereafter. I appeal to all my friends to
accept this draft resolution on the basis that I have set
out.
73. The PRESIDENT
(trans&ted from Spanish):
I have no other speakers on my list, We shall therefore
proceed to a vote on the draft resolution before us
[A/3329].
74. The delegation sponsoring the draft resolution has
withdrawn paragraph 3 and has also agreed to the deletion of the last phrase of paragraph 2, which reads as
follows : “including the draft resolutions contained in
documents A/3272 and A/3273”. We shall now proceed
to vote on the text I have mentioned, with the am’endrnents proposed by the sponsor of the draft resolution.
The draft resoltition, as amended, was adopted by 66
votes
EO none, z&h 2 abstentions.
75. Mr.
(translated

ARENALESL
AJAN
Kiyakrnala)
from Spa&h) : I feel tl&“‘??hould
explain
my delegation’s abstention in the vote on the resolution
just adopted. As another representative has already
said, the purpose of the resolution is acceptable to all
members of the Assembly, which is proved by the re-

Printed

in U.S.A.

137

Novembe

suit of
:. Nevertheless, there are two reasons
[on felt it should abstain.
why my
76, 0,
reason is based on rule 15 of the rules
of proceuurc. ;nd on some of the arguments advanced
by the Philippine representative from this rostrum. I
agree with the representative of India that we should
also aim at avoiding procedural difficulties when this
item comes up in the regular session of the Assembly.
Under rule 1.5 of the rules of procedure, a waiver of
the seven-day rule and of the report of a committee
requires a decision by a two-thirds majority
of the
Assembly, My delegation considered that the delicacy
and importance of the problems to be discussed might
make it necessary to consider this item before the end
of the seven-day period and without the two-thirds
majority vote provided for in rule 15.
77. The second reason for my delegation’s abst’ention
is the President’s interpretation concerning the question
of the compatibility
of the procedure w’e have just
, adopted with the General Assembly’s “Uniting
for
peace” resolution l-377 A(Y)].
78. Mr. SERRANO
(Philippines)
: I wish to explain
“‘bir~~~?y~FK%ed
KX%%ur of the resolution.
79. In my first intervention I expressed my views
to the effect that an emergency special session could,
consti’.utionally, coexist with a regular session. I also
exprc ssed the view that the items which are currently
being discussed in this emergency special session might
better be retained in such a session for psychological
reasons. Lastly, I feared the effect of this resolution on
paragraph 6 of the resolution adopted, on 2 November
1956 [997 (ES-I)],
which requires that this Assembly
should remain in $emergency session “pending compliance with the present resolution”.
80. However, after listening to the explanation by the
President to the eff,ect that an emergency special session is called only when no regular session is being
held, I am inclined to think now that the basic motivation for this present resolution is the fear that unless
we take the step contemplated by it, the General Assembly may cease to be seized of the item. That, as I
say, is the fear which motivates this resolution.
81. Although I do not quite share this view up to the
present moment, I have adopted a fixed form of conduct in my lif’e according to which, when I entertain
serious doubts between two conflicting solutions, one of
which I think is safe although questionable as to its
wisdom, and the other fraught with fatal consequences
if it proves to be wrong, I always decide in favour of
safety. That explains the reason why I voted in favour
of the resolution.
82. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece) : I just wish to
state that I abstained in the vote on the resolution in
view of the fact that it was not quite clear that a
simple majority of the regular session of the Assembly
would be sufficient for the consideration of this item
at any time.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

S-31331~December

1956-4500
