A /74/PV.51

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

51st plenary meeting

Wednesday, 18 December 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the seventy-fourth
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee
Report of the Credentials Committee (A/74/572)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution entitled “Credentials of representatives to
the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly”,
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 12 of
its report.
I now give the floor to the Chair of the Credentials
Committee, Ms. Elizabeth Thompson of Barbados.
Ms. Thompson (Barbados): On behalf of the
Credentials Committee, I have the honour to introduce
the report of the Credentials Committee concerning
the credentials of the representatives to the seventyfourth session of the General Assembly, contained in
document A/74/572.
Having considered the credentials of the
representatives to the seventy-fourth session at
its meeting on 10 December 2019, the Credentials
Committee adopted without a vote a draft resolution
accepting those credentials. The Committee also
recommended to the General Assembly the adoption
of a draft resolution concerning the credentials of
representatives to the seventy-fourth session, contained
in paragraph 12 of the report of the Committee.

The draft resolution approving the report of the
Credentials Committee is therefore before the General
Assembly for its adoption.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to the
members of the Committee and to the Secretariat for
facilitating our work.
The President: I
Credentials Committee.

thank

the

*1941943*

of

the

The General Assembly will now take a decision
on the draft resolution entitled “Credentials of
representatives to the seventy-fourth session of the
General Assembly”, recommended by the Credentials
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report.
The Credentials Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/179).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Prieto Tica (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I am
taking the floor on behalf of the delegations of Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala,
Honduras, Panama, Paraguay and Peru, member
countries of the Lima Group, as well as on behalf of
the delegations of Australia, Ecuador, El Salvador, the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-41943 (E)

Chair

A/74/PV.51

United States of America, Georgia, Haiti, Israel, the
Marshall Islands, the United Kingdom and the Republic
of Korea, in order to put on the record that the adoption of
the report of the Credentials Committee for the seventyfourth session of the General Assembly (A/74/572)
should not be interpreted as a tacit recognition by our
countries of the regime of Nicolás Maduro or of his
designated representatives to the Assembly.
Including our countries, a total of more than
50 countries do not recognize the illegitimate regime
of Nicolás Maduro in Venezuela and have recognized
Juan Guaidó as interim President of Venezuela.
Mr. Salovaara (Finland): The European Union
and its member States reiterate that the presidential
elections of May 2018 in Venezuela were neither free,
fair nor credible, lacking democratic legitimacy. The
European Union and its member States reiterate their
full support for the National Assembly, which is a
democratic, legitimate body of Venezuela and whose
powers need to be restored and respected, including the
prerogatives and safety of its members.
We underline our conviction that the solution to
the multidimensional crisis affecting Venezuela can
only be a political, democratic and peaceful one. We
therefore strongly renew our call for the restoration
of democracy through free, transparent and credible
presidential elections.
At the same time, the humanitarian needs of the
Venezuelan people inside and outside the country cannot
wait for a solution to the political crisis, as recently
underlined by the International Solidarity Conference
on the Venezuelan Refugee and Migrant Crisis.
Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation joined the consensus on resolution 74/179.
However, I would like to express my delegation’s
reservations about the parts of the report contained in
the document and in the resolution concerned that could
be construed as a recognition of the Israeli regime.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Credentials Committee and its Chair, the
Ambassador of Barbados, for their work.
We welcome that, during the meeting of the
Credentials Committee, held on 10 December, the draft
resolution contained in report A/74/572, submitted
for our consideration today, was adopted (resolution
74/179). It is the duty of the Credentials Committee,
of the Secretariat, the States Members of the United
2/15

18/12/2019

Nations and consequently the General Assembly to
ensure strict compliance with the rules of procedure
governing the work of the Organization, particularly as
it regards the consideration of credentials.
It is our duty to act in accordance with the foundation
Charter of the United Nations and to be faithful to its
purposes and principles. That commitment implies not
intervening — directly or indirectly — in the internal
affairs of other States and respecting the principles
of the national sovereignty, equal rights and selfdetermination of all peoples.
We reiterate that the legitimacy of a Government
emanates from the express and sovereign will of its
people, not the recognition of foreign Powers. As such,
we regret that this meeting is being used to attack the
legitimate Government of the sister Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela in open disregard for the popular will and
institutional integrity of the country, as expressed in
the elections held on 20 May 2018.
The main threat to peace and security in Latin
America and the Caribbean is the harassment by the
United States of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
We reiterate our full support for the Bolivarian
and Chavista revolutions and for its legitimate and
democratically elected President, the Constitutional
President, Mr. Nicolás Maduro.
We ask the international community, the States
Members of the United Nations, to continue supporting
the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
an active country in the Organization, the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States. The Community was
proclaimed to be a zone of peace by its Heads of State
and Government in 2014. Supporting the Government
of Venezuela is also a vote for peace, respect for the
sovereignty of States and non-interventionism in their
internal affairs.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the General Assembly
for accepting our credentials as the sole and legitimate
representatives of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. That decision recognizes the people and the
Government of our nation in their struggle for peace
and international law.
The use of the General Assembly to attack Member
States is an assault on multilateralism and on the
system of relations among Member States as set forth
19-41943

18/12/2019

in the Charter of the United Nations. We must therefore
work together to prevent the installation of a practice
that would allow a group of countries to claim the right
to illegally designate the authorities and diplomatic
representatives of other independent countries, in
disregard of the sovereign will of their peoples.
That becomes more evident when economic gain
is sought from such attacks on a sovereign State, like
Venezuela, a country upon which illegal, unilateral,
cruel and coercive economic measures that threaten the
human rights of its people have been imposed — all
with the intent to change its internal political order and
steal its national assets and resources.
Such economic aggression, accompanied by
violation of the right of sovereign States to participate
in the United Nations, opens the doors to chaos in
international relations and creates a systemic flaw
that benefits aggressor States — the unacceptable
imposition of force over international law.
In the course of this year, the Government of the
United States of America has unleashed a campaign of
political, economic and diplomatic coercion against my
country. It began with a false-flag operation to violate
our territorial integrity. Then, in the Security Council,
its Vice-President, Mike Pence, threatened to expel us
from the United Nations (see S/PV.8506). A few days
later, it promoted a coup d’état that placed the peace
of the region in jeopardy. It also imposed coercive
measures intended, through hunger and sickness,
to weaken the resistance of our people, against the
backdrop of constant incursions of military aircraft into
our airspace and public threats of the use of military
force against our country.
The Government of the United States of America
systematically and incrementally violates its Charter
obligations. It now declares Venezuela as a threat to
peace and invokes a regional military treaty to which
Venezuela is not a member in order to use armed force
without the authorization of the Security Council. The
Venezuelan credentials accepted today by the General
Assembly are a guarantee of peace because the puppet
Government created by the United States does not have
the necessary credentials to invoke the use of force
against our nation.
Today, it is clear that an independent, free and
sovereign Venezuela has thwarted the United States
campaign and, more importantly, that Venezuela can

A/74/PV.51

count on the majority of the international community
to safeguard peace and the United Nations Charter.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of Nicaragua welcomes the
work of the Credentials Committee and thanks its Chair,
the Ambassador of Barbados, for her report (A/74/572).
Nicaragua supports the report’s recommendations for
this seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly
which, in our view, are strictly in line with the rules of
procedure and the Charter of the United Nations with
regard to the credentials of its States Members.
Nicaragua bases its international relations on
respect for the sovereignty of States, non-intervention
and the peaceful settlement of disputes. The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has only one Constitutional
President, who was democratically elected by its
people — President Nicolás Maduro Moros.
The situation in this brother country is an internal
affair that should be resolved by the Venezuelan
people in accordance with its Constitution and laws.
Nicaragua’s position is fully in keeping with the United
Nations Charter and the principles of international law.
Mr. Ajeeb (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to express my delegation’s
support for the Credentials Committee with regard to
its acceptance of the credentials of the representatives
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the legitimate
delegation of Venezuela. We reiterate our rejection of
the statement of the representative of Peru, on behalf
of the Lima Group and other States. We also reject the
statement made by the representative of Finland on
behalf of the European Union.
My country wishes to reiterate its total solidarity
with, and support for, the people of Venezuela in
maintaining their sovereignty and resisting attempts to
impose regime change by force. My delegation’s position
is in total alignment with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations, in particular respect for sovereignty
and non-interference in domestic affairs. All attempts
to change the legitimate Government in Venezuela
undermine the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the principle of sovereign equality.
The Committee’s recommendation to accept
the credentials of the representatives of Venezuela
is aligned with the principles of the United Nations
and we emphasize that any attempt to undermine the
legitimacy of the Venezuelan Government represents a

19-419433/15

A/74/PV.51

threat to the Governments of Member States, in this
or any other forum. We wish to reiterate our solidarity
with the Venezuelan Government under the leadership
of its legitimate President — Mr. Nicolás Maduro.
Mr. Sadnovic (Indonesia): I am taking the floor to
present our general statement and to reiterate Indonesia’s
unwavering commitment, as a member of the United
Nations, to steadfastly contribute to multilateralism in
accordance with the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations — particularly the
principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity, upon
which the Organization rests.
To that end, we would like to draw the attention
of the States Members of the United Nations, as well
as that of the entire United Nations system, to the
unacceptable action of the delegation of Vanuatu during
the high-level segment of the seventy-fourth session of
the General Assembly — by including, as members
of its official delegation, non-citizens of Vanuatu
who have supported or been active in the separatist
movement against my country.
Furthermore, those alien members of the
Vanuatu delegation have incited violence, conflict
and destruction. They have consistently instigated
provocation, with malicious intentions. Endeavours by
any country to support a separatist movement and its
intentions is deplorable.
Indonesia underlines that such actions are clearly
against the principle of friendly relations among States.
My delegation totally rejects such actions as they
serve no purpose other than politically motivated and
provocative action aimed at disrespecting Indonesia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We believe that Member States should not play
into the hands of separatists or provide opportunities
and grand privileges that could be misused by interest
groups with separatist intentions. Finally, my delegation
requests that the Assembly ensure that the spirit and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which is
based on respect and neighbourly peaceful coexistence,
continue to be honoured.
In conclusion, we request an explanation from the
Permanent Mission of Vanuatu to the United Nations
concerning its accredited list of delegates to the highlevel segment of the seventy-fourth session of the
General Assembly.
4/15

18/12/2019

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 3 and agenda item 3, as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(b) Election of members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The President: Members will recall that, in
accordance with paragraphs 4 (a) to (e) of resolution
60/180 of 20 December 2005, the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission shall
comprise the following: seven members of the Security
Council, including five permanent members; seven
members of the Economic and Social Council, elected
from regional groups; five top providers of assessed
contributions to United Nations budgets and of voluntary
contributions to United Nations funds, programmes
and agencies, including a standing peacebuilding fund;
five top providers of military personnel and civilian
police to United Nations missions; and seven additional
members elected by the General Assembly, giving due
consideration to representation from all regional groups
in the overall composition of the Committee.
Members will also recall that, during the
75th plenary meeting of its seventy-second session, the
Assembly elected Czechia and El Salvador as members
of the Organizational Committee for a two-year term
of office, beginning on 1 January 2018, and that during
the 64th plenary meeting of its seventy-third session,
the Assembly elected Egypt, Guatemala, Kenya,
Mexico and Nepal as members of the Organizational
Committee for a two-year term of office, beginning on
1 January 2019. Consequently, the General Assembly
will need to fill the seats vacated by Czechia and
El Salvador, whose two-year term of office expires on
31 December 2019.
The Assembly will now proceed to the election of
two members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
By its resolution 60/261 of 8 May 2006,
the Assembly decided that the members of the
19-41943

18/12/2019

Organizational Committee shall serve for renewable
terms of two years, as applicable. Accordingly, Czechia
and El Salvador are eligible for immediate re-election.
Regarding candidatures for the two vacant seats, I
should like to inform members that the group of Eastern
European States has endorsed Slovakia as a candidate
and the group of Latin American and Caribbean States
has endorsed Peru as a candidate.
Members will recall that by its resolution 60/261,
the General Assembly decided that the rules of
procedure and established practice of the Assembly for
the election of members of its subsidiary bodies shall
apply to its election of members of the Committee.
For this election, rules 64 and 94 shall be applicable.
Accordingly, the election shall be held by secret ballot.
However, I should also like to recall paragraph 16
of decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election. In the absence of such a request, may
I take it that the Assembly decides to proceed to the
election on that basis?
It was so decided.
The President: Since the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled, may
I take it that the General Assembly decides to elect
Peru and Slovakia as members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission for a twoyear term of office, beginning on 1 January 2020?
It was so decided.
The President: I congratulate Peru and Slovakia
on their election as members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Sixth Committee on agenda
items 75 to 85, 109, 121, 136 and 165 to 174. I request
the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee, Mr. Mohamed

A/74/PV.51

Hamad Al-Thani of Qatar, to introduce the reports of
the Sixth Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic), Rapporteur
of the Sixth Committee: I have the honour to present the
reports of the Sixth Committee on its work during the
seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly. The
Assembly allocated to the Committee 23 substantive and
three procedural agenda items. With the exception of the
item relating to the election of officers, all the agenda
items fall under three of the headings corresponding to
the priorities of the Organization, namely, “Promotion
of justice and international law” “Drug control, crime
prevention and combating international terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations” and “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”. I will introduce the
reports of the Sixth Committee on the various items in
the order in which they fall under those three headings.
Under the heading “Promotion of justice and
international law”, the Sixth Committee considered
11 agenda items and adopted 14 draft resolutions
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption.
I first invite the Assembly to consider agenda item 75,
“Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful
acts”. The report on this agenda item is contained
in document A/74/421, and the draft resolution
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption is
reproduced in paragraph 10 thereof. Under the terms
of the draft resolution, the General Assembly would
once commend the articles on responsibility of States
for internationally wrongful acts to the attention of
Governments to and request the Secretary-General
to invite Governments to submit written comments
on future action regarding the articles and to update
the compilation of decisions of international courts,
tribunals and other bodies referring to the articles and
the 2016 technical report.
Document A/74/422 contains the report on agenda
item 76, “Criminal accountability of United Nations
officials and experts on mission”, and the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 8 thereof. Under
the terms of the draft resolution, the General Assembly
would affirm and further elaborate on the various
measures, adopted in previous resolutions, aimed at
ensuring the criminal accountability of United Nations
officials and experts on mission and sets out a variety
of mechanisms intended to increase and enhance
the information enabling Member States to address
the topic.

19-419435/15

A/74/PV.51

The report on agenda item 77, “Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-second session”, is
contained in document A/74/423. The Sixth Committee
recommends three draft resolutions for adoption by the
General Assembly, which are reproduced in paragraph
12 of the report. Under the terms of draft resolution
I, the Assembly would commend the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL)
for finalizing a number of its products and take note
with interest of the decisions taken by the Commission
with regard to its future work and the progress made by
the Commission in its work in several areas.
Draft resolution II relates specifically to the
UNCITRAL Model Legislative Provisions on PublicPrivate Partnerships. Under the terms of draft
resolution II, the General Assembly would recommend
that all States give due consideration to the Model
Legislative Provisions and the legislative guide when
revising or adopting legislation relevant to publicprivate partnerships.
Draft resolution III pertains to the UNCITRAL
Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency. Under
the terms of draft resolution III, the General Assembly
would recommend that all States give favourable
consideration to the Model Law when revising or
adopting legislation relevant to insolvency, and that
States continue to consider the implementation of
the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency and of
the Model Law on Recognition and Enforcement of
Insolvency-related Judgments.
The report on agenda item 78, “United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law”, is to be found in document A/74/424. The draft
resolution is reproduced in paragraph 8 thereof. Under
the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly would,
inter alia, authorize the Secretary-General to carry out
the activities specified in his report on this item and
decide to appoint 25 Member States as members of the
Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme
of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of International Law for a period of
four years, beginning on 1 January 2020.
The report on agenda item 79, “Report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its
seventy-first session”, is contained in document
A/74/425, and two draft resolutions recommended to
6/15

18/12/2019

the General Assembly in connection with this item
are reproduced in paragraph 11. Under draft resolution
I, the Assembly would express its appreciation to
the International Law Commission for the work
accomplished at its seventy-first session, including the
completion of the second reading of the draft articles
on the prevention and punishment of crimes against
humanity and the completion of the first reading of the
draft conclusions on peremptory norms of international
law ( jus cogens) and of the draft principles on the
protection of the environment in relation to armed
conflicts. In addition, the Assembly would recommend
that the Commission continue its work on the topics in
its current programme.
Draft resolution II pertains specifically to crimes
against humanity. Under the terms of the draft
resolution, the Assembly would take note of the draft
articles presented by the Commission and decide to
resume its consideration of the topic at its seventyfifth session.
The report on agenda item 80, “Diplomatic
protection”, is contained in document A/74/426.
Under the terms of the draft resolution reproduced in
paragraph 9 of the report, the Assembly would commend
once again the articles on diplomatic protection to the
attention of Governments and invite them to submit
to the Secretary-General any further comments,
including comments concerning the recommendation
by International Law Commission that the General
Assembly elaborate a convention based on the articles.
Document A/74/427 contains the report on agenda
item 81, “Consideration of prevention of transboundary
harm from hazardous activities and allocation of loss
in the cases of such harm”. Paragraph 7 of the report
reproduces the draft resolution on this agenda item,
by which the Assembly would commend, once again,
the articles on prevention of transboundary harm from
hazardous activities and the principles on the allocation
of loss in the case of transboundary harm arising out of
hazardous activities to the attention of the Governments,
invite Governments to submit further comments on
any future action, as well as on any practice in relation
to the application of the articles and principles, and
request the Secretary-General to submit a compilation
of decisions of international courts, tribunals and other
bodies referring to the articles and the principles.
The report on agenda item 82, “Report of the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and
19-41943

18/12/2019

on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization”,
is contained in document A/74/428. The related draft
resolution is reproduced in paragraph 11 thereof. Under
the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly would,
inter alia, request the Special Committee to continue
its consideration of the questions of the maintenance
of international peace and security and of the
implementation of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations on assistance to third States affected by
the application of sanctions, and to keep on its agenda
the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes
between States. Moreover, it would invite Member
States to focus their comments during the thematic
debate at the next session of the Special Committee
on the subtopic “Exchange of information on State
practices regarding the use of conciliation”.
The report on agenda item 83, “The rule of law
at the national and international levels”, is contained
in document A/74/429. Under the terms of the draft
resolution, which is reproduced in paragraph 8 of the
report, the Assembly would, inter alia, reaffirm the
imperative of upholding and promoting the rule of
law at the international level in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, stress
the importance of adherence to the rule of law at the
national level, and invite Member States to focus
their comments during the next Sixth Committee
debate on the subtopic “Measures to prevent and
combat corruption”.
The report on agenda item 84, “The scope and
application of the principle of universal jurisdiction”,
is contained in document A/74/430. Under the terms of
the draft resolution reproduced in paragraph 9 of the
report, the Assembly would decide that to continue its
consideration of the matter during the seventy-fifth
session, including in the context of a working group of
the Sixth Committee, in order to further undertake a
thorough discussion of the item.
The report on agenda item 85, “The law of
transboundary aquifers”, is contained in document
A/74/431, and the draft resolution is reproduced in
paragraph 7 of the report. By this draft resolution,
the Assembly would commend to the attention
of Governments the draft articles on the law of
transboundary aquifers and encourage the International
Hydrological Programme of UNESCO to continue
its contribution by providing further scientific and
technical assistance to States.

A/74/PV.51

I shall now turn to the second heading, “Drug
control, crime prevention and combating international
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations”, under
which the Sixth Committee considered agenda item
109, “Measures to eliminate international terrorism”.
The relevant report is contained in document A/74/432,
and the draft resolution recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 9
thereof. Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would, inter alia, decide to recommend
that the Sixth Committee, at the seventy-fifth session,
establish a working group with a view to finalizing
the process on the draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism as well as discussions on the item
included in its agenda by Assembly resolution 54/110
concerning the question of convening a high-level
conference under the auspices of the United Nations.
Under the third and final heading, “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”, the Sixth Committee
considered 11 substantive and two procedural items.
Agenda item 146, “Administration of justice at the
United Nations”, was allocated to the Fifth and Sixth
Committees. The views of the Sixth Committee on this
item were transmitted to the Fifth Committee through
a letter from the President of the General Assembly
dated 12 November 2019 and are annexed to document
A/C.5/74/10.
The report on agenda item 165, “Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country”, is
contained in document A/74/434. Under the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption, which is reproduced in paragraph 9 of the
report, the Assembly would, inter alia, urge the host
country to remove all remaining travel restrictions by
it on staff of certain missions and staff members of
the Secretariat of certain nationalities, express serious
concern regarding the non-issuance of entry visas to
certain representatives of certain Member States and
expect the prompt issuance by the host country of
entry visas to all representatives of all Member States
pursuant to the Headquarters Agreement.
Furthermore, the Sixth Committee considered nine
requests for observer status in the General Assembly. It
recommended that the Assembly grant observer status
in the General Assembly to the Group of Seven Plus,
under agenda item 171. The report concerning that
request is found in document A/74/440, and the relevant
draft resolution is reproduced in paragraph 8 thereof.

19-419437/15

A/74/PV.51

The Committee also recommended that the
Assembly defer to the seventy-fifth session the taking
of a decision on the requests for observer status in
the General Assembly for the Cooperation Council of
Turkic-speaking States, under agenda item 166; the
Eurasian Economic Union, under agenda item 167; the
Community of Democracies, under agenda item 168;
the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands Secretariat, under
agenda item 169; the Global Environment Facility,
under agenda item 170; the International Organization
of Employers in the General Assembly, under agenda
item 172; the International Trade Union Confederation,
under agenda item 173; and the Boao Forum for Asia,
under agenda item 174. The reports on those requests
are contained in documents A/74/435, A/74/436,
A/74/437, A/74/438, A/74/439, A/74/441, A/74/442 and
A/74/443, respectively, and the relevant draft decisions
are reproduced in paragraphs 7 or 8 thereof.
Concerning the two procedural items, namely
agenda item 121, “Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly”, and agenda item 136, “Programme
planning”, the report under agenda item 121, containing
the provisional programme of work of the Sixth
Committee for the seventy-fifth session, is to be
found in document A/74/445. The draft decision, by
which the Assembly would take note of the provisional
programme of work, is reproduced in paragraph 6 of
the report. The report on agenda item 136 is contained
in document A/74/444, and no further action by the
Assembly is recommended.
The draft resolutions and the draft decisions
relating to the agenda items under all three headings
were adopted by the Sixth Committee without a vote,
and it is my hope that the General Assembly will do
the same.
Finally, I wish to inform the Assembly that there
is no report regarding agenda item 5, “Election of the
officers of the Main Committees”. Consistent with
previous practice, the election of the officers of the Sixth
Committee for the seventy-fifth session will be taken
up at a later stage in the course of the current session.
In conclusion, allow me take this opportunity
to express my gratitude to the Chair of the Sixth
Committee, Ambassador Michal Mlynár of Slovakia,
for his dedicated work and for his commendable
leadership of the Committee, as well as to the other
members of the Bureau, Mrs. Cecilia Anderberg
of Sweden, Mr. Amadou Jaiteh of the Gambia and
8/15

18/12/2019

Mr. Pablo Arrocha Olabuenaga of Mexico, for their
cooperation. I also wish to thank all representatives
and colleagues for their valuable contributions to the
success of the session.
Mr. Dogan
the Chair.

(Croatia),

Vice-President,

took

Finally, I would like to express my gratitude and
appreciation to the secretariat of the Sixth Committee
and to the Codification Division of the Office of Legal
Affairs for its efficient and valuable support and for the
competent and professional advice provided throughout
the session.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur of
the Sixth Committee.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Sixth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the reports of the Sixth Committee that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. May I remind
members that, in accordance with decision 34/401, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, that is, either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee, and
that explanations of vote are limited to ten minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I therefore
hope that we may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Committee.
Members are reminded that additional sponsors
are no longer accepted now that draft resolutions and
decisions have been adopted by the Committee. Any
clarification about sponsorship should be addressed to
the Secretary of the Committee.
19-41943

18/12/2019

Agenda item 75
Responsibility of States for internationally
wrongful acts
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/421)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/180).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 79?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 76
Criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/422)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/181).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 76?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 77
Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its
fifty-second session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/174/423)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. The Assembly

A/74/PV.51

will now take decisions on the draft resolutions, one
by one.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Report
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-second session”. The
Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 74/182).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution II, entitled “Model Legislative Provisions
on Public-Private Partnerships of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law”. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 74/183).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution III, entitled “Model Law on Enterprise
Group Insolvency of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law”. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
74/184).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 77?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 78
United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/424)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/185).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 78?

19-419439/15

A/74/PV.51

It was so decided.
Agenda item 79
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its seventy-first session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/425)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. The Assembly
will now take decisions on the draft resolutions, one
by one.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Report
of the International Law Commission on the work of its
seventy-first session”. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 74/186).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution II, entitled “Crimes against humanity”. The
Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 74/187).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 79?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 80
Diplomatic protection
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/426)

18/12/2019

Agenda item 81
Consideration of prevention of transboundary
harm from hazardous activities and allocation of
loss in the case of such harm
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/427)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/189).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 81?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 82
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/428)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/190).

The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 82?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/188).

The rule of law at the national and international levels

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 80?
It was so decided.
10/15

It was so decided.
Agenda item 83
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/429)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
19-41943

18/12/2019

without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/191).
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes
to speak in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of my country would like to
express its categorical reservation on paragraph 3 of
resolution 74/191, under agenda item 83. We dissociate
ourselves from any consensus on this paragraph, whose
wording refers to the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document A/74/139.
The reason for the Syrian Arab Republic’s
reservation is that paragraph 75 of the report of the
Secretary-General, which falls under subheading II.C.3,
“Other international accountability mechanisms”,
refers to the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011. My country, Syria,
believes that the content of that paragraph represents
unbalanced and inappropriate conduct on the part of
the Secretariat in insisting on the promotion of the socalled Mechanism.
I would basically like to confirm that any discussion
or assessment that I will be presenting here in the
context of my statement on the so-called Mechanism
which is illegitimate cannot in any case be interpreted
as the Syrian Arab Republic’s acceptance or recognition
of the so-called Mechanism or of its mandate, activities
or illegitimate actions.
I call on my colleagues to take an in-depth look
at documents A/74/518, A/74/108, A/73/562, A/72/106
and A/71/799, which contain letters addressed by the
permanent delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
Secretary-General and to the President of the General
Assembly with regard to the so-called Mechanism.
These documents offer legal proof that, from the very
outset, the General Assembly did not have a mandate
to establish such an organ. These documents further
prove the grave legal violations that marred the process
of adopting resolution 71/248, which established the socalled Mechanism.

A/74/PV.51

These documents also
procedurally and legally.

prove

the

following,

First, the so-called Mechanism cannot be considered
a subsidiary body established by the General Assembly.
Secondly, it cannot enjoy any legal status or the status
of a moral person. Thirdly, the so-called Mechanism
has neither the power nor the mandate to conclude
agreements with Member States or other entities.
Fourthly, the United Nations does not have the right to
accept voluntary contributions or to allocate any funding
from its regular budget to support the establishment of
the so-called Mechanism or its illegitimate functions.
Fifthly, based on what I have just said, any information
or evidence gathered, kept or analysed by the so-called
Mechanism cannot be acceptable in any legal or judicial
procedure in the future, particularly in the light of the
fact that the mandates that have been granted to that
organ are not determined in terms of time and venue
and do not concur with any restrictions or norms in line
with the Charter or the methods of work that are well
established within our Organization.
We again pose to the Secretariat and the SecretaryGeneral a logical question that has very serious and
real legal implications. Does he or any United Nations
Member State expect the Syrian Arab Republic to
agree to the collection of evidence outside its national
borders, thousands of kilometres from its territory,
through a body that was created without consulting with
the Syrian Arab Republic or securing its approval and
without ensuring minimum guarantees and standards
related to the credibility of evidences or what is known
in criminal law as chain of custody? The answer to that
question is simple and we repeat it — the Syrian Arab
Republic has not accepted and will never accept the
Mechanism, neither today nor tomorrow.
The political process in the Syrian Arab Republic
will move forward despite all obstacles and challenges
and will deal, under Syrian ownership and Syrian
leadership, alone and without foreign interference,
with the issues of transitional justice, accountability
and reparations through Syrian national judicial and
legal organs, not through an irregular entity that is
based in Geneva while collecting so-called evidence
without respect for any legal and procedural standards
of the United Nations or for international and national
criminal norms.
I call on the members of the Assembly to block the
attempts of some to involve and trap the United Nations

19-4194311/15

A/74/PV.51

by making it bear the burden of financing this illegitimate
entity from the regular budget. We recommend that the
supporters of the so-called Mechanism finance it with
money from their own taxpayers instead of imposing
the financial responsibility for that illegitimate body
on the United Nations. As all members know, our
Organization is currently going through one of the
worst financial crises since its establishment.
In conclusion, I recall that the will of the Syrian
people is the only will that governs the political process
and that the Syrian people never allow their legal and
judicial affairs to be governed through such a body.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 83?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 84
The scope and application of the principle of
universal jurisdiction
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/430)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/192).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 84?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 85
The law of transboundary aquifers
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/431)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
12/15

18/12/2019

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/193).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 85?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 109
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/432)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/194).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 109?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/445)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision, entitled “Provisional programme
of work of the Sixth Committee for the seventyfifth session of the General Assembly”. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 74/521).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 121.
19-41943

18/12/2019

A/74/PV.51

Agenda item 136

Agenda item 167

Programme planning

Observer status for the Eurasian Economic Union
in the General Assembly

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/444)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Sixth Committee?
It was so decided (decision 74/522).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 136.
Agenda item 165
Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/434)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/195).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 165.
Agenda item 166
Observer status for the Cooperation Council of
Turkic-speaking States in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/435)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 74/523).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 166?
It was so decided.

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/436)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 74/524).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 167?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 168
Observer status for the Community of Democracies
in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/437)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 74/525).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 168?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 169
Observer status for the Ramsar Convention on
Wetlands Secretariat in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/438)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

19-4194313/15

A/74/PV.51

The draft decision was adopted (decision 74/526).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 169?

18/12/2019

Agenda item 172
Observer status for the International Organization
of Employers in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/441)

Observer status for the Global Environment
Facility in the General Assembly

The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/439)

The draft decision was adopted (decision 74/528).

The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 172?

It was so decided.
Agenda item 170

The draft decision was adopted (decision 74/527).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 170?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 171
Observer status for the Group of Seven Plus in the
General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/440)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
74/196).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 171?
It was so decided.
14/15

It was so decided.
Agenda item 173
Observer status for the International Trade Union
Confederation in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/442)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 74/529).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 173?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 174
Observer status for the Boao Forum for Asia in the
General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/443)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
19-41943

18/12/2019

The draft decision was adopted (decision 74/530).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 174?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I would like to thank His Excellency Michal

A/74/PV.51

Mlynár of Slovakia, Chair of the Sixth Committee,
members of the Bureau and representatives for a job
well done.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Sixth Committee
before it.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

19-4194315/15
