S/2019/865

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 November 2019
Original: English

Implementation of paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013)
Twenty-fourth report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to missing Kuwaiti and third country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, since
my previous report, dated 6 August 2019 (S/2019/632).

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their remains
2.
The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), in its capacity as
observer, attended the 109th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee and the forty eighth session of the Tripartite Commission, held on 29 and 31 July 2019,
respectively, in Amman. On 25 September, UNAMI participated as an observer in the
110th meeting of the Subcommittee, held in Baghdad. At the meetings, participants
received updates on the findings at the Samawah site, Muthanna Governorate, and on
the explorations and excavations at potential burial sites located in Karbala ’ and
Rahhaliyah, which were carried out by the Ministry of Defence of Iraq with support
from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). It was indicated that
excavation work at the Khamisiyah site had been postponed owing to religious
festivities and would resume in the coming months. No new information emerged
regarding other sites in Salman Pak, Radwaniyah and Barjisiyah in Iraq or the naval
base in Kuwait. The Subcommittee agreed to continue exploration work and the
search for new information on the sites.
3.
On 8 August, an official handover from Iraq to Kuwait of all the human remains
found at the Samawah site early in March was conducted at the Safwan border
crossing between the countries, under the supervision of ICRC. The Kuwaiti
delegation informed the Technical Subcommittee that the reassociation of the human
remains and their subsequent DNA identification processes were continuing in
Kuwait. Preliminary findings had indicated positive matches with some of the missing
persons on their lists. The final results would be announced once the full identification
process had been completed.

19-18921 (E)

081119

*1918921*

S/2019/865

4.
The Technical Subcommittee agreed that ICRC would draft a new protocol for
future cross-border transfers of human remains, in consultation with Iraq and Kuwait.
Once finalized, it would be submitted to the Subcommittee for review and subsequent
adoption by the Tripartite Commission.
5.
On 27 July, the Governor of Muthanna publicly announce d that another mass
grave, likely to contain Kuwaiti remains, had been found in the Samawah desert.
During the 109th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, the Iraqi delegation
reported that government security forces had secured the site so that further
excavation work could be carried out in due course. During the 110th meeting, the
Iraqi delegation noted that the Governor was unsure whether the site contained
Kuwaiti missing persons. The Subcommittee agreed that further exploratory work at
the site, in particular a review of available satellite imagery, was therefore required.
With guidance from ICRC, the members agreed to provide any additional satellite
imagery and information on the site that might be in their possession. It was also
agreed that a joint Iraqi, Kuwaiti and ICRC excavation mission to the site would be
conducted in due time.
6.
At the 110th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, the Ministry of Defence
of Iraq provided an update on excavation work conducted from 15 to 17 September
at the Karbala’ and Rahhaliyah sites, with support from ICRC. The Subcommittee
agreed to continue the search for additional information on the Karbala ’ site. In the
absence of indicators that further mass graves were likely to be located at the
Rahhaliyah site, the Subcommittee decided to suspend investigations there.
7.
On 6 August, my Special Representative and my Deputy Special Representative
met the newly appointed Minister of Defence of Iraq, Najah al -Shammari, who
expressed his determination to resolve the Kuwaiti missing persons file.
8.
On 4 September, my Deputy Special Representative met the Permanent
Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations, Mansour al-Otaibi, in New York.
They discussed relations between Kuwait and Iraq, the latest developments on the
Kuwaiti file and UNAMI activities in that regard.
9.
In a meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Mohamed Ali
al-Hakim, on 16 September, my Special Representative discussed, among other
things, the search for missing Kuwaiti and third -country nationals and missing
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. The Minister reiterated his
Government’s commitment and determination with regard to resolving outstanding
issues between Iraq and Kuwait.
10. UNAMI, in cooperation with the specialized training department of the Service
for Geospatial, Information and Telecommunications Technologies at the United
Nations Global Services Centre in Brindisi, continued logistical preparations for a
training course on the use of ground-penetrating radar for some 10 designated staff
members from the Ministry of Defence of Iraq. The training is scheduled to be
delivered in Iraq later in 2019 and will help in identifying clandestine burial sites.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
11. On 28 August, the Government of Iraq handed over to the Government of Kuwait
42,000 of 162,000 books recently found to belong to the National Library and Kuwait
University. The handover was held at the Diplomatic Institute in Kuwait City, where
it was witnessed by the United Nations Resident Coordinator ad interim in Kuwait.

2/3

19-18921

S/2019/865

12. While meeting my Special Representative on 16 September, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq reported that a large number of Kuwaiti books, in addition t o
the 162,000 already identified, had been collected, with preparations continuing for
their official handover to Kuwait.
13. On 26 September, UNAMI staff met officials from the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Iraq to discuss the modalities for transferring the books. The officials said
that the Ministry had comprehensively searched universities, other academic
institutions and government and private institutions all over Iraq to collate the
consignment. UNAMI reiterated its willingness to support the repatriation of the
books.
14. On 27 October, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq officially handed over to
the Government of Kuwait an additional consignment of Kuwaiti property,
comprising some 200,000 books belonging to the National Library and Kuwait
University. The official handover was conducted in Kuwait City in the presence of
the Deputy Assistant Foreign Minister for International Organizations of Kuwait,
Abdulaziz al-Jarallah, the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq,
Hazim al-Yusufi, and the United Nations Resident Coordinator in Kuwait.

IV. Observations
15. In recent months, the persistent efforts by the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait,
ICRC and the Tripartite Commission have collectively yielded significant progress on
this important humanitarian file. The progress was made possible thanks to the hard
work of the Government of Iraq, in particular the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, the unwavering diplomatic and other efforts by the Government of
Kuwait, the supportive and guiding role of ICRC and the important contributions of
other Commission members in the form of, for example, maps, satellite imagery and
diplomatic and military archives. I encourage all Commission members to continue
their search for the remaining Kuwaiti missing persons with the same dedication and
commitment. I sincerely hope that the ongoing diligent efforts of the Kuwaiti forensics
team to complete the identification of the human remains recovered in Samawah in
March will soon bring a degree of relief to some of the families.
16. The handover by the Government of Iraq, in late August and late October, of a
large number of books from Kuwait University and the National Library represents
another important step forward in the recovery and return of Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives. The ongoing efforts by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of Iraq to identify and collect Kuwaiti books from across Iraq are commendable, and
I strongly encourage the Government to build on those successful efforts and to take
all steps necessary to continue the search for further missing items, in particular the
Kuwaiti national archives.
17. My Special Representative and my Deputy Special Representative will continue
to do all that they can to promote further progress on this file, working closely with
the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait, ICRC and other partners.

19-18921

3/3
