General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

30

4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession
are deposited subsequent to the entry into force of this Agreement, it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of
their instruments of ratification or accession.
5. The depositary Governments shall promptly inform all
signatory and acceding States of the date of each signature,
the date of deposit of each instrument. of ratification or accessi6b and the date of the entry into f<Jl'Cl,Uf this Agreement.
and of the receipt of other notices.
6. This Agreement shall be registered by the depositary
Governments pursuant to Article I 02 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
ARTICLE IX
This Agreement, the Chinese, English, French, Russian and
Spanish texts of which are equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the depositary Governments. Duly
certified copies of the Agreement shaill be transmitted by the
depositary Governments to the Governments of the signatory
and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized for
the purpose, have signed this Agreement.
day
on the
copies, at
DONE in
of ...

3484 (XXX). General and complete disarmament
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3261 D (XXIX) of 9 December 1974 and 3386 (XXX) of 12 November 1975,
Convinced of the urgent necessity that all States, in
particular nuclear-weapon States, take effective measures to reverse the momentum of the nuclear arms race,
Recalling also its resolutions on the urgent need for
the prevention of nuclear proliferation and for an effective comprehensive nuolear weapon test ban,
Bearing in mind that it has not yet proved possible
to differentiate between the technolo~ for nuclear
weapons and that for nuclear explosive devices for
peaceful purposes and that, consequently, it is not possible at present to develop nuclear explosive devices
for peaceful purposes without at the same time acquiring a nuclear weapon capability,
Conscious of the fact that the testing and application
of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes can have
significant arms control implications both for the spread
of nuclear weapons and their technology to States which
do not already have them and, in the context of limitations of nuclear weapon testing, for the refinement of
the arsenals of existing nuclear-weapon States,
Desir.ous of ensuring the fullest possible exchange of
nuclear technology and nuclear materials for the economic and social benefit of mankind without increasing the risk of diversion to military purposes and the
consequent danger to world peace and security,
Noting that non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons118
have the right to obtain the potential benefits from any
applications of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, under appropriate international observation and
through appropriate international procedures, pursuant
to a special international agreement, through an appropriate international body with adequate representation of non-nuclear-weapon States, as contemplated in
article V of the Treaty,
118 Resolution 2373 (XXIl), annex.

Noting further that the potential benefits from any
applications of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes could be made available to non-nuclear-weapon
States not parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons by way of nuclear explosion
services provided by nuclear-weapon States, as defined
by the Treaty, and conducted under the appropriate
international observation and appropriate international
procedures called for in article V of the Treaty and in
accordance with other applicable international obligations,
Recalling once again the statements made at the
1577th meeting of the First Committee, on 31 May
1968, by the representatives of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America
concerning the provisions of article V of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons which relate to the conclusion of a special international agreement on nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, 57
Convinced of the need for the special international
agreement or agreements contemplated in article V of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in respect of the peaceful application of nuclear
explosions,
1. Appeals once again to all States, in particular
nuclear-weapon States, to exert concerted efforts in all
the appropriate international forums with a view to
working out promptly effective measures for the cessation of th1t ,nuclear arms race and for the prevention
of the further proliferation of nuclear weapons;
2. Notes with appreciation:
(a) The report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency concerning its studies of the peaceful applications of nuclear explosions, their utility and feasibility, including legal, health and safety aspects, which
comprises information regarding the establishment by
the Agency of the Ad Hoe Advisory Group on Nuclear
Explosions for Peaceful Purposes;58
( b) The section of the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament with respect to the
arms control implications of peaceful nuclear explosions within the framework of a comprehensive test
ban;59
( c) The consideration given by the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to the role of nuclear
explosions for peaceful purposes as provided for in
that Treaty;60
( d) The observations of the Secretary-General in
the introduction to his annual report submitted to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session;61
3. Notes the conolusions of the Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons with respect to article V of the Treaty,
contained in the Final Declaration of the Conference,
adopted by consensus po 30 May 1975;62
4. Notes also that the final documentation of the
Conference included a draft resolution submitted by
157 See A/C.1/1O52.
58 See A/10168 and Corr.I and Add.l.
159 Official Records of the General .Assembly,

Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/10027), paras. 62-78.
eo See A/10215, annex.
61 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. JA (A/10001/Add.l), sect. VIII.
82 A/C.1/1068, annex I.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

eight States which attended the Conference, 63 which
urged the Depositary Governments of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to initiate im.mediate consultations with all of the other States parties
to the Treaty in order to reach agreement on the most
appropriate place and date for holding a meeting of
the parties in order to conclude the special basic international agreement contemplated in artiole V of the
Treaty;
5. Notes in this connexion that, according to information provided by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America to the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons in response to the
invitation addressed to them in General Assembly resolution 3261 D (XXIX), no consultations have yet taken
place for the conclusion of the special basic international agreement on nuclear explosions for peaceful
purposes as envisaged in article V of that Treaty;
6. Invites the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and the United States of America to provide information
on such consultations as they may have entered into or
may intend to enter into for the conclusion of the special basic international agreement on nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, as envisaged in article V
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, to the General Assembly at its thirty-first
session through the Secretary-General;
7. Requests the International Atomic Energy
Agency, within its sphere of competence, to continue
its present examination of the aspects of the peaceful
application of nuclear explosions, which the Board of
Governors of the Agency has authorized under its resolution adopted on 11 June 1975,64 and to report on
progress in all these areas to the General Assembly
at its thirty-first session;
8. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to keep under review, in its consideration of an elaboration of a comprehensive test ban
treaty, the arms control implicat_ions <;>f nuclear e~plosions for peaceful purposes, mclud1':1g the pos~1bility that such explosions could be misused to cir:umvent any ban on the testing of nuclear weapons;
9. Stresses the need to ensure, particularly in the
:ontext of a comprehensive test ban, that any testing
or application of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes does not contribute to the testing or refinement
:,f the nuclear weapon arsenals of nuclear-weapon
States or to the acquisition of nucle~r explosive capability by other States;
10. Calls upon all Member States to support and
assist in the fulfilment of these tasks.
2439th plenary meetinf!
12 December 1975
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling that disarmament is one of the fundamental objectives of the United Nations,
Deeply concerned that the arms race bas continued
unabated and that the world expenditure on armaments
is increasing,
es See A/10215, annex, para. 4.
64 See A/10168/ Add.I.

31

Recalling that in its resolution 3261 A (XXIX) of
9 December 1974 it requested the Secretary-General
and Governments to report on the action and steps
which they had taken to publicize the Disarmament
Decade in order to acquaint the general public with its
purposes and objectives, and noting the report of the
Secretary-General in this regard,flli
Regretting that in recent years no significant progress
has been made in the field of disarmament,
Recognizing, therefore, the need to pursue negotiations on disarmament in existing negotiating forums,
Conscious of the need to utilize the resources spent
in the arms race for economic and social development,
particularly in the developing countries,
Reaffirming its conviction that the entire international community bas a vital interest and a common
responsibility in making every effort towards achieving
progress in the search for general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international
control,
Noting therefore the declaration adopted by the
Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries held at Lima from 25 to 30 August
1975, calling for new initiatives on a universal basis in
order to promote progress in disarmament, 88
Considering that the role of the United Nations in
the field of disarmament is far from adequate in comparison with existing needs,
Recognizing the need for additional and improved
information about relevant developments, progress and
results in the field of disarmament to be provided to
all Member States,
Noting the increased responsibilities that have been
placed upon the Disarmament Affairs Division of the
Secretariat in servicing meetings and conferences on
disarmament, as well as in implementing the decisions
adopted by the General Assembly, including requests
for information, studies and reports on matters related to disarmament,
·
Noting the suggestion made by the Secretary-General in the introduction to his annual report to the
General Assembly87 that a basic review be carried out
of the role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament,
1. Invites all States to communicate to the Secre-tary-General, not later than 1 May 1976, their views
and suggestions on the strengthening of the role of the
United Nations in the field of disarmament;
2. Decides to establish an Ad Hoe Committee ·on
the Review of the Role of the United Nations in 1he
Field of Disarmament, which shall. be a committee of
the General Assembly, open to the participation of all
Member States, to carry out a basic review of the role
of the United Nations in that field;
3. Decides that the review should, inter alia focus
on the following objectives:
'
(a) Possible new approaches for achieving more
effective procedures and organization of work in the
field of disarmament, thereby enabling the United
Nations to exercise its full role in multilateral disarmament efforts;
911 A/10294.
88 A/10217 and Corr.I, annex, pp. 3-23.

87 See Offecial Records of the General .4uembly Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. JA (A/10001/Add.1), seci. vm.

32

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

(b) Ways and means of improving existing United
Nations facilities for the collection, compilation and
dissemination of information on disarmament issues, in
order to keep all Governments, as well as world public
opinion, properly informed on progress achieved in the
field. of disarmament; .
(c) Ways and means to enable the Secretariat to
assist, on request, States parties to multilateral disarmament agreements in their duty to ensure the effective functioning of such agreements, including appropriate periodic reviews;
4; Requests the Secretary-General to render all
possible assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee, including preparation of summary records;
5. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to meet for a
short organizational session of not longer than one
week in January 1976 and for substantive sessions of
two weeks in June/July 1976 and of one week in
September 1976 and to submit its report, including
findings and proposals, to the General Assembly at its
thirty-first session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Strengthening
of the role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament".
2439th plenary meeting
12 December 1975
C
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2602 A (XXIV) of 16 De_cember 1969 relating to the initiation of bilateral negotiations between the Governments of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America on the limitation of offensive and defensive
strategic nuclear-weapon systems,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2932 B (XXVII) of
29 November 1972, 3184 A and C (XXVIll) of
18 December 1973 and 3261 C (XXIX) of 9 December 1974,

Bearing in mind that the above-mentioned Governments agreed on 21 June 1973 to make serious efforts
to work out and sign in •1974 the agreement on more
complete measures on the limitation of strategic offensive arms called for in the interim agreement of
26 May 1972, and that on the same occasion they expressed their intention to carry out the subsequent reduction of such arms,
·
Noting that, as a result of the discussions held at the
highest level in November 1974 also between the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America, both sides reaffirmed their intention to conclude an agreement on the limitation of strategic offensive arms to last until 31 December 1985 inclusive
and declared that they would make an effort to complete such an agreement in the course of 1975,
Noting also that at the same meeting it was agreed to
set ceilings both on the strategic offensive nuclear delivery vehicles as well as on such of those vehicles that
may be equipped with multiple independently targetable
warheads, and that both sides stated that 'favourable
prospects existed for completing the work on the new
agreement in 197S and stressed that it would include
provisions for further negotiations beginning no later

than 1980-1981 on the question of further limitations
and possible reductions of strategic arms in the period
after 1985,
Sharing fully the opinion expressed by the Secretary-General to the effect that disarmament negotiations
move very slowly in comparison to the obvious perils
posed by the enormous arsenals of nuclear weapons,
l. Regrets the absence of positive results during
the last two years of the bilateral negotiations between
the Governments of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the limitation of their strategic nuclear-weapon systems;
2. Expresses its concern for the very high ceilings
of nuclear arms set for themselves by both States, for
the total absence of qualitative limitations of such arms,
for the protracted time-table contemplated for the negotiation of further limitations and possible reductions
of the nuclear arsenals and for the situation thus
created;
3. Urges anew the Union of Soviet Socialist Repuolics and the United States of America to broaden
the scope and accelerate the pace of their strategic
nuclear arms limitation talks, and stresses once again
the necessity and urgency of reaching agreement on
important qualitative limitations and substantial reductions of their strategic nuclear-weapon systems as a
positive step towards nuclear disarmament;
4. Reite{ates its previous invitation to both Governments to 'keep the General Assembly informed in
good time of the progress and results of their negotiations.
2439th plenary meetinl(
12 December 1975
D
The General Assembly,
Conscious of the increased responsibilities that have
been placed upon the Disarmament Affairs Division of
the Secretariat in servicing meetings and conferences
on disarmament, as well as in implementing the decisions adopted by the General Assembly, including
requests for information, studies and reports on matters related to disarmament,
Noting, in particular, that the number of meetings
to be serviced and the amount of documentation to be
prepared by the Disarmament Affairs Division has
doubled within the last four years,
Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate
steps for the strengthening of the Disarmament Affairs
Division, including the addition of staff necessary for
the effective carrying out of its increased responsibilities.
2439th plenary meeting
12 December 1975

E
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2660 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, in which it commended the Treaty on the
Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons
and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the SeaBed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof,
Noting that article VII of the Treaty provides:
"Five years after the entry into force of this Treaty,
a conference of Parties to the Treaty shall be held
at Geneva, Switzerland, in oroer to review the operation of this Treaty with a view to assuring that the

........_ ••,.... _ .. .....,.._,.._l'lnlC
purposes of the preamble and the provisiC)DS of the·
Treaiy are being reali7.ed. Such review shall take
into account any relevant technolopcal developw. The review c:onfenDCI shall detetmiDe, in
accordanc:e with the views of a majority of dlOle
Partia ■uending. whether and when ID ldditioa■l
review coaferenco shall be convened.",
Bearln, In mind that the TreatY will ~ been in
fcxw for five yean on 18 May 1977 and e x ~ that
the review confennee c■lled for in the Treaty will
t■ko place IOOD after tbat date,

...,

II

1. Notu that after appropriate comultalioa a paeparatory committee of panies to the Treaty ii to be

mapd;
2. .,,__ the Slcretary-Oenen to nnclcr tbe
Dll'9llllry •WllallCI IDd to provide such 11mca tndllflna MD!PIIJ l'ICOldl, II Dla1 be required fw tbe
review conferenw ancl itl prep■ntioa;
3. Rab its ~ hope for the widest poai•
ble adbermol to tbo Tnaty.
26911s ,,_.,,,,,...,
12 Det:e,,l,., JV/S
