General Aaembly-Twenty-fourth SeHion

68

(a) The scope of the sanctions against the illegal
racist minority regime should be widened to include
all the measures laid down in Article 41 of the Charter;
( b) Sanctions should be imposed on South Africa
and Portugal, the Governments of which have blatantly refused to carry out the mandatory decisions
of the Security Council;
15. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to keep the situation in the
Territory under review;
16. Calls upon the administering Power to report
to the Special Committee on its action in the implementation of the present resolution.
1816th plenary meeting,
21 November 1969.
2517 (XXIV).

Question of Namibia

The General Assembly,_
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, 2248
(S-V) of 19 May 1967, 2498 (XXIV) of 31 October
1969 and its other relevant resolutions on the question
of Namibia, as well as Security Council resolution 264
(1969) of 20 March 1969,
Recalling further Security Council resolution 269
(1969) of 12 August 1969, in particular paragraph 5
in which the Council called upon the Government of
South Africa to withdraw its administration from Namibia immediately and in any case before 4 October
1969,
. Deeply concerned about the situation in Namibia,
which constitutes a threat to international peace and
security and which has been further aggravated by
South Africa's occupation of the Territory and that
country's defiant refusal to comply with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security

Council,
· Considering that the basic condition required, on the
oiie hand, to enable the Namibian :people to exercise
*ir right to self-determination and mdependence and,
on tlle other hand, to enable the United Nations to
fulfil its responsibilities towards Namibia is the applitjltion, of effective measures to bring to an end imDlC(liately the illegal presence of South Africa in the
']ferritory,
Gtavely concerned that the refusal of South Africa
to comply with the decisions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly seriously undermines and
epcroaches on the authority of the United Nations,
Mindful ot the obligations of Member States under
4rticle 25 of the Charter of the United Nations,
: Noting with appreciation the report of the United
llfations Council for Namibia,7
• 1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination and independence, in
cpnformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(?{V), and the legitimacy of their struggle against the
'-:>reign occupation of their territory;
2. Expresses solidarity with the people of Namibia
i4 their legitimate struggle against foreign occupation
abd requests all States to provide increased moral and
material assistance to them;
· T Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
S11sion, Supplement No. 24 (A/7624/Rev.l).

3. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its persistent refusal to withdraw its administration
from the Territory and for its policies and actions
designed to destroy the national unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia, thus persistently violating the
principles and obligations of the Charter of the United
Nations;
4. Draws the attention of the Security Council to
the need for taking appropriate measures in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter to solve
the grave situation that has arisen as a result of
South Africa's refusal to withdraw its administration
from Namibia;
5. Commends the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to all States and to the subsidiary organs of the General Assembly and other
competent organs of the United Nations, as well as
to the specialized agencies and other international
organizations concerned, for appropriate action, acting
in conformity with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council;
6. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to continue to discharge, by every available
means, the functions entrusted to it in the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the necessary assistance and facilities to the
United Nations Council for Namibia to discharge its
duties and functions;
8. Calls upon all States to co-operate with the
United Nations Council for Namibia in carrying out
the tasks entrusted to it.
1819th plenary meeting,
1 December 1969.
2518 (XXIV).

Petition8 concerning Namibia

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the special responsibilities of the
United Nations with regard to Namibia, including in
particular those set out in General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, 2248 (S-V)
of 19 May 1967, 2325 (XXII) of 16 December
1967 and 2403 (XXIII) and 2404 (XXIII) of 16
December 1968,
Noting that the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples has received and examined during
1969 ten petitions concerning Namibia, in accordance
with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 1805
(XVII) of 14 December 1962 and within the context
of the implementation of the Declaration,
Noting further that these petitions relate, inter alia,
to the general situation and recent developments concerning Namibia, to the refusal by South Africa to
implement General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI)
and 2248 (S-V) and, in particular, to the continued
implementation by South Africa of the recommendations of the Odendaal Commission, 8 including the partitioning of the Territory into "self-governing homelands" and the removal of Africans from their ancestral lands,
~

s Commission of Enquiry into South West Africa Affairs,
established in 1962 by the Government of South Africa under
the chairmanship of Mr. F. H. Odendaal.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth 'Committee

1. Notes that the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples has taken these petitions into
account in its consideration of the situation in Namibia
within the context of the implementation of the Declaration;
2. Notes further that those petitions which raised
matters of concern to the United Nations Council for
Namibia have been brought to the latter's attention
by the Secretariat and have been taken into consideration by the Council in the performance of the functions as~igned to it by the General Assembly in resolutions 2248 (S-V), 2325 (XXII) and 2403 (XXIII);
3. Draws the attention of the petitioners concerned
to the report on the Territory submitted by the Special
Committee9 and to the resolutions on the question of
Namibia adopted by the General Assembly at its
twenty-fourth session, as well as to the report of the
United Nations Council for Namibia. 10
I 819th plenary meeting,
1 December 1969.
2554 (XXIV). Activities of foreign economic and
other interests whirh are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peooles in Southern Rhodesia,
Namibia and Territories under Portuguese
domination and in all other Territories
under colonial domination and efforts to
eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories under Portuguese domination and in all other
Territories under colonial domination and efforts to
eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to this question, 11
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
in particular the eighth preambular paragraph thereof,
and its resolution 2425 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968,
Convinced that any economic or other activity which
impedes the implementation of resolution 1514 (XV)
and which obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination
of colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in
southern Africa and other colonial Territories violates
the political, economic and social rights and interests
of the people in these Territories and is therefore ine Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/7623/Rev.1), chapter VII.
1-0 Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (A/7624/Rev.1 ).
11 Ibid., Supplement No. 23A (A/7623/Rev.1/ Add.l ).

69

compatible with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling that the administering Powers have the
obligation to ensure the political, economic, social and
educational advancement of the inhabitants of the
Territories under their administration and to protect
the population and the natural resources of these Territories against abuses, in accordance with Chapters XI
and XII of the Charter,
1. Approves the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the natural resources of their Territories, as well as their right to dispose of these resources in their best interest in the light of the eighth
preambular paragraph of General Assembly resclution
1514 (XV);
3. Affirms that foreign economic and other interests operating in colonial Territories which are exploiting those Territories constitute a major obstacle
to political independence as well as to the enjoyment
of the natural resources of these Territories by the
indigenous inhabitants;
4. Declares that any administering Power, by depriving the colonial peoples of the exercise of their rights
or by subordinating them to foreign economic and
financial interests, violates the obligations it has assumed
under Chapters XI and XII of the Charter of the
United Nations and impedes the implementation of
resolution 1514 (XV);
5. Condemns the exploitation of the colonial Territories and peoples and the methods practised in the
Territories under colonial domination by those foreign
economic, financial and other interests which are designed to perpetuate colonial rule;
6. Deplores the attitude of the colonial Powers and
States concerned which have not taken any action to
implement the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions;
7. Requests the administering Powers and States
concerned whose companies and nationals are engaged in such activities to take immediate measures
to put an end to all practices which exploit the Territories and peoples under colonial rule, in conformity
with General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, 2288 (XXII) of 7 December 1967
and 2425 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968, in particular by preventing new investments, especially in
southern Africa, which run counter to the objectives
of the above-mentioned resolutions;
8. Requests all States to take effective measures to
cease forthwith the supply of funds or other forms
of economic and technical assistance to colonial Powers
which use such assistance to repress the national liberation movements;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
study this question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to use all the
facilities at his disposal to render assistance to the
Special Committee in the pursuit of this study.
1831st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.
