30

General AHembly-Twenty-fifth SeS11ion

6. Expresses its appreciation of the assistance
rendered to the Scientific Committee by the specialized
agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the non-governmental organizations concerned;
1. Recommends that all parties concerned should
continue their co-operation with the Scientific Committee;
8. Commends the Scientific Committee for the discussion it has had on the contribution that might be
made to the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment and recommends that the Secretary-General should fully utilize the relevant experience of the
Committee in the further preparations for this Conference;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Scientific Committee with the assistance
necessary for the conduct of its work and the dissemination of its findings to the public.
1864th plenary meeting,
13 October 1970.

2624 (XXV). The policies of apartheid of the
Government of South Africa
The General Assembly,
Takin1 note of the report of the Special Committee
on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the
Republic of South Africa/'
RecalUn1 its resolution 2505 (XXIV) of 20 November 1969 expressing the firm intention of the United
Nations, actinJ in co-operation with the Organization
of African Umty, to intensify its efforts to find a solution to the present grave situation in southern Africa,
Recalling further Security Council resolution 282
(1970) of 23 July 1970 calling upon all States to
strengthen the arms embargo against South Africa,
Seriously concerned at reports that this resolution
of the Security Council is not yet being implemented
by some States,
Gravely concerned about the continued build-up of
the South African military and police forces and the
consequent aggravation of the situation in southern
Africa,
Taking note of the resolution adopted on 2 September 1970 by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity,8 mandating a delegation of five African States to urge the
Governments concerned to stop selling arms to South
Africa and also to stop assisting in the manufacture of
arms in South Africa,
Taking note also of the resolution on apartheid and
racial discrimination8 adopted by the Third Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Lusaka from 8 to 10 September
1970,
1. Calls upon all States to take immediate steps to
implement fully the provisions of Security Council
resolution 282 (1970);
2. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
the implementation of the present resolution, as he has
been doing with regard to Security Council resolution
282 (1970), and to report to the- General Assembly
not later than 10 December 1970.
1864th plenary meeting,
13 October 1970.
I Ibid., Twenty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/8022/
llev.1).
a See A/SPC/L.181.

2656 (XXV). Establishment of the Working
Group on the Financing of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East4

The General Assembly,
Havi"!.g considered the report of the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering the period from 1 July 1969 to 30 June 1970,G
Noting with grave concern the acute financial situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and its serious
implications for the future work of the Agency,
Bearing in mind the appeal made by the SecretaryGeneral on 2 December 1970 at the 740th meeting of
the Special Political Committee as well as the appeal
made by the Chairman of that Committee on 25 November 1970 at the 733rd meeting of the Committee,
and taking into account the suggestions made in the
course of the debate concerning possible means of
securing additional income,
1. Decides to establish a Working Group on the
Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, consisting of nine Member States, to study all aspects of
the financing of the Agency;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly,
in consultation with the Secretary-General, to designate
the Member States which will compose the Working
Group;
3. Requests the Working Group, in consultation
with the Secretary-General and the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, to
present an interim report to the General Assembly,
not later than 14 December 1970, containing its recommendations on possible measures to be taken to
prevent a reduction of the Agency's services in 1971;
4. Also requests the Working Group, in the interv&l
between the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth sessions of
the General Assembly, to assist, as appropriate, the
Secretary-General and the Commissioner-General of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East in reaching solutions to the problems posed by the Agency's financial
crisis;
5. Further requests the Working Group, in consultation with the Secretary-General, the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
the specialized agencies, to present a comprehensive
report on all aspects of the financing of the Agency
to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session.
1918th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.

•

•

•

At the 1926th plenary meeting, on 11 December 1970, the
President of the General Assembly announced that, in pursuance of paragraph 2 of the above resolution, he had
designated the nine members of the Working Group on the
Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
4 See also resolution 2728 (XXV), p. 8.
G Official Records of the General Assembly,

Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/8013).

Twenty-fifth

Retolatlone adopted on the reporll of the Special Polldcal Committee
' The Working Group is composed of the following Member
States: FltANCB, GHANA, JAPAN, LEBANON, NORWAY, TRINIDAD
AND ToBAOO, TuuEY, UNITED KINoDoM oF GREAT BRITAIN
AND N01tnmRN lllLAND and UNITED STATES oF AMERICA,

26'70 (XXV). Comprehensive review of the whole
queatlon of peace-keeping -operalions in all
their aapect11
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 196S, 20S3 A (XX) of 1S December 1965,
2249 (S-V) of 23 May 1967, 2308 (XXII) of 13 December 1967 and 2451 (XXIII) of 19 December
1968,
Recalling in particular its resolution 2576 (XXIV)
of 15 December 1969, in which it requested the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations to continue its work and to submit to the General Assembly
at its twenty-fifth session a comprehensive report
on the United Nations military observers established
or authorized by the Security Council for observation
purposes pursuant to Council resolutions, as well as
a progress report on such work as the Special Committee miaht
able to undertake on any other models
of peace-Keeping operations,
Having received and examined the report of the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations of
1 October 1970,'
Noting with regret that the mandate entrusted to the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations has
not as yet been fulfilled,
Conscious nevertheless that the problems with which
the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations
has been faced are of a fundamental nature and _that
the Special Committee believes that more time is
required,
Realizing that problems of such a fundamental
nature require further consultations within the context
of the United Nations in order to enable the Special
Committee on Peace-keeping Operations to fulfil its
mandate,
Bearing in mind the concern of Member States, as
expressed in solemn declarations adopted on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, over the need to reach an early agreement for
carrying out United Nations peace-keeping operations
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations;
2. Stresses the importance of achieving agreed guidelines to enhance the effectiveness of United Nations
peace-kee_Ping operations consistent with the Charter
and to this end urges the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to accelerate its work;
3. Instructs the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to mtensify its efforts with a view
to completing, b).' 1 May 1971, its report on the
United Nations nnlitary observers established or authorized by the Securitr. Council for observation purposes
pursuant to Councll resolutions and to determine, in
the light of the progress achieved by that date, whether
alternative methods are advisable for the early fulfilment by the Special Committee of its mandate to
reach an agreement on peace-keeping operations in
conformity with the Charter;

oe

• Ibid,, Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 36,
document A/8081.

11

4. Notes with interest the suggestions, J)!oposals
and documents submitted on this item during the preaent session and transmits to the Special Committee
on Peace-keeping Operations the records of the debates
on the item at this session, together with the documents put forward in the course of those debates;
S. Requests the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, in the course of its further deliberations, to study carefully and to take full account of
the views expressed and the suggestions, proposals and
documents submitted at the present session, and to
report on them to the General Assembly at its twentysixth session, as appropriate, within the context of
its work;
6. Directs the Special Committee on Peace-keepina
Operations to submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-sixth session a comeleted comprehensive report
on the United Nations military observers establlsned
or authorized by the Security Council for observation
purposes pursuant to Council resolutions, as well u
a progress report on any other models of peace-keeping
operations.
1921st pltnary ,Mettn,,
8 December 1970.

2671 (XXV). The pollclee of apartheid of the
Government of South Afrlca1
A

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the work of the Special Committee
on Apartheid, 8
Considering it essential to intensify United Nations
efforts to promote concerted international action for
the elimination of apartheid in South Africa,
Recognizing the need for greater co-ordination of
efforts by the United Nations towards this end and
for the elimination of duplication, in order to utilize
the resources for a more effective international campaign against apartheid,
1. Requests the Special Committee on Apartheid
constantly to review all aspects of the policies of
apartheid in South Africa and its international repercussions, including:
(a) Legislative, administrative and other racially
discriminatory measures in South Africa and their
effects;
( b) Repression of opponents of apartheid;
( c) Efforts by the Government of South Africa to
extend its inhuman policies of apartheid beyond the
borders of South Africa;
( d) Ways and means of promoting concerted international action to secure the elimination of apartheid,·
and tc report from time to time, as appropriate, to
the General Assembly or the Security Council, or
both;
2. Draws the attention of all United Nations organs
concerned to this decision, so that any undue duplication of efforts may be avoided;
T The decision of the General Assembly to shorten the name
of the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of tho
Government of the Republic of South Africa (see "Other
decisions" below, p. 37) has been taken into account in the
present resolution.
e See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/8022/Rev.1).
