United Nations

A/RES/59/288

General Assembly

Distr.: General
29 April 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 107

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 13 April 2005
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/652/Add.1)]

59/288. Procurement reform
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/14 of 29 October 1999, 55/247 of 12 April 2001
and 57/279 of 20 December 2002,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on procurement
reform, 1 the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions 2 and the reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the audit of safeguarding air safety standards while procuring air services for the
United Nations peacekeeping missions 3 and on the audit of the functioning of the
Headquarters Committee on Contracts, 4
A.

Report of the Secretary-General on procurement reform

1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General1 and the related report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;2
2.
Welcomes the progress achieved in addressing the concerns expressed in
its resolution 57/279 and the recent significant improvements made by the
Secretary-General in procurement reform at Headquarters and in the field missions;
Notes with appreciation the progress achieved in the harmonization and
3.
streamlining of procurement practices;
4.
Calls upon the executive heads of the funds and programmes of the
United Nations to continue their efforts with a view to improving the efficiency of
procurement by reducing duplication and harmonizing the procurement procedures
in the United Nations system as a whole, in close cooperation with the Procurement
Service of the Office of Central Support Services of the Secretariat;
Requests the Secretary-General to encourage all the organizations of the
5.
United Nations system, consistent with their respective mandates, to further improve
_______________
1

A/59/216.
See A/59/540.
3
See A/59/347.
4
See A/58/294.
2

04-49441

A/RES/59/288

their procurement practices, inter alia, by participating in the United Nations Global
Marketplace with a view to creating one common United Nations global
procurement web site;
Notes the activities of the Inter-Agency Procurement Working Group and
6.
of the Common Services Procurement Working Group on enhancing the
transparency and increasing the harmonization of procurement practices, and
requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the executive heads of the
United Nations funds and programmes, to continue work in this regard;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to simplify and streamline the
7.
vendor registration process and to share responsibilities among the various United
Nations organizations;
Notes the efforts made by the Secretary-General to increase procurement
8.
opportunities for developing countries and countries with economies in transition,
and requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to simplify the vendor registration process, taking into
account access to the Internet;
(b) To take further steps to sensitize the business community to procurement
opportunities within the United Nations system, inter alia:
(i)

The holding of additional business seminars;

(ii) Inviting the Inter-Agency Procurement Working Group to hold more
meetings in developing countries;
(iii) Including the issue of “Diversity of sources of procurement” as an agenda
item at the annual meetings of the Inter-Agency Procurement Working Group;
9.
Notes also the recent introduction of the principle of best value for
money in relation to procurement, and requests the Secretary-General, when
applying this principle, to continue safeguarding the financial interests of the
Organization, consider best practices and ensure that adequate records are kept;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly an
overview and general analysis of the functioning of the principle of best value for
money, within the framework of his regular reporting on procurement reform;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to implement measures to reduce the
time line associated with invoice payment;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to issue ethical guidelines without
delay for those involved in the procurement process, requests that those guidelines be
shared with Member States through the procurement web site, and reiterates its request
to the Secretary-General for the early adoption of a code of conduct for vendors and a
declaration of ethical responsibilities for all staff involved in the procurement process;
13. Encourages the Inter-Agency Procurement Working Group to continue
its efforts to produce comprehensive and generally applicable statistics
encompassing the procurement activities of all United Nations entities;
14. Welcomes the training programmes for United Nations procurement staff that
the Procurement Service has initiated, including in the field, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to support these programmes and to evaluate and monitor their impact;
15. Notes the promotion by the Procurement Service of the voluntary
principles of the corporate social responsibility initiative, the Global Compact,
2

A/RES/59/288

within the United Nations procurement framework, and requests the SecretaryGeneral, as appropriate, to report to the General Assembly for further consideration;
16. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the comments and
observations of the Board of Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight Services,
to ensure that information regarding the accountability factor within the
procurement reform framework is provided in the next report of the SecretaryGeneral on procurement reform;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that consistent
non-compliance and poor performance by vendors is recorded and that appropriate
action is taken with respect to their inclusion in the list of vendors;
18. Takes note of the agreements made with major companies, and urges the
Secretary-General to continue to ensure adherence to the rules and procedures governing
the procurement process and to enable more active participation by all vendors;
19. Notes the increase in the number of ex post facto cases, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue to take appropriate action in order to minimize that
practice to those cases which fully comply with the criteria of exigency;
20. Requests the Secretary-General, in his next report on procurement
reform, to provide information on the implementation of the new delegations of
authority, including mechanisms used to strengthen effective monitoring, oversight
and accountability;
21. Notes the Secretary-General’s plan to provide purchasing cards to
departments and offices for the procurement of low-value items, and requests the
Secretariat to develop strong internal control mechanisms that will safeguard against
misuse, after consulting with the Office of Internal Oversight Services and outside
organizations experienced in administering purchase card programmes.
B.

Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of
safeguarding air safety standards while procuring air services for
the United Nations peacekeeping missions

1.
Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the audit of safeguarding air safety standards while procuring air services for the
United Nations peacekeeping missions;3
2.
Requests the Secretary-General, as recommended in the report of the
Office of Internal Oversight, to fully document the reasons for not following up on
the recovery of liquidated damages for contracts and to apply consistent methods to
the collection of liquidated damages from vendors;
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure compliance
3.
with the standards and recommended practices of the International Civil Aviation
Organization within the framework of the policy of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the Secretariat regarding the chartering of civilian registered aircraft,
with the objective of ensuring the highest level of air safety when providing air
services to the United Nations;
Notes with concern the delay and difficulties experienced in recruiting
4.
and appointing aviation safety officers in some peacekeeping operations, and
requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to fill the vacancies
expeditiously;

3

A/RES/59/288

5.
Requests the Secretary-General, in view of the limited number of site
visits by aviation experts to operational bases of air carriers, to ensure that experts
are able to conduct the necessary technical assessment of vendors;
Notes with concern that occurrences attributed to specific vendors were
6.
not included in the vendor performance reports, and requests the Secretary-General
to take all necessary measures to ensure that such occurrences are reflected in the
appropriate vendor performance reports;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Department of
7.
Peacekeeping Operations communicates the information on vendor performance to
all aviation offices involved and the Procurement Service.
C.

Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of the
functioning of the Headquarters Committee on Contracts

1.
Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the audit of the functioning of the Headquarters Committee on Contracts;4
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to review without delay options to better
safeguard the independence of the Headquarters Committee on Contracts, including
the option identified in recommendation 1 of the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services; 5
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General to examine the appropriateness of
the current threshold for the review of procurement cases by the Headquarters
Committee on Contracts with a view to improving the effectiveness and efficiency
of the functioning of the Committee, taking into account the development of the
delegation of authority to the field offices as described in paragraph 11 of the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2 and to
report on action taken to the General Assembly in the context of the next report of
the Secretary-General on procurement reform.
91st plenary meeting
13 April 2005

_______________
5

4

Ibid., para. 29.
