A /74/PV.38

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

38th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 3 December 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Buttigieg
(Malta), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 35 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(А/74/35)
Report of the Secretary-General (А/74/333)
Note by the Secretary-General (А/74/272)
Draft resolutions (A/74/L.14, A/74/L.15,
А/74/L.16 and А/74/L.17)
Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express my thanks and appreciation to
the Secretary-General, and through him to all the staff
of the United Nations, for the importance they attach to
the question of Palestine and the Arab-Israeli conflict
as a whole and for his efforts towards achieving a just
and comprehensive peace to restore the rights and
strengthen security and stability in the Middle East and
the world.
My delegation would also like to express Tunisia’s
appreciation for the tireless efforts of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and the Division for Palestinian Rights and their
work to mobilize international support for the rights
of the Palestinian people and raise the awareness of

the international community of the urgent need for
the peaceful settlement of the Palestinian question. I
would like to particularly thank Ambassador Cheikh
Niang, Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Senegal, for his valuable work in his capacity as Chair
of the Committee.
In that regard, we commend draft resolutions
A/74/L.14, A/74/L.15, А/74/L.16 and А/74/L.17, which
are before us today, and confirm our support for all of
them. Support for the Palestinian question is one of
the pillars of Tunisia’s foreign policy. We reiterate our
President’s message on the occasion of the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian people regarding
our ongoing commitment to the important and just
Palestinian cause and our solidarity with the struggling
Palestinian people and their heroic actions to reverse
the historical injustice that they have suffered for many
decades, restore their legitimate, imprescriptible rights,
including their inalienable rights, and establish an
independent State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital.
Tunisia also calls on all people of conscience
throughout the world and those who support peace
to work seriously towards achieving a lasting, just,
genuine and comprehensive peace that would end the
aggressive practices of the occupying Power and its
racist, inhumane and systematic aggressions against
the innocent Palestinian people so that they may enjoy
freedom, independence and dignity like other peoples.
Tunisia will always uphold its pledge to promote its
principled position in support of the Palestinian cause
in all regional and international forums, as well as all

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-39049 (E)

*1939049*

A/74/PV.38

to support international efforts to lay the groundwork
for a just peace that would fully restore the rights of
the legitimate owners and, ultimately, achieve lasting
peace and security for humankind.
Given the ongoing Israeli practices and resolutions
that seek to impose a fait accompli policy and change
the historical and legal status of Jerusalem and the rest
of the occupied Palestinian territory, we call on the
international community and countries of the region
to fully shoulder their responsibility and compel the
occupying Power to respect international legitimacy
and put an end to settlement activities and its flagrant
violations of international law, the terms of reference
of the peace process and all Israel’s efforts to thwart
all serious efforts for a just settlement of the question
of Palestinian, leading to instability and tension in
the region.
Tunisia reiterates its deep concern regarding the
indifference of the occupying Power to the humanitarian
suffering of the Palestinian people. In that context,
we reiterate today our call to the donors to continue
their economic and financial support to the Palestinian
National Authority. We emphasize the urgent need to
continue and increase international financial support
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East in order to enable
it continue its humanitarian role by providing basic
and fundamental services to ensure full respect for the
dignity of refugees.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me
to express our profound appreciation to the Chair of
the Special Committee for his introduction of draft
resolutions A/74/L.14, A/74/L.15, А/74/L.16 and
А/74/L.17 and to the Vice-Chair for presenting the
annual report of the Committee (A/74/35).
It is our fervent belief that the agenda item on the
question of Palestine and the four draft resolutions that
have been put before us today are important and remain
relevant as part of our effort to achieve a just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The international community must not wait for
another 50 years of occupation, filled with the tragic
grievances and suffering of the Palestinian people. As
we all know, in the past year alone, the Palestinians have
endured an unprecedented situation, caused by various
arbitrary and unilateral measures by the occupying
Power. These include the closure of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron, the withholding of
2/19

03/12/2019

Palestinian tax revenues and provocations at the Al
Haram Al-Sharif, to name just a few.
More upsetting is the continued expansion of illegal
settlements and demolition of Palestinian homes, all
of which continue to diminish the prospects for the
two-State solution. With such measures, a gradual,
inhumane and de facto annexation is unfolding before
our eyes. The negative impact of Israeli settlements
and settlers’ violence on the economic and social
rights of Palestinians, as well as on the environment,
is apparent. Furthermore, we are witnesses to the
deterioration of the human rights and humanitarian
situation of the Palestinians in Gaza on account of the
numerous and perpetual violations of the occupying
Power. Against that backdrop, allow me to underline
the following points.
First, we need to be reminded of the true nature
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. As reiterated in
the report of the Committee, this is not a conflict
between two equal parties over a disputed territory.
It is a conflict between an occupying State, which
imposes colonization policies in the territory of
another State, under oppressive, inhumane and
discriminatory conditions.
As a result, the response cannot be simply a matter
of promoting a just and peaceful resolution between
two parties on a level playing field. Most importantly,
it is about safeguarding and preserving the rights and
territories of the people under occupation. The question
of Palestine must therefore remain one of the priorities
of the United Nations.
With that in mind, let me make my second point, on
the need to ensure that multilateralism is at the heart of
any peace initiative. Indonesia would like to reiterate its
call that multilateralism should be our guiding principle
to bring lasting peace and security to the region. We
need to reinvigorate the spirit of multilateralism,
based on the rule of law and the Charter of the United
Nations. All parties, including those trying to mediate
the conflict, must ensure respect for international law
and the principle of multilateralism.
Finally, the internationally agreed parameters
pertaining to the Palestine issue must be fully
respected. That includes the final-status issues
concerning the borders, settlements, refugees and the
subject of Jerusalem. With regard to the holy city, we
must uphold and respect the historic status quo of the
holy sites in Jerusalem. It is the shared responsibility
19-39049

03/12/2019

of the international community to preserve the legal,
demographic, historical and multi-religious character
and status of the city.
As the report of the Committee clearly points out,
any unilateral decision by Member States to recognize
the holy city of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel is
null and void and in violation of Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 476 (1980) and 478
(1980). Indonesia calls on the international community
to respect and protect the holy city and its status.
To conclude, Indonesia recommits to the two-State
solution, consistent with relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), and in
accordance with the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the principle of land for peace. Indonesia
will continue to support the Palestinian people until
their inalienable rights are fulfilled.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Efforts to bring about a lasting
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict have come
to a standstill. Only a negotiated two-State solution
can provide lasting peace, security and prosperity for
both peoples.
The security situation in and around Gaza remains
fragile and unstable. Norway is deeply concerned about
the recurring flare-ups of violence and the high number
of lives lost. All parties have an obligation to protect
civilians and refrain from actions that could reignite
the conflict. We commend the efforts and good work
of Egypt and the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process to prevent the situation from
escalating. We encourage all parties to abstain from
unilateral actions that obstruct a peaceful resolution of
the conflict.
Norway’s position on the Israeli settlements and
the annexation of occupied territories remains firm.
They are in contravention of international law. All
actions taken towards further settlement expansion and
annexations, as well as house demolitions, including in
East Jerusalem, are unacceptable and will undermine the
possibility of achieving a negotiated two-State solution.
It is incumbent upon Fatah, Hamas and other
Palestinian factions to commit to reconciliation and to
once again reunifying Palestine under one legitimate
political authority. We regret to note that the Palestinian
Authority is not providing the needed medical supplies
to Gaza.
19-39049

A/74/PV.38

In New York on 26 September, Norway chaired a
ministerial meeting of the international donor group
to Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians (AHLC). The meeting affirmed the broad
international support for a negotiated two-State solution
as the basis for resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The AHLC members called for immediate steps to
remedy the dire financial situation of the Palestinian
Authority. In that respect, we welcome the arrangements
reached between the two parties on financial issues
following the AHLC meeting. We encourage Israel and
the Palestinian Authority to extend their dialogue with
a view to finding durable solutions to other outstanding
economic issues. When the AHLC reconvenes in
Brussels in the spring of 2020, we must ensure that the
dialogue has resulted in tangible progress on the ground.
As underlined by the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, facilitating trade and
opening up Area C in the West Bank for Palestinian
use are preconditions for a more sustainable Palestinian
economy. In September, the AHLC members also urged
donors to step up humanitarian and other support for
Gaza. There is an urgent need for improved access
to clean water and energy, job creation and increased
movement of people and goods in and out of Gaza.
We welcome the recent calls for general elections in
Palestine. We encourage all parties to act constructively
in facilitating and holding free and fair elections across
Palestine, including in East Jerusalem and Gaza.
Norway stands ready to offer support.
The need for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) remains greater than ever, both as a
service provider for the most vulnerable people and as
a stabilizing element in the region. Norway remains
a reliable partner of UNRWA. We are committed to
continuing our financial and political support to the
Agency until there is a political solution to the refugee
issue. We urge all donors to continue supporting
UNRWA, especially when the organization is facing
financial and political challenges.
As a consistent partner, Norway has a long-standing
commitment to working for peace and security in the
Middle East. Supporting the conditions for a just and
lasting peace for the Palestinian and Israeli peoples will
remain a key priority of our foreign policy.
3/19

A/74/PV.38

Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and its Chair, Mr. Cheikh Niang, for the
Committee’s valuable and tireless efforts to support
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and
for overseeing a number of executive programmes to
allow the Palestinian people to enjoy their rights and
establish an independent State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital.
The Kingdom of Morocco, whose King Mohammed
VI presides over the Al-Quds Committee of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, is following
with great concern the illegal Israeli practices in the
occupied Palestine territory, especially attempts to
change the legitimate and historical status of Jerusalem,
the ongoing settlement activities that compromise the
rights of the Palestinian people and repeated attacks
against Al-Aqsa mosque. Such practices conflate the
Palestinian cause with the labyrinths of conflicts,
including sectarian and ideological ones, undermining
the prospects for achieving lasting peace in the region.
A few days ago, the international community
commemorated the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, on the occasion of which His
Majesty King Mohammed VI expressed his solidarity
with the brotherly Palestinian people in a letter sent
to the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People. His Majesty the King
of Morocco reaffirmed his country’s long-standing
position and continued support for the Palestinian
people in order to restore their legitimate and just
rights to establish their own independent State within
the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in line with relevant resolutions of international
legitimacy. In his letter of solidarity, His Majesty the
King of Morocco stated that
“[a]ny attempt to relaunch the peace process can be
achieved only once there is an end to the settlement
policy in the occupied Palestinian territory”.
In that context, we reiterate our call on the
Security Council and the international community to
act swiftly to preserve the legal and historical status
of the occupied Palestinian territory and to implement
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), which calls
for an end to settlement activities and states that
settlements are illegal. The Kingdom of Morocco
believes that East Jerusalem is an integral part of the
4/19

03/12/2019

Palestinian territory occupied in 1967 and is the capital
of the State of Palestine. East Jerusalem is therefore one
of the final-status issues that must be addressed through
negotiations between the Israeli and Palestinian sides.
It is also the heart of the conflict in the Middle East and
is central to achieving any political solution between
the two parties.
We, as Chair of the Al-Quds Committee, have
consistently called for the preservation of the unity
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, its sanctity and religious
dimensions, and its special status as a city of peace. In
our appeal concerning Al-Quds, signed in the presence
of His Holiness Pope Francis during his visit to the
Kingdom of Morocco on 30 March, we stressed the
importance of preserving the status of that holy city as
a symbol of humankind’s common heritage, peaceful
coexistence and the three monotheistic religions and as
a centre for dialogue and mutual respect.
We also believe that unilateral measures against
Al-Quds Al-Sharif undermine its status, its symbolism
and its legitimate religious and cultural dimensions and
are null and void, have no legal impact and contravene
the relevant Security Council resolutions 476 (1980)
478 (1980). His Majesty the King also stated,
“More than 2 million Palestinians are suffering
collective punishment in Gaza as a result of the
blockade that has been imposed on them for
12 years, undermining their standards of living
and health and the provision of basic services. The
blockade must be lifted because its continuation
in that part of Palestinian territory will increase
instability and frustration and despair.”
Achieving peace and security in the Middle East
is contingent on a just solution for the question of
Palestine, which will be achieved only through the
revival of negotiations between the Palestinians and the
Israelis. The international community must therefore
use innovative resolve to bring the two parties back to
dialogue in order implement the two-State solution based
on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as
the capital of the State of Palestine. Those negotiations
must be based on proper foundations and good faith, in
accordance with a specified time frame that restores
trust between the parties, laying the foundations for a
viable Palestinian State living side by side with Israel
in peace and security, in line with the resolutions of
international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative.
19-39049

03/12/2019

A/74/PV.38

We also appreciate efforts to achieve lasting peace and
security in the Middle East.

Jerusalem, and that it fully respect all of its legal
obligations in that regard.

Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): South Africa
joins others at this meeting in thanking the President
for his able leadership of the General Assembly. Last
Wednesday, we gathered in the Trusteeship Council
Chamber to commemorate the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People 42 years after this
organ established the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People. It is South Africa’s hope
that the commemoration, as well as the work of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, will galvanize global action
towards ending the occupation of Palestine.

We reiterate our position that there can be no
military solution to the conflict and that peaceful
negotiation is the only means of ensuring lasting peace,
security and stability. In that regard, South Africa once
again calls on all parties to negotiate in good faith in
order to reach a permanent and just solution.

South Africa urges the global community to
act purposefully towards a just and peaceful end of
the occupation, in line with international law. We
are concerned by the actions of the Government of
Israel, which seek to exclude the final-status issues,
thereby disregarding Security Council resolutions on
the Middle East peace process. A just ending of the
occupation must address the disputes regarding the
borders for a viable two-State solution, the return of all
Palestinian refugees and the status of East Jerusalem as
the capital of a Palestinian State, as well as the halting
of all illegal settlements.
South Africa remains concerned and condemns
the continued illegal settlement expansion by Israel,
in contravention of international law, particularly
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. The illegal
settlement expansion has also been called by the
Security Council a flagrant violation of international
law with no legal validity.
The ongoing Israeli settlement activity in the
occupied territories is therefore a fundamental obstacle
to a return to negotiations and a grave threat to the
very existence of a future Palestinian State. This
encroachment on a future Palestinian State further
undermines the security of both Palestine and Israel,
sowing long-term animosity and hatred among the
people and making the idea of two independent States
living side by side in peace ever more elusive.
South Africa calls for the effective and immediate
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), in particular
the Security Council’s demand that Israel immediately
and completely cease all settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
19-39049

South Africa is deeply concerned at the recent
activities in Gaza that have led to increased tensions,
the killing of more than 30 Palestinians and injuries
to hundreds of Palestinians and Israelis. Such actions
have perpetuated the dire security and humanitarian
situation in the area. We welcome last week’s ceasefire
announcement, brokered by the United Nations
and Egypt. In that regard, we call for a cessation of
violent attacks against both sides and for all sides to
resume negotiations.
South Africa is also concerned at the continued
human rights violations in the occupied territories and
again reiterate that such violations only contribute to
the fostering hatred between the people of Palestine and
of Israel.
South Africa expresses its deep concern regarding
the budgetary shortfall that the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) presently faces. We therefore continue
to appeal to the international community to continue
to increase its support and humanitarian assistance
to UNRWA, which seeks to restore the dignity of the
Palestinian people by improving their living conditions
through the provision of emergency relief, health
and social services and decent housing and access to
education. For its part, South Africa remains committed
to its financial contribution to UNRWA in order to
assist the Agency to effectively carry out its mandate in
addressing the plight of Palestine refugees.
The conflict between Palestinians and Israelis is a
source of wider regional tension, undermining peace,
economic development, sociopolitical progression and
security throughout the entire Middle East region.
Peace will remain elusive in the region if the question
of Palestine is not resolved.
Finally, South Africa believes that ending the
occupation is in the interest of both Israel and Palestine,
and we call on both parties to take concrete steps to
that end.
5/19

A/74/PV.38

Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to read out the statement made by His Excellency
the President of the Republic of Iraq, Mr. Barham Salih,
before the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People on the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, which
we commemorated in the United Nations Headquarters.
“On this International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, on behalf of the Iraqi people
we reiterate our solidarity with that brotherly
people and affirm our tireless commitment to
continuing to raise international awareness of the
historical importance of this annual celebration,
which coincides with the General Assembly’s
adoption in 1947 of resolution 181 (II). That
resolution, on the partition of Palestine, recognizes
the peculiar responsibility of the United Nations
for the oppression and damage that have now been
sustained by the Palestinian people for nearly
72 years. It also constitutes legal recognition of
the just cause of the Palestinian people and the
commitment of the international community
to the necessary restoration of their legitimate
rights, in accordance with the resolutions of the
General Assembly and as the culmination of their
just struggle to pursue self-determination and the
need to end the Israeli occupation of their territory
and homeland.
“On this International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, the Republic of
Iraq reiterates its firm position that a just and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question
is possible only through the establishment of a fullfledged independent Palestinian State within the
borders of 4 June 1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital, in accordance the resolutions of
international legitimacy. We urge action to be
taken to implement the provisions of international
agreements, the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
international humanitarian law, particularly the
Fourth Geneva Convention. We also reject any step
that runs counter to international law in relation to
Jerusalem. We call on the States of the world that
have not yet recognized the State of Palestine to
do so as soon as possible. We call for support for
the aspirations of our brother Palestinian people
to exercise their legitimate rights, which would
6/19

03/12/2019

greatly enhance and consolidate security, stability
and peace in the Middle East.
“The Republic of Iraq expresses its strong
condemnation of all Israeli aggressions against the
Palestinian territory and its unwavering support
for the Palestinian Government and solidarity
with the Palestinian people. We also call on all
our Palestinian brethren to pursue efforts for
democratic dialogue and consensus in order to
achieve constructive reconciliation and consolidate
Palestinian national unity as a shield for defending
their legitimate rights.”
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): Following the observance
of the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People last week (see A/AC.183/PV.398), today we join
the international community in reaffirming once again
our unwavering commitment to the inalienable rights
of the people of Palestine to self-determination and our
principled position in favour of establishing the State of
Palestine on the basis of the two-State solution and the
pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
We reiterate our support for the draft resolutions to be
considered at this session.
The Palestine question has been one of the most
regrettable and long-standing crises of human history. It
remains one of the root causes of the many other crises
in the Middle East and also in other parts of the world.
Yet a peaceful, just and viable political solution to the
issue continues to elude the international community.
Rather, we are at a time when the cause of Palestine
is experiencing unprecedented existential challenges,
particularly due to the absence of any serious political
and legal actions by the international community to end
Israel’s illegal, decades-long foreign occupation in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
My delegation strongly condemns the persistent
and systematic violations of international law and
norms in the occupied Palestinian territory, killing of
innocent Palestinians, including children, escalating
military offensives and all other provocative actions
by Israel, the occupying Power. The expansion of
Israeli settlements is changing the demography of
the occupied territory. The illegal Israeli blockade is
making the already volatile situation more perilous,
thereby exacerbating the humanitarian catastrophe.
More and more Palestinian civilians are being made
homeless and forced to live under inhuman conditions.
Ongoing assaults on Islamic and Christian holy places,
19-39049

03/12/2019

particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque, constitute the most
blatant manifestations of the injustice committed
against the Palestinian people.
We are deeply concerned by the ongoing deteriorating
socioeconomic situation of the Palestinian people,
particularly the challenges faced by them in realizing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Israeli
occupation has been contributing directly to prolonged
poverty, unemployment, declining industrialization and
slow development in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
will fail miserably if our Palestinian brothers and sisters
continue to languish in their political, social, economic
and cultural hardship. The international community
must deliver on its commitment to leave no one behind
by giving due attention to the legitimate rights and
needs of the Palestinians.
We are concerned that the programmes of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which over the
years have been providing essential humanitarian
services to the refugees, are facing a serious budgetary
shortfall. We urge the international community to
come forward in a collective show of generosity to
ensure enhanced, predictable and sustainable funding
for UNRWA.
Israel’s continued acts of aggression have given rise
to an egregious culture of impunity, which undermines
the viability of the State of Palestine. Under such
circumstances, the international community must fulfil
its responsibility to ensure accountability for all Israeli
violations, upholding the rule of international law and
providing protection for the Palestinian people in the
occupied territory. The international community should
continue to apply all international legal mechanisms to
end the occupation.
Bangladesh believes that the timely implementation
of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the road
map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the efforts made by
the Quartet is of paramount importance to achieving a
lasting peace for the people and the State of Palestine
and in the Middle East.
We reaffirm our support for the accession of the
State of Palestine to the international organizations and
treaties and reiterate our call for its admission as a full
member of the United Nations.
19-39049

A/74/PV.38

During the war of liberation in 1971, our people
had to endure the worst form of genocide. That
inspires us to stand by oppressed people throughout
the world. That is why our Constitution enshrines our
nation’s unequivocal support for oppressed peoples
throughout the world waging a just struggle. That
also underpins our adherence to the fundamentals of
a rules- and value-based international order. Driven
by our constitutional and moral obligations, we did not
hesitate to respond to the call of distressed humanity
and opened our doors to host 1.2 million of Rohingyas
fleeing atrocity crimes in Myanmar. These painful
experiences only embolden our resolve to stand
firmly by our Palestinian brothers and sisters in their
just struggle for self-determination, peace, stability
and justice.
I would like to conclude by quoting from the
message delivered by our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina
on the occasion of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People:
“We urge all concerned to be pragmatic in their
approach and walk together, hand in hand, for the
establishment of an independent homeland for the
Palestinian people where they can live in peace and
in dignity side by side with their neighbours.”
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item. The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 35.
Agenda item 34
The situation in the Middle East
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/74/310
and A/74/333)
Draft resolution (A/74/L.9)
The Acting President: I now give the floor
to the representative of Egypt to introduce draft
resolution A/74/L.9.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, on behalf of Egypt, I would like to express
my gratitude for the convening of this meeting under
agenda item 34, “The situation in the Middle East”, to
consider draft resolution A/74/L.9, entitled “The Syrian
Golan”, presented to the General Assembly annually by
the representative of Egypt.
7/19

A/74/PV.38

The Arab region has faced a number of crises
over the past few years, undermining its security and
stability and increasing the suffering of its people. The
crises prevailing in the region have led to increasing
suffering as a result of the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories since the war of 5 June 1967. If we all hope
to see improved security and stability in the near future
through the settlement of such crises, particularly in
the brotherly country of Syria, we must remember that
the Middle East region will have no security, stability
and lasting peace without the liberation of the Arab
territories of Palestine and the Syrian Golan that have
been occupied in 1967.
The international community must adopt a serious
position with regard to the decades-long occupation
of the Syrian Golan. No progress has been made
in implementing the resolutions of international
legitimacy, particularly General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, or in ensuring compliance with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, all of which stress the illegality of
the annexation of the territories of other States by force
and the non-recognition of any change to the borders
of 4 June 1967 due to the Israeli occupation. Egypt
remains convinced that the settlement of the crises in
the Middle East can be achieved only on the basis of
international law and by implementing the resolutions
of international legitimacy, particularly United
Nations resolutions.
In the context of its commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter, Egypt has annually
endeavoured to put forward a draft resolution on the
Syrian Golan to the General Assembly to reaffirm the
commitment of the international community to the
inadmissibility of the occupation of other territories by
force and to reaffirm the resolutions of international
legitimacy, particularly Security Council resolution
497 (1981) and all other relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions.
This year’s draft resolution on the Syrian Golan has
kept last year’s wording, except for a technical update.
It reaffirms Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and
the principles of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations, including the inadmissibility of the
annexation of territories by force. It also reaffirms the
applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 1949,
to the occupied Syrian Golan, In addition, the draft
resolution confirms the illegality of Israel’s settlement
8/19

03/12/2019

construction and other activities in the occupied
Syrian Golan and that the ongoing Israeli occupation
of the Syrian Golan is impeding comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the region. It calls on Israel
to resume peace talks with a view to withdrawing
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Egypt hopes that all Member States, in particular
those which belong to the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the Group of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, will support
the draft resolution, as they did last year, so that we
can all reaffirm the importance of our commitment to
international law, the inadmissibility of annexing the
territories of others by force and the need to respect
the United Nations Charter. Egypt aspires to peace and
stability in the Middle East so that future generations
can enjoy the fruits of security and comprehensive
development and the region can turn the page on the
current crises. Egypt sees no other way to achieve
that than by respecting the resolutions of international
legitimacy, international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First of all, I would like to express my thanks to
the Permanent Representative of Egypt for introducing
draft resolution A/74/L.9, on the Syrian Golan. I also
thank all the sponsors and Member States that will vote
in favour of it.
The General Assembly has had the situation in the
Middle East on its agenda every year since its twentyfifth session in 1970. Every session, the Assembly urges
Israel to end its occupation of Arab territories, stressing
that any measure taken by Israel to impose its laws,
sovereignty and administration on the occupied Syrian
Golan is null and void, illegal and without effect. The
Assembly’s position has been in full harmony with that
of the Security Council when it unanimously adopted
resolution 497 (1981).
We have recently seen a number of unilateral
actions and provocations. The perpetrators of those
acts are trying to exploit the international community’s
inability to implement its own resolutions on ending
the Israeli occupation in order to distort the facts,
shirk their legal commitments and bypass the terms
of reference with the aim of perpetuating the Israeli
occupation. Examples of that include the United States
19-39049

03/12/2019

Administration recognizing occupied Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel, its recognition of Israeli sovereignty
over the occupied Syrian Golan and its attempt, only a
few days ago, to legitimize colonization.
In that context, the Government of my country
would like to reiterate its strongest condemnation
of the decisions of the United States Administration,
which constitute flagrant violations of international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. We consider the decisions
to be unilateral actions by a party that has neither the
status nor the political, legal or moral competence to
decide the fate of the peoples of the world or to dispose
of territories that it does not possess and that are, in
this case, an integral part of the territories of the Syrian
Arab Republic and occupied Palestine.
The blind support of a number of Governments
of United Nations Member States has encouraged
the Israeli occupying Power to continue violating
international law and the provisions of the Charter.
Israel has continued to carry out aggressions and
attacks on the territories of the Syrian Arab Republic
and other neighbouring countries. It has pursued its
attempts to change the history of the occupied Syrian
Golan, to loot the territory’s antiquities and wealth
and to alter its demographics by confiscating the
lands of Syrian citizens residing there, with the aim
of expanding illegitimate settlements and engaging in
new occupation projects. It forces our people living
in the Golan to register their land with the Israeli
Administration — land which they inherited from their
fathers and grandfathers before them — and threatens
to confiscate the land if they oppose the policy. It has
also organized what it falsely called local elections.
All of those actions constitute serious violations of
international law and international humanitarian law,
to which some parties apply flagrant double standards
and hypocrisy.
In addition, Israel, the occupying Power,
continues to implement its policy of repression, racial
discrimination, arbitrary detention and terrorism
against Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan.
It conducts so-called trials that are in fact mock trials.
One such example is that of Sidqi Suleiman Al-Maqt,
who has been arbitrarily detained for exposing Israel’s
cooperation with terrorist organizations, including
the Al-Nusra Front, in the buffer zone in the occupied
Syrian Golan. We call on the international community
19-39049

A/74/PV.38

to act immediately to free that prisoner and all other
prisoners held in Israeli prisons.
Naturally, the Israeli occupation would never have
taken place and could never have continued, posing
grave danger to the region and its peace and security,
without the support and assistance of some powerful
Governments that are Members of the United Nations.
They provide a lifeline to the Israeli occupation by
supporting it politically, militarily, economically and
financially and by covering up its crimes in international
forums, thereby making them direct accomplices in all
the crimes committed by the Israeli occupation against
our States, our peoples, justice and the law.
We call on the United Nations to immediately take
all measures to implement its resolutions designed to
end the Israeli occupation of occupied Arab territories.
We reiterate the affirmation of our sovereign right
over the occupied Syrian Golan within the borders of
4 June 1967. That right is not subject to negotiation or
compromise and will never be time-bound. We will never
waive our right to recover our occupied territory by all
means permissible under the Charter, the principles of
international law and United Nations resolutions.
Syria once again recalls its consistent principled
position in support of the Palestinian people in their
struggle to achieve self-determination, to establish their
independent State on their entire national territory, with
Jerusalem as its capital, and to guarantee the right of
return of refugees in keeping with resolution 194 (III).
We reiterate our request to grant full membership to the
State of Palestine.
In conclusion, I call on all States to support draft
resolution A/74/L.9, entitled “The Syrian Golan” and
other resolutions on Palestine.
Ms. Fareena (Maldives): The Maldives would like
to express its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report (A/74/333) on this agenda item and his
continuing efforts towards achieving peace and stability
in the Middle East.
The Maldives remains deeply concerned about
the precarious situation in the Middle East. Millions
of people continue to suffer, living their lives amid
conflict, terrorist attacks and other forms of violence.
The international community must do better. Peace in
the Middle East is crucial to enabling the people of the
region to achieve their fundamental rights, stability and
progress, as well as for the world.
9/19

A/74/PV.38

The question of Palestine is one of the longeststanding issues before the General Assembly. It has
remained unresolved for seven long decades, owing to
a lack of effective action on the part of the international
community. The Government of the Maldives is greatly
concerned about the latest developments in Palestine.
The ongoing conflict continues to result in human
rights violations and humanitarian crises. Palestinian
people are being killed by live ammunition during
non-violent demonstrations, and many others are
suffering life-altering injuries. Waking up to the sound
of bullets and not knowing if their loved ones will
make it home alive is a grim reality for the people of
Palestine. That is unacceptable. Such acts of brutality
also affect the unborn, as mothers and fathers struggle
with traumatic stress. As the international community,
we cannot ignore the plight of people living in such dire
conditions. We must ensure the protection of the people
of Palestine.
The plight of the Palestinian people and their right
to self-determination will always remain a priority for
the Maldives. Our position on Israel’s settlements and
related activities in the occupied Palestinian territory
remains unchanged. We reaffirm Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016), which states that all settlement
activities violate international law. We further remind
Member States of Security Council resolutions 476
(1980) and 478 (1980), which declared that actions by
Israel to change the status of the holy city of Jerusalem
are in contravention of international law.
We call on our fellow Member States, as responsible
members of the international community, to respect
the decisions of the Security Council, bearing in mind
the implications for peace, security and stability. The
continuation of those illegal acts erodes the viability
of a two-State solution and the prospects for lasting
peace. The Maldives reaffirms its unwavering support
for a two-State solution. We stand with Palestine in its
quest to establish its own State alongside Israel, on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. We urge Israel to respect international law so
that the people of Palestine can enjoy meaningful and
lasting peace and live in dignity.
The Maldives also remains greatly concerned about
the ongoing conflicts in Yemen and Syria. In Yemen,
the world’s worst humanitarian crisis continues to
unfold amid a brutal conflict that has now been raging
for almost five years. Eighty per cent of the Yemeni
population, some 24 million people, are now dependent
10/19

03/12/2019

on aid to survive, while 12 million are on the brink of
starvation. By the end of this year, the combined death
toll from fighting and disease in Yemen is expected to
reach 230,000. In Syria, meanwhile, the ongoing civil
war continues to result in violence against civilians,
human rights violations and the displacement of millions
of people both inside and outside Syria’s borders. The
international community simply must do better. Longlasting and stable political solutions to those conflicts
must be pursued with greater urgency. That is the only
way to ensure peace in the Middle East and a stable
international order with security and prosperity for all.
The Government and the people of the Maldives
will always support a peaceful and lasting solution to
the question of Palestine through a negotiated political
settlement, as well as for other conflicts in the Middle
East. We call on all parties to prioritize all efforts to
restore stability in the region through peaceful means.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The region of the Middle East and North
Africa is the cradle of our civilization and has always
been a focus of the international community. This
part of the world, which has important historical,
civilizational, cultural and socioeconomic significance
and impressive natural and human resources, has long
attracted interest that has unfortunately not always
been altruistic. First through colonial policies and now
very recently through reckless external interference in
the internal affairs of countries of the region designed
to achieve regime change, the conditions have been
created for a growing explosive potential in the Middle
East and North Africa that has been detonated by
numerous conflicts in various parts of the region.
Russia has advocated and will continue to do so for
political and negotiated solutions to the crises in the
region. That quest should be conducted by the parties
concerned themselves, with impartial international
assistance under the auspices of the United Nations,
and without the imposition of artificial solutions,
deadlines or unrealistic conditions. That kind of
process has enabled significant progress to be made in
Syria. Thanks to the collective work of the participants
in the Astana format, de-escalation and stabilization
have been achieved in most of Syria. On 30 October,
in accordance with the outcomes of the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress in Sochi, the Constitutional
Committee began its work. We will continue to assist
Mr. Geir Pedersen, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, in his contacts with all the parties
19-39049

03/12/2019

involved in the Syrian settlement so that the Syrians’
concerted work can be conducted without external
interference in a professional and practical atmosphere.
In order to definitively achieve peace in Syria, efforts
are needed to rebuild the country’s war-torn economy.
It is unacceptable and inhumane to continue to
indefinitely impose new political conditions.
We support a ceasefire in Libya — except for counterterrorism operations, of course — and a resumption of
the negotiation process between all of Libya’s political
forces, based on the previous understandings reached
in Skhirat, Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi. We are
ready to join realistic initiatives that can support the
work of Special Representative Ghassan Salamé. We
are in contact with all Libya’s stakeholders and are
encouraging them to abandon armed confrontation and
resolve their differences at the negotiating table.
We remain hopeful that thanks to the hard work of
Martin Griffiths, the Special Envoy of the Secretary
General, we will soon be able to make progress on a
settlement in Yemen. We welcomed the signing on
5 November in Riyadh of an agreement between
the legitimate Yemeni authorities and the Southern
Transitional Council in southern Yemen. It will be
important to continue the efforts to bring together the
conflicting Yemeni parties to discuss the parameters
for a comprehensive settlement.
We support the need for normalizing the situation
in Iraq and Lebanon as soon as possible through a broad
national dialogue. Establishing calm in those countries
is essential for the entire region. Reducing tension
in the region would also help to ease the artificially
heightened tensions involving Iran. Creating blocs
against one State of the region will not bring peace to
the Middle East. We believe that the countries of the
Middle East and North Africa must themselves work
together to develop the parameters for collectively
ensuring regional security. To do that, we must begin
a dialogue. In that regard, we have proposed a concept
for security in the Persian Gulf to the countries of the
region. Unity among the Arab countries, primarily
within the framework of the League of Arab States,
with a view to developing a common vision for solving
the core problems in the region and safeguarding the
international law that underpins the modern world
order, is essential to making progress in restoring
stability in the Middle East and North Africa.
19-39049

A/74/PV.38

Regardless of the issues we may be discussing,
the key problem in the region remains the settlement
of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Shifting our focus
from that onto other, sometimes artificial problems,
skews our vision and makes us short-sighted. Genuine
peace in the Middle East will not happen without
a resolution of the Palestine issue. The only way to
achieve a just solution to the Palestine problem is on
the basis of the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, the Madrid principles and the
Arab Peace Initiative, which provide for the creation of
an independent, sovereign and territorially contiguous
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
We share the concerns of the majority of Member
States about the systematic unilateral steps being
taken with regard to Palestine, which are eroding the
prospects for the delineation of a historic Palestine as
it was envisaged in resolution 181 (II), of 29 November
1947. Eliminating the very notion of a two-State solution
from the customary international approach to this would
lead to a conceptual revision of the foundations of a
Middle East peace settlement and of the many years of
the international community’s work on it. We disagree
profoundly with the recent decision of the United
States that it no longer considers Israel’s construction
of settlements a violation of international law, with its
excuse being that in this way it is recognizing what
it calls the real situation on the ground, just as we
disagree with its recognition of Israel’s sovereignty
over the Syrian Golan.
In the circumstances, it will be important for the
representatives of the international community who
are constructively disposed to support the generally
accepted foundations for a settlement in the Middle East.
We would like to coordinate activities with influential
international players and the United Nations with the
aim of returning to a collective approach to the quest
for a solution. We very much appreciate the activities
of the United Nations entities in the region, particularly
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
is helping to stabilize the situation. In that connection,
we consider the efforts to discredit UNRWA and cut
its funding short-sighted. The hope that the Palestinian
refugee problem will disappear if UNRWA disappears
is naive and dangerous. We hope that the change in
UNRWA’s leadership will not affect the activities of
11/19

A/74/PV.38

the Agency, which for decades has shown itself to be
essential and effective.
Russia is contributing actively to strengthening
stability and security in the Middle East and North
Africa and working to bring to bear the potential of its
ties to all the key players in the region. We urge for
a collective effort based on agreed approaches in the
interests of resolving its acute situations of conflict.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
I would like to inform members that we will take
action on draft resolution A/74/L.9 after doing so on
draft resolutions A/74/L.14, A/74/L.15, A/74/L.16 and
A/74/L.17, submitted under agenda item 35.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 34.
Agenda item 35 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/74/L.14, A/74/L.15,
А/74/L.16 and А/74/L.17)
The Acting President: Before the Assembly takes
action on the draft resolutions, one by one, members are
reminded that they will have an opportunity to explain
their vote on all four draft resolutions either before or
after action is taken on all of them.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/74/L.14, A/74/L.15, A/74/L.16 and A/74/L.17.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position or vote before the voting, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations should be limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Bourgel (Israel): My delegation has asked for
the floor regarding the draft resolutions under agenda
items 34 and 35, the Palestinian package. That group of
redundant texts promotes a simplistic vision of the world
according to which the Palestinians have all the virtues
and Israel has all the vices. That vision absolutely
ignores the fact that there are two perspectives on this
complex issue — that of the Palestinians, of course, but
also that of Israel. Israel’s concerns deserve to be heard
too, and I will give a few examples in that regard.
Two of those draft resolutions, A/74/L.14 and
A/74/L.16, renew the mandates of two United Nations
12/19

03/12/2019

bodies, the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People and the Division for
Palestinian Rights. The sole purpose of those bodies is
to systematically promote anti-Israel bias in the United
Nations and beyond. The existence of United Nations
bodies that use United Nations resources to fund
propaganda against a Member State is unparalleled
and outrageous. The overall part of the United Nations
budget allocated to the work of those two bodies
amounts to more than $2.5 million for 2020. That does
not include the cost of the additional United Nations
resources used to support the ongoing work of those
bodies. Many would agree with us that this is a blatant
misuse of valuable United Nations resources that could
certainly be put to more constructive use.
It is our long-standing position that this group
of resolutions only damage the prospects for peace
and security in the Middle East. They entrench the
Palestinian leadership in its maximalist agenda and its
intransigence and reinforce the sentiment in Israel that
the General Assembly is unable to play a constructive
role in resolving this conflict. Lastly, they serve as
an alibi for the worst regimes in the world, such as
those in Tehran and Damascus, which never miss an
opportunity to play the role of the defender of the rights
of the Palestinians while continuing to slaughter their
own populations. For those reasons and many more, we
will vote against these draft resolutions, and we call on
all delegations to do the same.
Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): Brazil would like
to reiterate its support for a peaceful, negotiated solution
to the conflict that will see Israelis and Palestinians
living side by side in peace and security. After decades
of conflict, Brazil encourages all the parties involved to
work for a constructive political environment conducive
to a return to meaningful negotiations. That will require
engaging in new and creative diplomatic efforts with an
open mind in order to achieve a just and comprehensive
settlement. Brazil welcomes the efforts of this year’s
facilitators to streamline their draft proposals and to
reduce the number of draft resolutions currently under
consideration in both the General Assembly and its
Second, Third and Fourth Committees.
Nevertheless, there is a need for improvement with
a view to achieving texts that are more balanced and
less biased, especially with regard to the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and the Division for Palestinian Rights. We
regret that human resources have been devoted to
19-39049

03/12/2019

bodies that have been used to promote one-sided
narratives and biased views against one of the parties
to the conflict without making any real contribution to
a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful settlement.
Brazil also wishes to reiterate the importance of the city
of Jerusalem to the three main monotheistic religions.
With regard to terminology, we especially want to recall
the need to duly reflect that significance when referring
to the Temple Mount or Haram Al-Sharif.
Finally, Brazil reiterates its view that respect for
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law is the cornerstone of
peace and security in the region for all parties concerned.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/74/L.14, A/74/L.15, A/74/L.16 and
A/74/L.17.
We first turn to draft resolution A/74/L.14, entitled
“Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/74/L.14: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brunei Darussalam, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, the Gambia, Guinea, Iraq,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Oman, Somalia, South Africa, the State of
Palestine, the Sudan, Tunisia, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
19-39049

A/74/PV.38

Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, Guyana, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Czech
Republic, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Israel,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Nauru, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belarus,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Croatia, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Tonga,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/74/L.14 was adopted by 92 votes
to 13, with 61 abstentions (resolution 74/10).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/74/L.15, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
13/19

A/74/PV.38

to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/74/L.15: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, the Gambia,
Guinea, Iraq, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Somalia, South Africa, the
State of Palestine, the Sudan, Tunisia, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
14/19

03/12/2019

Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Brazil, Cameroon, Fiji, Guatemala, Honduras,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Tonga, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/74/L.15 was adopted by 147
votes to 7, with 13 abstentions (resolution 74/11).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/74/L.16, entitled
“Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/74/L.16: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brunei Darussalam, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, the Gambia, Guinea, Iraq,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Oman, Somalia, South Africa, the State of
Palestine, the Sudan, Tunisia, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
19-39049

03/12/2019

A/74/PV.38

Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Colombia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Israel, Lithuania, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Netherlands,
Romania, Slovakia, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Belarus,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Ghana, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/74/L.16 was adopted by 87 votes
to 23, with 54 abstentions (resolution 74/12).
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution A/74/L.17, entitled “Special information
programme on the question of Palestine of the Department
of Global Communications of the Secretariat”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/74/L.17, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei
Darussalam, the Democratic People’s Republic of
19-39049

Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, the Gambia, Guinea, Iraq,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Oman, Somalia, South Africa, the Sudan,
Tunisia, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the
Observer State of Palestine.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
15/19

A/74/PV.38

Against:
Australia, Canada, Guatemala, Israel, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Fiji, Ghana, Honduras, Mexico, Nigeria,
Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Samoa, Solomon
Islands, South Sudan, Togo, Tonga, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/74/L.17 was adopted by 144
votes to 8, with 14 abstentions (resolution 74/13).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of vote after the voting, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Singapore.
Ms. Tang (Singapore): I am speaking in explanation
of our vote after the adoption of resolutions 74/10, 74/11,
74/12 and 74/13.
Singapore voted in favour of resolution 74/10,
entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People”, on the understanding
that the reference in operative paragraph 2 to the
“achievement ... of the two-State solution on the basis
of the pre-1967 borders” should be interpreted in the
same manner as set out in operative paragraph 1 of
resolution 74/11, entitled “Peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine”, which reads “the two-State
solution of Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security within recognized borders, based on
the pre-1967 borders”.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
A delegation has asked to speak in exercise of the
right of reply. I would like to remind members that
statements in right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for
the first intervention and five minutes for the second,
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): As
usual, today the representative of the Israeli regime
made unfounded claims contradicting the situation
on the ground and against a number of countries,
including Iran. I have no intention of dignifying his
16/19

03/12/2019

claims with an answer. His fallacies are used as tools
to divert attention from the expansionist policies and
brutalities of his regime. As my delegation stated
earlier, this is another type of WMD in the hands of
the Israeli regime — weapons of mass deception. Is
it not very ironic that a regime that is famous for its
atrocities, apartheid policies and war crimes, which
are well documented in various United Nations organs
and agencies, that is non-compliant with many United
Nations resolutions and has occupied the lands of other
peoples for many decades can allow itself to complain
about condemnation of its actions?
Against that backdrop of the 71 shameful years
of its history, the officials of the Israeli regime
should not speak about their intentions for the type of
settlement they intend to arrive at with the Palestinian
people, which can be boiled down to a mere few
words — occupation, brutality, massacre and flagrant
violation of the norms of humankind. It goes without
saying that the Israeli regime has a long history of
opportunistic policies misleading others and diverting
attention from its inhumane and savage actions
against innocent Palestinians and other nations in the
Middle East.
Israel, the last apartheid regime and the only one
in the world that openly practices racism and has
recently legalized it, seeks to ride a wave towards
international legitimacy. We cannot ignore the fact
that Israel’s occupations and racism are at the heart
of all the conflicts in the Middle East. The repulsive
Israeli occupation, which has brought so much
suffering, caused so many crises and created so much
instability and anger throughout the region, continues
to be the primary spoiler of peace and stability in the
region. The irony is that in his statement the Israeli
representative complained that the condemnations of
Israel’s 71 years of brutality against Palestinian people
are discriminatory and unjust.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 35.
19-39049

03/12/2019

A/74/PV.38

Agenda item 34 (continued)

Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolution (A/74/L.9)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/74/L.9, entitled
“The Syrian Golan”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/74/L.9, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria,
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam,
Comoros, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Indonesia, Malaysia, Morocco, Nicaragua,
Oman, Senegal, Somalia, the Sudan, Tunisia and the
State of Palestine.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Oman,
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic
of Moldova, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
19-39049

Against:
Australia, Brazil, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Tonga,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/74/L.9 was adopted by 91 votes
to 9, with 65 abstentions (resolution 74/14).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Republic
of Moldova informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mazzeo (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina would like to make the following explanation
of vote on resolution 74/14, on the Syrian Golan, just
adopted by the General Assembly.
Argentina voted in favour of the resolution because
we believe that its essential nature is linked to the
unlawful acquisition of territory by force. Paragraph
4 of Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations
prohibits the use or threat of use of force against
the territory or territorial integrity of a State. At the
same time, I want to clarify Argentina’s position on
paragraph 6 of the resolution. Our vote is without
prejudice to the content of that paragraph, specifically
the reference to “the line of 4 June 1967”. In Argentina’s
view, it is important to make progress on a solution to
the Syrian-Israeli conflict in the Middle East with a
17/19

A/74/PV.38

view to ending the occupation of the Golan Heights.
The Government of Argentina therefore once again
reaffirms the importance of resuming negotiations to
find a definitive solution to the situation in the Syrian
Golan in accordance with Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land
for peace.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
The United States once again opposed the five
resolutions voted on today, which are entirely biased
against Israel. These are in addition to the 10 other
draft resolutions before the General Assembly this year
that criticize Israel. Let me reiterate that this one-sided
approach only undermines trust among Israelis,
Palestinians and the international community and fails
to create the kind of positive environment critical to
achieving peace.
We are deeply disappointed that despite support for
reform, Member States continue to disproportionately
single out Israel year after year through these types of
resolution. It is regrettable that the United Nations, an
institution founded on the idea that all nations should
be treated equally, should be so often used by Member
States to treat one particular State, Israel, unequally.
Furthermore, several of the resolutions presented
here today support United Nations bodies, such as the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, whose primary purpose,
unbelievably, is to target Israel. These bodies cost
the United Nations $6 million annually but bring us
no closer to a peaceful solution to the conflict. They
rather promote our culture of bias against Israel as
demonstrated by the anti-Israeli tone in the events,
publications and rhetoric produced by the bodies, and,
even more concerning, consume scarce United Nations
resources that could be better devoted to other priorities.
These resolutions are quick to condemn all manner
of Israeli actions but say almost nothing about terrorist
attacks against innocent civilians. That is particularly
apparent when we see Israel blamed for the situation in
Gaza while none of these resolutions even mentions the
name of Hamas or any armed groups in Gaza. As we have
made clear at all levels of our Government, the United
States remains firmly and consistently committed to
achieving a comprehensive and lasting peace agreement
between the Israelis and the Palestinians. Resolutions
like those introduced here today only distract from that
process. One-sided resolutions do not help advance
peace. The cause of peace will be served only when
18/19

03/12/2019

the bias promoted in these resolutions against Israel
ends. The United States will continue to oppose every
effort to delegitimize Israel and we thank the other
Member States that joined us by voting against these
resolutions today.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
The observer of the observer State of Palestine has
asked for the floor to make a statement.
Mr. Mansour (State of Palestine): On behalf of
the State of Palestine and our delegation to the United
Nations, I would like to express our gratitude to all the
countries that voted in favour of the resolutions just
adopted. This very strong demonstration of support
for upholding international law and the position of the
international community in finding a solution to this
conflict is greatly appreciated. I believe that upholding
international law as reflected in these resolutions is
the essence of the work of the General Assembly. We
debate, we discuss and we respect international law,
and then, in a democratic way, we decide the content of
these resolutions. I believe that this is a contribution by
the international community to finding a solution to this
conflict. We thank all the States Members of the United
Nations for doing so. We also thank all those countries
that introduced or sponsored the draft resolutions.
Earlier this morning, we heard a speaker who said
that the General Assembly decided how to deal with
this conflict in 1947, through its adoption of resolution
181 (II). Following the same principle, if we respected
the wishes of the General Assembly in 1947, we have
to respect the wishes of the General Assembly in 1948,
1949, 2018 and 2019. We cannot be selective in our
rationale: if the General Assembly votes in a way that
I like, then the General Assembly is fair and balanced
and respects international law, but when the General
Assembly votes differently than I like, then it is biased,
targets one country and acts unjustly. To go so far as to
describe the General Assembly as morally bankrupt is
disrespectful to all of us and to the United Nations itself.
The United Nations is a collective body in which
we peacefully debate and discuss how to resolve
conflicts and find solutions to conflicts, as we were
asked to do in accordance with the principles enshrined
in the United Nations Charter. We have to respect this
wish. All States Members of the United Nations in this
Hall who voted overwhelmingly in favour of today’s
resolutions do not represent a group of people who
19-39049

03/12/2019

A/74/PV.38

not know what they are doing. They consult with their
countries and with their Governments and they receive
authorization and instructions to vote the way they do.
We have to respect these wishes whether people vote in
favour of the State of Palestine or not.

make sense that Israel has to be brought back into the
fold and respect — as it claimed it respected resolution
181 (II) in 1947 — the wishes of the international
community reflected in the relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions?

We have to stop using double standards in dealing
with the wishes of the United Nations. The membership
of the General Assembly today is four times larger than
it was in 1947, at the early stages of the establishment
of United Nations. We are more democratic. More
countries from all corners of the globe are represented
in the General Assembly. Therefore, the wishes that
were respected in welcoming one Member State into
the Organization in 1947 — to its liking — should be
no less respected than the wishes of 193 countries and
two Observer States — one of which is the State of
Palestine — to see us become the 194th Member State,
in accordance with resolution 181 (II), which called
for two States. One State came into being; the other is
struggling for its independence.

We challenge anyone, including the representative
of the State of Israel: we are ready and willing to
implement the relevant United Nations resolutions
on the question of Palestine and the conflict in the
Middle East and, on the basis of these resolutions,
which are part of international law, to find a solution
to this tragedy and conflict for the betterment of the
Palestinian people, the people of Israel and all countries
in the Middle East.

If the General Assembly makes a decision that is not
to a country’s liking, subsequent to which the country
concerned says that the General Assembly is irrelevant
and biased and is targeting one country, we have to say
that it does not work that way. We have a collective
responsibility to defend multilateralism, the General
Assembly and the United Nations, and honour and
respect the wishes of the General Assembly conveyed
in its resolutions in accordance with our obligations to
under the Charter. Accordingly, we in Palestine say that
we are ready and willing to implement the wishes of
the General Assembly and the Security Council in their
many resolutions on dealing with our conflict. Why is
that one-sided? Why is that targeting Israel? Does it

19-39049

I say once again to all colleagues present in the
General Assembly Hall today — the Parliament of
the world — that we thank them very much for their
demonstration of strong support for justice for the
Palestinian people and a solution, based on two States
within the 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as the capital
of our State, with both States living side by side in
peace and security — the parameters constituting the
basis for what is known as the two-State solution. We
are committed to that solution, and we hope that the
other side — which, despite the fact that things do not
work that way, is insisting on not going that route but
trying to impose its wishes on all of us — will do the
same. Our wish has been demonstrated through these
resolutions and should be respected and implemented.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 34.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

19/19
