S/PV.9125

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9125th meeting

Wednesday, 7 September 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière/Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Kirpichenko
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2022/665)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-58245 (E)
*2258245*

S/PV.9125

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2022/665)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. James
Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia; Ms. Fiona Lortan, Deputy Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia and Acting Head of the
African Union Mission in Somalia; and Her Excellency
Ms. Annette Weber, Special Representative of the
European Union for the Horn of Africa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/665, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Swan.
Mr. Swan: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the situation in Somalia.
With the conclusion of its contentious electoral
process in May, the political climate in Somalia
is now more conducive to addressing key national
priorities. To capitalize on that opportunity, federal
and state authorities must collaborate closely to achieve
progress on the new Government’s goals, including
by improving governance and justice, effectively
countering Al-Shabaab and responding urgently to the
worsening humanitarian crisis. The United Nations is
committed to supporting Somalis in achieving their
national priorities.
I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.9040) just
after the 15 May election of Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
as the new President of Somalia. Since then, in June,
2/19

07/09/2022

the Parliament unanimously endorsed his nominee for
Prime Minister, Hamza Abdi Barre, and in August
confirmed his Cabinet. The new Government has
moved swiftly to present a four-year work programme,
laying out goals and activities across six pillars:
security, justice, reconciliation, economic development,
social development and foreign relations. In parallel,
the Parliament completed the process of forming
its committees, during which the Joint Oversight
Committee was charged with steering the constitutional
review process through Parliament. The United Nations
and other international partners are supporting the
Parliament to advance key legislative priorities.
Unfortunately, women remain underrepresented
in Cabinet positions and parliamentary committees.
Only 13 per cent of Cabinet members and 21 per cent
of parliamentary committee members are women. I
call again for Somali leaders to take further measures
to ensure women’s meaningful participation across
institutions of Government, as well as the inclusion of
youth and historically marginalized groups.
President Mohamud has repeatedly highlighted the
importance of improving relations between the central
Government and the federal member states to advance
national priorities. Among his first commendable
actions in office was to meet with federal member state
leaders in the National Consultative Council and then
visit several state capitals. I urge that that outreach to
the federal member states continue and that the National
Consultative Council meet again very soon. The United
Nations is working with the Government in support of
that important meeting. Since taking office, President
Mohamud has also made multiple foreign visits to
neighbouring countries and other important bilateral
partners. I welcome his initiative to ensure close ties
with all, even those countries with which relations
were previously strained. I urge that that continue,
particularly with regional neighbours.
The new Somali Administration has identified
security as its top national priority. That comes at a time
when Al-Shabaab has demonstrated increased boldness.
Its recent activities include targeted assassinations,
complex attacks such as that on the Hayat Hotel in
August, and large-scale military actions along the
border with Ethiopia. I condemn those repeated terrorist
attacks, extend my deep condolences to the families of
those killed by Al-Shabaab and wish a speedy recovery
to the wounded. I commend the courage and tenacity
of Somali security forces and the forces of the African
22-58245

07/09/2022

The situation in Somalia

Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), who
at great cost in lives continue to fight to defend the
population against Al-Shabaab.
Somalia’s efforts towards force generation,
integration and coordination are necessary both
to achieve military gains and to address citizens’
protection concerns. Effective Somali forces are key to
the planned transition from ATMIS. I reiterate the need
for the federal Government and the federal member
states to collaborate closely to counter Al-Shabaab,
guided by Somalia’s regional and international human
rights commitments.
The implementation of the security transition tasks
mandated by resolution 2628 (2022) is advancing,
including the request for the federal Government of
Somalia, the African Union, the European Union
and the United Nations to identify relevant, clear and
realistic benchmarks for progress. The United Nations
Support Office in Somalia continues to provide
mandated logistical support to ATMIS and, using
trust fund contributions, to authorized Somali security
forces. I remain deeply concerned about the shortfall
in funding available for ATMIS salary stipends and for
the trust fund of the Somali security forces and urge
additional donor contributions as a matter of urgency.
Somalia is facing a humanitarian catastrophe, with
some 7.8 million Somalis — nearly half of the country’s
estimated population — impacted by the worst drought
in at least four decades, exacerbated by climate factors.
The four consecutive failed rainy seasons have put
areas of the country at risk of famine. Thanks to
generous donor support, humanitarian organizations
have since January quadrupled the number of those
reached with assistance to 5.3 million people. But with
ever-escalating needs and a fifth failed rainy season
projected, a further scale-up of humanitarian assistance
is critical. I call on all parties in Somalia to facilitate
humanitarian access. I also call on all of Somalia’s
friends to increase urgently the needed funding.
The ongoing humanitarian crisis has especially
contributed to the vulnerability of displaced
women and children, who historically have faced
discrimination and exclusion from services. I urge the
Somali authorities to increase prevention measures for
the risk of sexual violence, particularly against women
and girls, including by strengthening security at water
points and food distribution sites.

S/PV.9125

Turning to the longer-term development agenda,
Somalia has taken significant steps in the debtrelief process. In June, the Executive Board of the
International Monetary Fund approved pending
reviews, leading to the release of $350 million in muchneeded development funding. Similarly, other donors
have resumed pending budgetary support to ease the
financial pressures and sustain the required reform
efforts to complete the debt-relief process.
Before I conclude, let me reiterate the commitment
of the United Nations to continue supporting the
Government and the people of Somalia in achieving
their national goals. In that context, the strategic review
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
is well-advanced. The review team visited Somalia
in August and held extensive consultations with
Government officials and other stakeholders, ensuring
that Somali views will inform the review’s forthcoming
report and recommendations to the Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Swan
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Lortan.
Ms. Lortan: I am grateful for this opportunity to
address the Security Council on the situation in Somalia.
The African Union partnership with the United Nations
remains vital to delivering our collective support
to Somalia.
At the most recent Council briefing by the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) in May
(see S/PV.9040), the Mission reported that, with the
conclusion of the election cycle, Somalia was entering
a period of optimism and opportunity. And thanks to
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud’s leadership, the
political process has continued to register progress.
The President adopted a political programme
centred on the promotion of reconciliation, under
the theme “Somalia at peace with itself and with the
world”. That has seen important outreach visits to
federal member states, notably South-West, Galmudug
and, recently, Puntland, in an attempt to foster national
integration and peaceful coexistence in the context of the
President’s peace caravan launched in May. That peace
caravan paved the way in June for the first National
Consultative Council meeting, held under President
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud’s leadership. The two-day
meeting concluded with the Federal Government and
the federal member states agreeing on key national

22-582453/19

S/PV.9125

The situation in Somalia

priorities. Those priorities now form the basis of the
Federal Government’s ambitious programme of work,
which was presented to the federal Parliament in August
by Somalia’s new Prime Minister, Hamse Abdi Barre.
Prime Minister Barre’s nomination and unanimous
approval by the federal Parliament in June represents
a welcome and timely consensual approach to political
relations between the Federal Government and the
federal member states. That was followed by the
appointment and endorsement of Somalia’s Council
of Ministers, which saw both the President and the
Prime Minister embark on wide-ranging consultations
with opposition figures, parliamentarians, civil society
organizations, women’s groups and members of the
business community. The outcome is that Somalia now
has a Council of Ministers that is both selected on merit
and represents inclusivity and diversity.
Recognizing Somalia’s strategic position and
its desire to both foster reconciliation at home and
strengthen its external relations within the first 100 days
of assuming office, President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
undertook a series of official visits to the United
Arab Emirates, Türkiye, Eritrea, Kenya, Djibouti, the
East African Community summit in Arusha, Egypt
and, lastly, Uganda. Those visits signal Somalia’s
determination to define itself beyond security and to
seek support for its security transition, in particular
by requesting assistance for the development of its
security forces.
Turning to the security situation, insecurity across
Somalia remains a serious concern for ATMIS. Since
our most recent briefing, we have observed an uptick
in Al-Shabaab attacks as it launches asymmetric
attacks that include various forms of improvisedexplosive-device (IED) attacks, complex attacks,
infiltration attacks, probing attacks, grenade and mortar
attacks, ambushes, attacks targeting key Government
installations and targeted assassinations of senior
Government officials, security forces and civilians. The
noticeable increase in both the frequency and lethality
of the group’s deadly operations across Somalia and,
more recently, across its borders is a matter of grave
concern to ATMIS.
In the ATMIS area of responsibility, in August,
Al-Shabaab launched a series of attacks, including
complex attacks on the Hayat Hotel in Mogadishu. The
attack and the prolonged 30-hour siege employed a
combination of person- and vehicle-borne IED attacks
4/19

07/09/2022

and small arms, killing more than 20 people and
injuring more than 117.
Beyond Somalia, Al-Shabaab carried out crossborder operations in Kenya and Ethiopia in May and
July. On 20 July, the group attacked the Ethiopian
Liyu police stationed in the towns of Yeed and Ato,
in the Bakool region of Somalia. The incident killed a
reported 17 police officers. After the attacks, reports
suggested that Al-Shabaab deployed a large number of
its fighters along with vehicles into the Afder zone of
Somali Regional state in Ethiopia.
While Al-Shabaab’s basic tactics and techniques
have largely remained unchanged, we are concerned
about the emerging threat, as well as the group’s
ability to launch simultaneous attacks in different
parts of the country. Indications are that Al-Shabaab
has replenished its fighting force to an estimated
9,000 to 12,000 fighters. The group has also acquired
new capabilities, such as commercial drones used in
surveillance of ATMIS, and Somali National Army
forward operating bases (FOBs). It continues to
enhance its ability through the rapid mobilization of its
fighters. That is in addition to generating millions of
dollars on a monthly basis from extortion of the Somali
economy and using a reported 25 per cent of its revenue
for military purposes.
Let me take this opportunity to update the Council on
the implementation by ATMIS of key aspects of both the
African Union’s Peace and Security Council resolution
1068 and United Nations Security Council resolution
2628 (2022), particularly as they relate to phase one of
the ATMIS concept of operations (CONOPS).
In that context, ATMIS continues to conduct
joint targeted operations across its mandated sectors
to degrade Al-Shabaab. We also continue to support
Somali national armed force operations, including with
air assets; intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance;
ground support and indirect fire; and casualty and
medical evacuations, with the most recent operations
taking place in Lower and Middle Shabelle, which
ended on 25 August and led to significant gains in
Galguduud in July and in the Hiraan region in August.
I would now like to pay tribute to the leadership
and the courage of the Somali national armed forces in
recovering significant tracts of territory in the Hiraan
region. The Hiraan operations are part of a series
of military offensive campaigns led by the Somali
National Army. The objective is to disrupt and end
22-58245

07/09/2022

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.9125

Al-Shabaab’s freedom of movement in Middle Shabelle.
Significantly, those operations have taken place in the
context of spontaneous uprising by local communities
and with the close support of local groups, who have a
renewed determination to end Al-Shabaab’s terror over
their lives.

the implementation of the Somalia Transition Plan
by ATMIS, the Federal Government of Somalia and
key partners. Much progress has been achieved in
that exercise, and the benchmark will be submitted to
the Council by the end of this month, as required by
resolution 2628 (2022).

While that is encouraging, the response of
Al-Shabaab to the determined actions of local
communities has been a scorched-earth policy, in
which — as they have retreated — they have destroyed
wells, communication towers and emergency food
trucks, at a time of extreme hardship for those
communities as a result of the ongoing drought.

Despite much of the ongoing effort under phase
one, more work is admittedly required, particularly to
reach agreement on the handing over and collapsing of
forward operating bases to the Somali security forces.
To date, only two FOBs, namely, Ceel Baraf and
Gololey, have been collapsed. To address that delay,
more emphasis needs to be given to issues such as
ATMIS force protection, the creation of mobile forces
and the drawdown of 2,000 troops by December. That
would require that at least 20 FOBs be handed over to
the Somali security forces by December.

It is critical that the international community
provide the desperately needed emergency and longerterm stabilization support to those newly liberated
territories. Operational support by ATMIS has been
provided to the Somali police force through joint and
motorized patrols in Mogadishu, Baidoa and Kismaayo.
At the strategic level, the ATMIS police component
has continued to advise the Somali police force in
Mogadishu and the federal member states on the
operational planning execution.
To better support our uniformed personnel and
the Somali national armed forces, we have made
progress in the development and implementation of the
logistical support plan. In that regard, joint operation
centres were operationalized last week and have been
established at the ATMIS headquarters, as well as in
the sectors, in order to enhance command-and-control
and coordination between ATMIS and Somali security
forces. Plans are ongoing to develop and establish joint
operations logistics bases at the sector level.
A draft statement of unit requirements has been
reviewed by the military Strategic Support Group,
which met in Addis Ababa from late June to early July.
The equipment review to determine what obsolete
equipment needs to be removed and replaced in the
theatre of operations will commence next week.
ATMIS and the Federal Government have also
established a joint technical committee to work on the
details of the transition. The committee is currently
focused on phase one activities. In addition, the
Federal Government, ATMIS, the European Union
and the United Nations, as well as other core security
partners, are meeting today and tomorrow to complete
the mandated benchmarking exercise, which will
include parameters to measure the effectiveness of

The upcoming drawdown will ultimately depend
on the Federal Government’s ability to generate forces
to fill the gaps that have been left by the reduction
of ATMIS force. If not, we run the risk of creating a
security vacuum and reversing the gains achieved over
the years, which have been achieved at huge cost in
terms of lives and money.
A key requirement for the effectiveness of ATMIS
throughout the CONOPS phases through December
2024 is the availability of sustainable, predictable
and adequate levels of funding. However, despite
the request of the African Union Peace and Security
Council communiqué 1075 of this year, there has been a
reluctance to consider a special United Nations meeting
on financing for ATMIS and the Somali security
forces. I would like to use this opportunity to appeal to
the Council and to all partners, traditional and new, to
urgently ensure sustainable, predictable and adequate
funding for ATMIS for the duration of its mandate.
Currently, the Mission is experiencing a significant
funding shortfall of between $40 and $50 million.
Those funds are needed to cover stipends for military
and police components and salaries for the civilian and
military staff officers and individual police officers, as
well as to undertake critical programmes and projects
in support of the mandate.
Finally, Somalia is facing one of the worst
humanitarian emergencies in its history, following
the failure of a fourth consecutive rainy season. Only
two days ago we received the news that many of us
had feared — that famine is now knocking at the door

22-582455/19

S/PV.9125

The situation in Somalia

in Somalia. This year’s drought has devastated the
livelihoods of the affected populations, particularly the
most vulnerable and marginalized people, across many
parts of Somalia. We have, unfortunately, witnessed an
increase in malnutrition and disease outbreaks, with
more people facing difficulties to access safe water,
proper sanitation and food. In response to this crisis,
ATMIS is working with the African Union Commission
in Addis Ababa to provide immediate humanitarian
relief to the affected people. Given the severity of the
drought, we are also preparing the ground in Mogadishu
for a fact-finding mission in the coming weeks by the
African Union Permanent Representatives Committee
on Humanitarian Issues.
In the meantime, ATMIS continues to coordinate,
liaise and share information with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and humanitarian
actors through effective civil-military coordination
as part of support in facilitating the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to drought-affected areas.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Lortan
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Weber.
Ms. Weber: Let me extend our best wishes to France
in presiding over the Security Council this month. I
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting the European
Union (EU) to brief the Security Council on Somalia.
I wish to extend my deepest condolences to the
families and friends of those who lost their lives in the
terrible attack on the Hayat Hotel and to pay tribute to
the brave security forces who risk their lives daily to
protect the people of Somalia. We are at this meeting to
discuss a security situation that threatens all of us — in
Somalia, the region and beyond. We must stand united
to face this threat together.
Al-Shabaab has grown to become the richest and
strongest global franchise of Al-Qaida, threatening
peace and security as well as humanitarian efforts, in
Somalia and the Horn of Africa. The incursion into
Ethiopia at the end of July was the most significant
since the organization’s inception, followed by a
deadly complex attack in Mogadishu three weeks later.
Renewed threats have been issued against Kenya,
where the organization also has a significant presence
and is destroying the lives of the Kenyan people in
the north-east. The organization continues to control
large areas in Somalia. Its extortion and taxation go
6/19

07/09/2022

even further, resulting in an alarming operational and
financial capacity.
The response to fight Al-Shabaab has to be
substantial. We all owe deep gratitude to the brave
Somalis who have engaged in the fight against
Al-Shabaab. After 30 years of conflict, Somali children
and youth know nothing else.
I want to pay tribute also to the troop-contributing
countries of the African Union Mission in Somalia,
now the African Union Transitional Mission in Somalia
(ATMIS), and especially to their brave men and
women, who have served and continue to serve the
Somali people. Many have paid the ultimate price. This
sacrifice has to be acknowledged.
We have all invested heavily in bringing security
to Somalia. The troop-contributing countries under
ATMIS have deployed thousands of troops. Key
partners, including the EU, have trained Somali
troops and police forces. The EU has supported the
African Union-led Mission for 15 years, investing over
€2.5 billion. We also have three peace and security
Missions deployed to Somalia and have supported
the Somali National Army and Somali police with
€77 million under various instruments.
Ensuring security in Somalia has become a “must
not fail” for all of us. In all honesty, we have to ask
ourselves, if over a decade of significant investment
in peacekeeping missions and the increased capacity
of the Somali National Army has resulted in a rolling
back of security gains against Al-Shabaab, what has
gone wrong?
We are now five months into the ATMIS mandate.
Owing to the delayed transfer of power and the
establishment of the new Cabinet, progress has been
limited. Resolution 2628 (2022) signals change. The
EU is committed to supporting the continued efforts
and security presence of ATMIS. To that end, we have
committed €140 million for 2022. There is, however, no
support for more of the same.
Resolution 2628 (2022) places the Somalis in the
lead for this transition, security and the fight against
Al-Shabaab. Somali leadership is essential, and I
welcome the new Government’s commitment to fight
Al-Shabaab militarily, financially and ideologically.
I urge the Somali Government to provide clarity
on the Somalia Transition Plan and the national
security architecture.
22-58245

07/09/2022

The situation in Somalia

As ATMIS draws down, Somali troops have to take
over. That does not necessarily mean generating more
troops, but it requires a clear overview of the troops
available — at the federal level and in the federal member
states — as well as the force organization needed to
assume responsibilities from ATMIS and a clear vision
for the Somali Armed Forces. The only exit strategy for
ATMIS is to support the Somali security sector.
We have to acknowledge that the root causes
of instability in Somalia remain unresolved. The
relationship between the Federal Government of
Somalia and federal member states continues to be
fragile. Core issues such as security, power sharing and
resource sharing have not yet been addressed. Time
has been lost through political infighting. We must
now make progress on building institutions; national,
regional and local authorities; ensuring service delivery;
and building the social contract between citizens and
the State.
Security and justice must be ensured for the people
of Somalia. I encourage the Somali leadership to come
together, deliver on the finalization of the constitution
and institutionalize a dispute resolution mechanism
through either a constitutional court or the Supreme
Court. The international community has provided
ample support to that process for over a decade, and we
cannot continue to act as referee for domestic disputes.
It is time to start building institutions and move away
from ad hoc decision-making processes. That is why I
urge the Somali leadership to finalize what is essentially
a Somali process and a national responsibility. Until
that has been done, delivery to the Somali people will
remain incomplete.
Thousands of lives have already been lost and more
remain at risk. The worst drought in four decades is
ravaging Somalia and the wider Horn of Africa. More
than 7 million people — over half the population — are
food insecure. Over 200,000 people are at immediate
risk of starvation.
This is not the first drought the Somali people have
had to endure, and neither will it be the last. Somalia
bears some of the worst consequences of climate change
and is hit hard by recurrent droughts and flooding. In
May, I had the opportunity to visit Mogadishu and meet
the new President, His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud. In his words,
“Somalia must face the brutal truth in that
pastoralism, the lifestyle of more than 90 per cent

S/PV.9125

of the population, might no longer be sustainable
given the changing climate in the region”.
In response to the growing humanitarian crisis, the
EU pledged €633 million for the region. That includes
€20 million for our humanitarian reserves for Somalia,
which brings the EU’s humanitarian aid on drought
response to €80 million since December last year.
Furthermore, we have set up an EU humanitarian air
bridge in Somalia, which is delivering emergency
supplies to hard-to-reach areas. A total of 50 to 70
flights will take place, and over 100 metric tons of
life-saving medical and nutritional supplies have
already been airlifted.
The European Union remains committed to a
holistic approach in Somalia, and delivering on its
promises remains a high priority. The formation
of a new Government presents an opportunity for
re-engagement, refocus and the alignment of priorities.
The authorities need strong encouragement by a more
unified international community to move forward on
core issues linked to the fight against Al-Shabaab.
Al-Shabaab is a multilayered threat and can be
successfully engaged only through a comprehensive
approach. The Somalis need to be at the head of the table.
The complexities of fighting one of the most effective
terrorist organizations deserve our collective attention.
Now is the time to stand together with our
Somali partners, troop-contributing countries, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the United Nations and all other entities
that contribute to tackling that challenge together.
Strong cooperation and warm relationships are crucial
to the Horn of Africa at this time. The European Union
is committed to peace and stability in Somalia, and we
look forward to a new chapter of renewed cooperation.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Weber
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Swan and our African Union
and European Union briefers for their briefings today.
I congratulate Somalia on the successful completion
of its electoral process and on the peaceful transition
of power to President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. The

22-582457/19

S/PV.9125

The situation in Somalia

United Kingdom stands ready to support President
Mahmud’s Government to deliver its ambitious agenda
and realize his vision of a Somalia at peace with itself
and the world.
I will focus my remarks today on three subjects — the
humanitarian situation, security and reconciliation.
First, urgent action is needed to meet Somalia’s
acute humanitarian needs. As Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths has warned, after four consecutive failed
rains, Somalia faces famine on a scale that is greater
than we last saw a decade ago. The window to prevent it
is rapidly closing. We recognize the efforts of Somalia’s
Special Envoy for Drought Response and of the systemwide scale-up, but the response must be sustained and
prioritized. On its part, this financial year, the United
Kingdom has contributed $180 million to respond to
drought in the Horn of Africa. We call on all partners to
do what they can to step up their humanitarian support
to prevent famine.
Secondly, the United Kingdom welcomes the high
priority that the new Somali Government has placed
on security and on the fight against Al-Shabaab. We
join others in extending our condolences to those who
suffered and to the families of those who were killed in
the Hayat Hotel attack.
We are also proud to provide funding to the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) and the
Somalia trust fund. We encourage other Member States
to join us in that endeavour so that Somali forces can
develop the capacity and capabilities they need to end the
threat posed by Al-Shabaab. However, military effort
on its own will not be enough. The upcoming renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia and the sanctions regime under resolution
751 (1992) will be an opportunity for the Council to set
out how those tools can work most effectively alongside
ATMIS to support Somalia and defeat Al-Shabaab.
Finally, we urge Somalia’s political leaders to work
together to agree on and implement national priorities
and solve shared problems. Working together, and
with support from their partners, we are confident that
Somalia can defeat Al-Shabaab and advance peace,
stability and prosperity for the benefit of all Somalis
and the region.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Swan for his
briefing. I also thank Deputy Special Representative
8/19

07/09/2022

Lortan for her update on the work of the African Union,
and we look forward to engaging with the new Special
Representative very soon.
I thank Special Representative Weber for her
briefing. As she has made very clear, the European
Union remains a steadfast partner of Somalia. Her
upcoming visit to the region with High Representative
Borrell Fontelles could not be timelier.
I am also pleased to see the Permanent
Representative of Somalia here with us today. We
warmly welcome Ambassador Abukar Dahir Osman.
First, Ireland congratulates Somalia and its people
on the successful completion of elections and, in
particular, the recent appointment of the Prime Minister
and establishment of the Cabinet. Now is the time to get
back to the core business of Government. There is an
urgent need to address the challenges of State-building,
humanitarian needs, economic development and
tackling Al-Shabaab. Addressing those issues will
require an inclusive, all-of-society, consensus-based
approach. As we just heard from Mr. Swan, a strong
working relationship between the Federal Government
of Somalia and the federal member states will be vital.
A return to the animosity of the past will help no one.
In addition, Somalia, like all countries, needs
to harness the potential of its whole population. That
means that Somalia needs to ensure the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women throughout society.
In most countries, including my own, much more needs
to be done to support the meaningful participation of
women in decision-making positions. Nevertheless, the
number of women appointed to the new Somali Cabinet
falls short of Somalia’s own commitments. I urge
the incoming Administration to build on its electoral
promises and ensure the meaningful participation of
women throughout the new Administration, including
at senior levels.
Secondly, the new Government faces a dire
humanitarian emergency that is rapidly unfolding across
the country. We have seen the reports of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of alarming
levels of widespread hunger. Millions of people are being
displaced and even more face the horror of famine-like
conditions. We, in the international community, have
a duty to provide the urgent surge in humanitarian aid
that is needed now to avoid a catastrophe. We have no
time to lose.
22-58245

07/09/2022

The situation in Somalia

Drought, the impact of climate change, conflict
with Al-Shabaab and difficulty accessing food drive
the humanitarian crisis. Meanwhile, food costs and
inflation are spiralling due to the knock-on effects
of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The international
community must do everything it can to support the
Somali people at this time. It can count on our support.
However, the response must be led by the Somali
Government. It must live up to its commitments and
deliver for the Somali people.
Finally, I would like to express my sincere
condolences to the families of those killed or injured in
the recent Al-Shabaab attacks. That includes the attack
at the Hayat Hotel in Mogadishu and on a civilian convoy
in Hiraan, which was reportedly carrying much-needed
aid. Those attacks are a stark reminder of the threat
posed by terrorism in Somalia. Ireland condemns those
senseless attacks in the strongest possible terms.
Ireland urges the Government of Somalia to
intensify its multifaceted approach to addressing the
threat of Al-Shabaab. African Union peacekeepers
and the Somali security forces play a crucial role in
combating the extremists. We commend their bravery
and sacrifices. However, military action alone will
not be enough. Ultimately, good governance, justice,
the protection of human rights, as well as economic
development, will be the weapons that defeat
Al-Shabaab once and for all.
We have made a number of asks of the Somali
Government today. I urge the new Administration to
grasp this opportunity to deliver for its people. There
is no time to waste. Ireland, together with the European
Union, will continue to support Somalia’s efforts to
face those challenges, become a peaceful and stable
country and take progressive ownership over its own
national security.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General James
Swan and Deputy Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia Fiona Lortan for their briefings on the
most recent developments in Somalia. I also thank
Special Representative of the European Union for
the Horn of Africa Annette Weber for her insights. I
welcome the Permanent Representative of Somalia to
today’s meeting.
Following the successful conclusion of the
elections in Somalia in May, the new Government of

S/PV.9125

Somalia has taken concrete shape with the appointment
of the Prime Minister and the Cabinet. The number of
women in the Cabinet has also increased. Engagement
with the federal member states has intensified, as
highlighted by Special Representative Swan. We
welcome those positive developments. We also take
note of the positive developments in relation to women’s
empowerment, as stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/665), including the establishment
of six women’s peace networks across the federal
member states.
However, the security situation in Somalia
remains precarious and worrisome. The acts of terror
perpetrated by Al-Shabaab continue in greater numbers
and increasing force, with improvised explosive device
(IED) attacks becoming commonplace. The deadly
attacks on the Hayat Hotel on 19 August and in Somalia’s
central region on 3 September are yet another grim
reminder of terrorism’s existential threat to Somalia.
Al-Shabaab’s incursions into Ethiopia and the clashes
on the Somali-Ethiopian border in the Bakool region
on 20 July attest to Al-Shabaab’s expanding scale of
operations. India unequivocally condemns the terror
attacks perpetrated by Al-Shabaab.
Against that volatile security backdrop, the phased
handover of security responsibilities from the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) to the
Somali security forces will be critical and needs to be
calibrated to avoid security gaps.
It is imperative that the ongoing debate on
addressing food security also focus on the severe
drought in Somalia and the Horn of Africa. Addressing
that dimension of food security in the appropriate
forums is crucial, given its far-reaching detrimental
consequences for over 1 million people who have been
displaced in Somalia, with an estimated 45 per cent of
the population facing acute food insecurity. Only 67 per
cent of the $1.5 billion 2022 humanitarian response plan
has been funded. Amid the drought and the ensuing
humanitarian crisis, we call on the international
community to stand by Somalia in its hour of need.
A stable security transition in Somalia demands
firm leadership and collaboration between the Somali
Government and the African Union. The consistent
support of international partners in line with Somalia’s
needs and expectations will be crucial at this stage.
We welcome the recent initiatives taken by the
Government of Somalia to implement the Somalia

22-582459/19

S/PV.9125

The situation in Somalia

Transition Plan. We also welcome the work being done
by the United Nations Support Office in Somalia and
the United Nations Mine Action Service to assist the
ATMIS transition, particularly with the Somali army
and police on counter-IED operations. We also noted the
inaugural meeting of the Somali navy and coastguard
working group, with the aim of enabling a coordinated
approach in developing Somalia’s maritime sector.
In conclusion, India will continue to support
Somalia and its people to realize their collective
aspirations for a stable, secure and peaceful future.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council, namely, Gabon, Ghana and
Kenya (A3).
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary General, Mr. James Swan, and the Special
Representative of the European Union for the Horn
of Africa, Ms. Annette Weber. We also welcome the
appointment of Ambassador Mohamed El-Amin Saif of
Comoros as the head of the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), ably represented at
this meeting by Ms. Fiona Lortan, Deputy Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Acting Head of Mission.
We also welcome the participation in this meeting of
our brother the Permanent Representative of Somalia.
The A3 welcomes the encouraging political
developments in Somalia, especially the efforts of
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud to foster national
unity and reconciliation by addressing existing
differences between the Federal Government and
the federal member states. We particularly welcome
the convening of the first meeting of the National
Consultative Council in June and the consensus reached
on implementing the federal system; on preserving the
constitutional development process and completing the
provisional Constitution within an agreed time frame;
finalizing a national independent judiciary system; and
completing the national security architecture, which is
critical for force development and generation, as well as
for sustaining the fight against terrorism. We encourage
future meetings of the National Consultative Council
to be sustained as a regular feature of governance to
address lingering differences, as such an approach
offers an opportunity to develop sound foundations for
sustainable peace in Somalia.
10/19

07/09/2022

On the security situation, we remain concerned
about the ability of Al-Shabaab to sustain its operations,
including carrying out complex terror attacks within
and beyond Somalia. We strongly condemn the recent
spate of attacks by the group targeting key installations
in Mogadishu, security personnel and civilians, as well
as its incursions into the Somali region of Ethiopia. The
A3 conveys its deepest condolences to the families of
the victims, as well as the Governments of the region,
and wish those injured a speedy recovery.
Those attacks illustrate how the Al-Qaidaaffiliated group is determined to destabilize the region
by exporting its brand of extremist ideology. The
persistent terrorist attacks have also demonstrated
the need for increased international cooperation and
solidarity in the fight against the threat. We therefore
reiterate our call on Somalia’s international partners
and stakeholders to support the efforts of the Federal
Government in safeguarding the security of the country
and countering Al-Shabaab’s networks and capabilities.
We underscore the role of the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia, particularly its mandate
in the implementation of the Somalia Transition Plan.
In that regard, we welcome the installation of a new
police station at Jawhar airport to strengthen security.
The A3 emphasizes the need for sustained, adequate
and predictable funding by the international community
to enable ATMIS to effectively deliver on its mandate.
Similarly, we call on Somalia’s partners to support
the Federal Government of Somalia in generating
the required forces to take over responsibility for the
country’s security and to ensure the gains achieved
thus far are not reversed.
The A3 expresses its full solidarity with the
Federal Government and the people of Somalia in the
fight against terrorism and reaffirms its commitment
to supporting their efforts to eradicate extremism and
bring peace and stability to the country.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, the A3 is
concerned about the worsening crisis in Somalia, which,
regrettably, is not matched by timely and adequate
funding. Furthermore, the vagaries of climate change
continue to plague and negatively affect millions
of people in the Horn of Africa. Drought in Somalia
has reached an unprecedented level this year, with
devastating impacts on civilians who are already facing
acute food insecurity. We appeal to the humanitarian
community to scale up its relief efforts and urgently
22-58245

07/09/2022

The situation in Somalia

address the funding gap in the humanitarian response
plan for Somalia. We welcome the Federal Government
of Somalia’s commitment to working with international
humanitarian organizations and encourage improved
coordination efforts by the Special Envoy for Drought
Response appointed by President Mohamud.
In conclusion, the A3 urges Somalia’s political
leaders to focus on advancing the commonly agreed
national priorities in line with the Somalia Transition
Plan so as to make progress in stabilizing Somalia and
rebuilding strong federal state structures and processes.
For its part, the wider international community should
support such efforts through accelerated debt relief,
as well as the injection of new funds to revamp the
economy and remove the existing drivers of instability
that have been exploited by Al-Shabaab to spread
radicalism and undermine State legitimacy.
The A3 will continue to stand with the people of
Somalia in their struggle for peace and security and
national development.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the briefers for
their insights.
Let me first express Norway’s sympathies to
those bereaved and those harmed in recent attacks by
Al-Shabaab, including at the Hayat Hotel in Mogadishu,
where two Norwegian-Somali nationals were among
the casualties.
Political stability and unity are the keys to progress
towards economic recovery, development, security
sector reform and countering Al-Shabaab. Therefore,
we support President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud’s
ambitions to improve relations between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, as well
as to prioritize constitutional reform and national
reconciliation. Completing the national security
architecture is of the utmost priority, and relevant, clear
and realistic benchmarks for the Somalia Transition
Plan and the African Union (AU) Transition Mission in
Somalia must be supported by close cooperation among
all levels of Government, as well as through consensus
in the National Security Council and the National
Consultative Council. The AU Transition Mission
in Somalia, together with the Somali security forces,
have the potential to achieve a more effective response
to Al-Shabaab with a strong emphasis on protecting
civilians, including children.

S/PV.9125

The three pillars of the Somalia Transition Plan
are mutually reinforcing, but progress on stabilization
efforts under the third pillar is particularly needed,
and, in order for it to be successful, its implementation
must be coordinated by the authorities at the federal,
state and district levels and aligned with the realities
on the ground, with justice and security delivered by
accountable local authorities.
The provision of essential services, including water,
basic health care, education and justice, is also crucial
and must be rights-based. That builds local resilience,
prevents the recruitment of children, strengthens the
Government’s legitimacy and counteracts violent
extremist ideology, including in newly liberated
areas. Efforts towards countering Al-Shabaab must
rest on a broader political and development strategy.
We therefore advocate for a reinvigorated policylevel dialogue on stabilization and reconciliation,
including the full implementation of the national
reconciliation framework.
We welcome the attention paid by the National
Consultative Council to dialogue between the Federal
Government of Somalia and Somaliland. While sensitive
and difficult, only dialogue and trust-building can bring
the parties closer to mutually acceptable solutions.
In the recent federal elections, the percentage
of women in Parliament regrettably decreased as
compared to the 2016 elections. Nevertheless, it is
important that all newly elected women members of
Parliament be provided with sufficient support and
security. We encourage the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Development
Programme and UN-Women to continue to cooperate
with key Somali partners in that regard. The meaningful
and equal participation of women in Government is
essential to progress in Somalia.
Lastly, Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffith’s
recent warning of a likely famine should serve as a
reminder of the gravity of the humanitarian situation
and the continued need for action. Tackling the
devastating drought and the imminent risk of famine
must remain a top priority for the Government and all
international partners, and Norway stands ready to do
its part. The worst outcome scenario must be averted.
All stakeholders and parties to the conflict must
allow and facilitate full, safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian assistance. At the same time, more

22-5824511/19

S/PV.9125

The situation in Somalia

sustainable solutions to recurring emergencies must
also be found.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Swan for his comprehensive
briefing. I would like to express our appreciation
for his tireless efforts and the efforts of his team in
supporting the Government and the people of Somalia.
I would also like to thank Ms. Lortan and Ms. Weber
for their valuable briefings. In addition, I offer our
sincere condolences to the families of the victims of
the terrorist attack that targeted a civilian convoy in
the Hiraan region, in central Somalia. My country
condemns those criminal acts.
This is a critical period for Somalia following
the success of the electoral process and the vote of
confidence in the new Government, which requires
strengthening efforts to ensure Somalia’s security and
stability. Furthermore, the Somali Government must be
enabled to assume its responsibilities, especially in the
light of the complex challenges facing it and the need
to meet the Somali people’s aspirations to build a stable
country so that they can enjoy peace and prosperity. The
United Arab Emirates believes that the time is ripe to
meaningfully improve the general situation in Somalia
by working closely with the Somali leadership on their
priorities. Today’s meeting provides the opportunity to
send a clear message to the Somali people conveying
the Council’s consistent support for them in achieving
security and stability.
In the context of our discussion, I would like to
focus on two aspects, namely, the continued terrorist
threat posed by Al-Shabaab and the dire humanitarian
and climate crises.
The people of Somalia, and all the people of the
Horn of Africa, continue to face the brutality and
terror of Al-Shabaab’s relentless violence. The terrorist
group’s attacks continue to inflict harm on civilians,
destroy essential infrastructure and cripple national and
regional economic potential. Al-Shabaab’s continued
deployment of sophisticated technology, including
conducting its criminal activities, the concealment
of its sources of funding and the ultimate spread of
the group’s destructive reach, is a growing source of
concern for us.
As such, the Security Council must remain united in
its resolve to address the transnational threat posed by
Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups to international
12/19

07/09/2022

peace and security, including adopting the needed
regulatory framework to prevent terrorist groups’
access to technology and countering its use for criminal
purposes. The United Arab Emirates remains firmly
committed to working with international and regional
actors in supporting Somalia’s fight against terrorism.
The Council is well aware of the humanitarian
plight of the people of Somalia. All the relevant United
Nations agencies have painted a bleak picture of the
humanitarian situation, while warning of the everincreasing threat of famine, as the country is currently
experiencing the worst drought in its history. According
to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/665), the
drought will affect approximately 50 per cent of the
population, while, at the same time, more than 6 million
people are suffering from the lack of sufficient water,
which is simply untenable. The deteriorating and
worrisome crisis requires urgent attention from the
international community, including by doubling its
humanitarian assistance to support the Government
of Somalia and helping vulnerable communities with
relief from drought throughout the country.
Accordingly, we look forward to hearing additional
details from Mr. Martin Griffiths concerning his recent
visit to Somalia and his recommendations on improving
the humanitarian situation in the country. For its part,
the United Arab Emirates remains committed to
providing humanitarian aid to the people of Somalia.
Since the beginning of this year, my country has sent
approximately 2,870 tons of aid to support the millions
of people affected by the drought.
Responding to climate-related challenges will also
require the international community to focus on the
terrorist groups like Al-Shabaab that are exploiting the
crisis caused by the drought to achieve their objectives.
Recent United Nations reports have documented that
the group has become adept at using the drought and
other urgent crises to its benefit, whether by extorting
local communities or by attempting to expand their
influence, including through propaganda and deceptive
means. The United Arab Emirates therefore stresses the
need for stronger collaboration between the Government
of Somalia and key international partners in devising
a community-oriented response plan. Importantly,
humanitarian actors must be able to reach vulnerable
populations and deliver unhindered aid relief.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates commends
the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia, the
22-58245

07/09/2022

The situation in Somalia

United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and all
partners for their vital support in Somalia’s journey
towards security, stability and prosperity.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would like to thank
Special Representative Swan, Deputy Special
Representative Lortan and European Union Special
Representative Weber for their briefings. I also
welcome the presence of the representative of Somalia
at today’s meeting.
We are pleased to hear that President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud has appointed a new Prime Minister
and that the new Cabinet is already in place. Those are
very encouraging developments. We call on Somalia’s
political leadership to also further advance women’s
meaningful inclusion in all processes, including in the
new Administration. We welcome the establishment
of six women’s peace networks across the federal
member states.
Albania also welcomes and echoes the key
conclusions of the National Consultative Council
meeting held in June in Mogadishu. We therefore
encourage the Government to achieve tangible results in
completing the constitutional reform within an agreed
time frame, finalize a national independent judicial
system and develop a unified democratic election
model. It is crucial for the Federal Government to boost
constructive dialogue with the federal member states
and restore trust between citizens and institutions.
Turning to the security situation, we commend
the Government’s efforts to prioritize the fight against
Al-Shabaab and improve the overall security landscape
in Mogadishu and across Somalia. Albania condemns in
the strongest terms the latest attacks by Al-Shabaab on
19 August and expresses its condolences to the families
of the victims. In that regard, we echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the implementation of the Somalia
Transition Plan, as well the importance of resuming
Government-led discussions on force generation,
force integration and the phased handover of security
responsibilities from the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia to the Somali security forces.
We also urge the new Government to step up its
efforts in tackling the continued human rights violations
and abuses, including sexual and gender-based violence
and grave violations committed against children, and
to make progress on the swift adoption of key human
rights-related legislation.

S/PV.9125

Somalia continues to face an alarming drought
emergency and increasing economic pressure, which
have worsened the humanitarian situation. Albania
is deeply worried about the situation’s impact on the
population, particularly children, women and the
elderly. In addition to that gloomy situation, ensuring
humanitarian access has remained a major challenge,
mainly as a result of ongoing conflict and insecurity.
We applaud humanitarian actors for their efforts in
providing life-saving assistance to the most vulnerable
people. The entire international community should
support those efforts.
Lastly, Albania reiterates its support for the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and looks forward seeing its strategic review
report, as well as the report on the arms embargo.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank Special Representative
Swan, Deputy Special Representative Lortan and
Special Representative Weber for their briefings. I also
welcome the Permanent Representative of Somalia
to today’s meeting. I will focus my statement today
on three points: the humanitarian crisis, the security
situation and political developments.
We note with great concern that, as UnderSecretary-General Griffiths warned us a few days ago,
millions of Somalis are facing a tragic plight. The worst
drought in four decades is affecting nearly half of the
population, and 1 million Somalis have been forced to
flee their homes. Of the 7.1 million people facing acute
food insecurity, more than 213,000 could die if they do
not receive urgent assistance. Since the beginning of
the year, more than 750 children have died in nutrition
centres, which is unacceptable. Sadly, those are not new
warnings — we are well aware of them. The country is
at imminent risk of famine owing to the projections for
a fifth consecutive failed rainy season, the indisputable
effects of climate change, the continued increases in
food prices and a level of humanitarian aid that is not
commensurate to scale of the needs. We need to take
urgent action. We must not wait for an official famine
to be declared. As the Security Council will recall, half
of the deaths in the 2011 famine occurred before it was
officially declared.
My second point concerns the security situation.
Al-Shabaab’s recent attacks, as well as its incursions
into and threats to neighbouring States, demonstrate
the risk the group poses both to Somalia and the region.

22-5824513/19

S/PV.9125

The situation in Somalia

Mexico condemns in the strongest terms the attacks
committed by Al-Shabaab, including its 19 August
attack on a hotel in Mogadishu and its attack on a
food convoy on Friday. We extend our condolences
to the victims and their families. The looting and
destruction of humanitarian goods is also unacceptable.
We underscore that all parties have an obligation
to respect international humanitarian law, protect
civilians and allow safe, timely and unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance. They must also respect
humanitarian personnel and the goods and supplies
critical to civilians’ survival.
The fight against Al-Shabaab requires the close
coordination and cooperation of all actors on the
ground. Mexico calls on the Government to redouble
its efforts to implement the Somalia Transition Plan.
In that connection, we encourage the international
community to ensure the resources needed to ensure
that both the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia (ATMIS) and the Somali security forces
have the means to carry out their mandates. We look
forward to receiving in the coming days the proposed
benchmarks and indicators on increasing ATMIS
effectiveness and the implementation of the Somalia
Transition Plan and the national security architecture,
in line with resolution 2628 (2022). The technical
assessment by the Secretary-General of Somalia’s arms
and ammunition management capabilities will also be
vital for us to take stock of the current capabilities in
the face of the existing security threats.
Finally, my country takes note of the formation of
the new Cabinet and welcomes the goals laid out by
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. We call on the new
Federal Government to build on that momentum in order
to promote political stability, including by strengthening
relations with the federal member states, which will be
essential to advancing its ambitious agenda. In that
context, we hope that the strategic review the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) is
currently conducting will enable it to lay groundwork in
order to meet the Government’s priorities for ensuring
the well-being of the Somali people. Mexico looks
forward to engaging constructively with the members
of the Council in the renewal of UNSOM’s mandate.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Representative Swan,
Deputy Special Representative Lortan and Special
Representative Weber for their briefings. I welcome
14/19

07/09/2022

the participation of the Permanent Representative of
Somalia in today’s meeting.
Somalia’s successful holding of elections and smooth
transition of power in May has created a favourable
political environment for Somalia to focus on urgent
challenges and pursue peace and development. Since
he assumed office, President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
has been strengthening dialogue and reconciliation
and promoting international cooperation, heralding
a good start to his new Administration, and China
appreciates those efforts. We welcome the fact that the
parties in Somalia convened a National Consultative
Council meeting in June to agree on seven priorities for
national development and believe that the parties will
continue to promote peace and reconstruction in a spirit
of cooperation.
Security issues are a daunting challenge facing
the new Government of Somalia. In the recent period,
Al-Shabaab and other terrorist forces have continued
to launch terrorist attacks, posing a serious threat to
Somalia and the Horn of Africa. The attack on the
Hayat Hotel in Mogadishu on 19 August and a series of
terrorist activities demonstrate, once again, the urgency
of counter-terrorism operations. China supports
President Mohamud in listing counter-terrorism and
accelerating the reconfiguration of forces as major
tasks during his term.
We welcome the Government’s efforts to enhance
coordination and cooperation with the African Union
and other key international partners in order to promote
the implementation of the Somalia Transition Plan and
gradually take over the responsibility for maintaining
its national security.
I would like to pay tribute to the commitment
and sacrifice of peacekeepers in the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) and to call
on major donors to provide ATMIS with sustainable
and predictable funding in order to ensure that AU
peacekeepers regularly receive their stipends in full.
At present, the humanitarian situation in Somalia
is dire. The persistent drought affects the livelihoods
of nearly half of its population, and food security is
rapidly deteriorating, with significant risks of famine
and malnutrition. The international community
should accelerate its humanitarian response, increase
its assistance and make the utmost efforts in order to
prevent a humanitarian disaster.
22-58245

07/09/2022

The situation in Somalia

China welcomes the appointment by President
Mohamud of the Special Presidential Envoy for
Drought Response in order to focus on humanitarian
aid. We support the United Nations in its emergency
fund relief to the Horn of Africa in order to mitigate
the consequences of the drought. We also welcome the
aid provided to Somalia by the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank under the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Initiative, which will help the country
address its challenges through assistance and debt relief.
China expresses its solidarity with the people of
Somalia, who are facing great hardship. China signed
an exchange of notes in June on Somalia emergency
food assistance. We will accelerate that process and do
everything we can in order to help Somalia respond to
the drought, and we will jointly explore lasting solutions
to prevent and mitigate disasters.
As required by the Council resolution, the
Secretary-General will soon submit to the Council
three reports — a strategic review of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, an assessment
of the progress by ATMIS and an adjustment of the
benchmarks for the implementation of sanctions. China
hopes that, in the drafting process for those reports, the
Somali-led and -owned principles will be upheld, the
opinions of Somalia, the AU and the countries of the
region will be fully heeded and the reports be aligned
with priorities of the new Somali Government so as to
serve the goal of peace and development in the country.
Mr. Kirpichenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General James Swan, as well as to
Ms. Fiona Lortan, Deputy Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Acting Head of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, for their substantive briefings. We
also listened to the briefing delivered by Ms. Annette
Weber, Special Representative of the European Union
for the Horn of Africa. Russia is closely following the
developments in the situation in the Federal Republic
of Somalia, which today faces serious challenges — a
deep-rooted fragmentation of society, a terrorist threat
and a country-wide large-scale drought.
We have consistently supported the efforts of the
Somali leadership to stabilize the domestic political
situation. We commend the conclusion of the electoral
process, including elections to both chambers of the
Somali Parliament, the election of the President of the

S/PV.9125

country and the appointment of the Prime Minister
and the new Federal Government. We hope that all
participants in the Somali political process, including
the leaders of the states of Jubaland, Puntland and
Somaliland, will continue to work together with
Mogadishu in order to establish a sustainable model for
federal governance in the country. Moreover, we firmly
believe in the need to ensure the unity and territorial
integrity of Somalia.
We commend the work of the African peacekeepers
who play a key role in counter-terrorism. We consider
the presence of the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia (ATMIS) to be one of the most important
factors in deterring extremist and other illegal activity,
as well as a guarantee of steady movement towards
strengthening statehood in the country. We believe it
important for the Somalis themselves to take an active
part in the discussion of issues relating to the strategic
goals, mandate, size, composition and financing
of ATMIS.
Nonetheless, we are concerned about the significant
uptick in the activities of the Al-Shabaab group, which
controls vast areas in the south and centre of Somalia.
Al-Shabaab militants periodically successfully carry
out high-profile attacks that result in a large number
of victims. Those include terrorist attacks on towns
and cities and on positions and bases of ATMIS and
the Somali National Army. Our main message today
is for the Somali Government to focus its efforts on
increasing the effectiveness of the security and law
enforcement agencies, including the Somali National
Army, so that the Government can effectively ensure
independent control over the security situation
throughout the country.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Swan for his briefing and for his work as Special
Representative and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) over the
past three years. His leadership has gone far to support
Somalia’s efforts as it works towards a better future for
its people. We commend his team’s work. Like others,
we look forward to reading the UNSOM strategic
review in October. Let me also thank our other briefers
today, Deputy Special Representative Lortan and
Special Representative Weber, for their informative and
insightful presentations.

22-5824515/19

S/PV.9125

The situation in Somalia

07/09/2022

Like others, the United States congratulates
Somalia for the formation of its Government and
looks forward to collaborating with the Government in
support of efforts to extend governance, security and
economic opportunities for the people of Somalia. We
look forward to now seeing progress towards addressing
Somalia’s serious challenges, including reconciliation
among the national Government and federal member
states, completing the review of the federal Constitution
and achieving debt relief.

order to prevent the growing loss of life and livelihoods.
Such action should include efforts to bolster global food
supply and strengthen food resiliency.

As demonstrated by the horrific attack on
20 August at the Hayat Hotel in Mogadishu, the threat
from Al-Shabaab remains a paramount concern. The
actions of the Somali security forces who responded to
and ended the attack were commendable. We strongly
condemn the attack and, on behalf of the United
States, I would like to offer condolences to the victims’
loved ones. The United States remains committed to
supporting Somali-led efforts to defeat Al-Shabaab.

Somalia can further strengthen its economic wellbeing by fulfilling the conditions required for reaching
the completion point under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative. We welcome the Government’s
engagement with international financial institutions to
ensure that process remains on track.

We congratulate the Somali national security forces
for their successful offensive to drive Al-Shabaab from
the Hiraan region. It is now critical that sufficient
security be supplied to allow governance and services to
be rapidly extended to those liberated areas, particularly
given the group’s efforts — as we heard — to destroy
water wells and other critical infrastructure as they fled
Government forces.
We are committed to using all available tools to
fight terrorism, including providing direct support to
the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia and
to Somalia’s security forces, as well as utilizing the
sanctions regime under the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia,
to designate Al-Shabaab operatives who continue to
threaten peace and security in Somalia and throughout
East Africa. We urge other Member States to do
the same.
As the single-largest donor of humanitarian
assistance to Somalia, the United States remains
committed to responding to the unprecedented drought
impacting more than 7 million people facing food
insecurity. The warning on Monday that a famine is
projected next month is a sobering call to action for us
all. The Somali Government deserves recognition for
tackling this deepening crisis with the urgency required,
but it is a challenge no one country can address alone.
The international community must take concerted
action, while dedicating the necessary resources in
16/19

The United States Government has provided more
than $700 million in assistance to Somalia this year
amid the unprecedented drought, which constitutes
more than 70 per cent of all contributions received so
far by the United Nations humanitarian response plan
for Somalia. We encourage other international partners
to expand their contributions for humanitarian relief.

In conclusion, the United States strongly supports
the Somali people. And we remain committed to
working together to advance democracy and mutual
prosperity for both our countries.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative James Swan, Deputy
Special Representative Fiona Lortan and Special
Representative Annette Weber for their briefings. I also
welcome the presence of the representative of Somalia
in this meeting.
Somalia can boast significant political progress
in 2022 — in particular, the formation of the national
Parliament and the peaceful and transparent presidential
election on 15 May. We commend Somali political
actors for the spirit of dialogue and compromise, which
made those developments possible. We also welcome the
formation of the new Cabinet, which involved prolonged
consultations with the several entities of Somalia’s
federal structure. The increase in the participation of
women is a sign that steps are being taken in the right
direction. Overall, we are encouraged by President
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud’s emphasis on dialogue and
reconciliation as key elements of his political platform.
There were also significant steps towards the
reconfiguration of the presence of international partners
in Somalia. In that regard, I have in mind the transition
from the African Union Military Observer Mission in
Somalia to the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia (ATMIS).
Those advances, however, contrast with the
dramatic humanitarian situation in the country. We
22-58245

07/09/2022

The situation in Somalia

are greatly concerned by the reports that the historic
drought that Somalia is currently enduring may
continue into the fall, with a possible fifth consecutive
failed rainy season in the coming months.
We took note, with alarm, of the recent statement of
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths that “famine
is at the door”. We also recall the figures presented
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/665)
about the estimated number of people facing acute
food insecurity, that is, 7.1 million, or 45 per cent of
Somalia`s population. In this ghastly context, the role
of international partners is more important than ever.
We praise the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia and the other United Nations agencies and
programmes for their collaboration with the National
Flood and Drought Task Force. We also commend
the more than 300 humanitarian actors that provide
life-saving assistance to 5.3 million Somalis under
difficult logistical and security conditions.
The food insecurity crisis that Somalia currently
faces is aggravated by the security situation in the
country, which hampers humanitarian access and
disrupts the flow of goods and agricultural supplies.
In that context, the recent attack by Al-Shabaab,
which killed 20 people and burned seven food trucks,
is particularly deplorable. Brazil condemns terrorism
in all its forms and commends the work of ATMIS
personnel and Somali security forces, who have the
difficult mission of bringing peace and stability
to Somalia.
We know, however, that peace cannot be achieved
by the use of force alone. The political processes that
I have highlighted before are key, but so is economic
development, as we have pointed out time and again in
the Security Council. In that regard, we are encouraged
by the progress in the negotiations with the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank in the framework
of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, with
the ultimate goal of allowing Somalia to be eligible for
full debt relief.
Somalia can be truly peaceful only when its citizens
are able to earn a decent livelihood. The international
community can play an important role in making
that possible.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

S/PV.9125

I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. James Swan; the Deputy Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, Ms. Fiona Lortan; and the
Special Representative of the European Union for the
Horn of Africa, Ms. Annette Weber, for their briefings.
France welcomes once again the election of
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, the appointment of
Prime Minister Hamse Abdi Barre and the formation of
the Government. We wish the federal Somali authorities
every success and encourage them to pursue dialogue
with the federal member states, including within the
framework of the National Consultative Council.
My first message concerns the unprecedented
humanitarian crisis in Somalia. I welcome the
Government’s appointment of a Special Envoy for
the Drought Response. The international community
must mobilize. The European Union has announced
€633 million to respond to the humanitarian and
food crisis in the Horn of Africa, in addition to its
humanitarian assistance to Somalia, which amounts to
€61 million in 2022. The European Union also launched
a humanitarian air bridge in July to provide urgent
assistance — primarily food and medicine — in areas
that are difficult to access by road. France is playing its
full part in providing that assistance.
This situation bears witness to the ravages of
climate change and its consequences for peace and
security. Al-Shabaab is exploiting the suffering of the
people. France firmly condemns its attacks against
civilians and Somali, regional and international forces.
We welcome the Government’s determination to
combat the threat of Al-Shabaab. The implementation
of the Somalia Transition Plan is essential for an
appropriate response to that threat, as the SecretaryGeneral has stressed. France calls on the Federal
Government and the federal member states to step up
force generation to enable the Somali army to increase
its strength, with the support of the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), including in
relay. It is imperative that ATMIS begin its drawdown
this year, as mandated by resolution 2628 (2022), so
that Somalia can eventually provide its own security.
The international community must support
that transition. The European Union remains one
of Somalia’s main partners. It has shown itself to be
a reliable partner of Somalia and the African Union,
providing nearly €2.3 billion to the African Union

22-5824517/19

S/PV.9125

The situation in Somalia

07/09/2022

Transition Mission in Somalia and then ATMIS since
2007. We encourage more partners to contribute as well.

villages were recovered in Hiraan, Middle Shabelle and
parts of Galmudug.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The gallant Somali National Army soldiers defeated
the enemy and recovered towns and villages. Somali
National Army forces have weakened Al-Shabaab,
disrupted its network and supply lines and pushed back
the bulk of its forces. Somali National Army forces
have opened main supply routes between the cities of
Beledweyn, Mataban and Mahas.

I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Madam, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I take this opportunity to welcome the newly
appointed African Union Special Representative to
Somalia, Mr. Mohammed El-Amine Souef. I also want
to thank Mr. James Swan, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia;
Ms. Fiona Lortan, Deputy Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Acting Head of the African Union
Mission in Somalia; and Her Excellency Ms. Annette
Weber, Special Representative of the European Union
for the Horn of Africa, for their briefings on recent
developments in my country.
Since winning the election, President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud has taken steps to create an
environment of unity and reconciliation among all
stakeholders and visited three federal member states:
South-West state, Galmudug state and Puntland state.
Furthermore, the President held the first National
Consultative Council meeting, laying the road map for
the main national priorities. Those priorities include
finalizing the provisional constitution, adopting a
unified election model, realizing political and social
reconciliation, finalizing the federalization process
and adopting a suitable justice model. The meeting
of the National Consultative Council emphasized that
national unity is essential in achieving all priorities,
including improved security and the development of the
economic sector. Its upcoming meeting, to be held later
this month in Mogadishu, will focus on trust-building
and the execution of the detailed road map and plan of
action for achieving the main national priorities.
On the security front, as outlined in the recent
implementation report of the Federal Government
of Somalia on the Somalia Transition Plan,
which was submitted to the Security Council on
10 July, considerable progress has been made on the
implementation of the Plan. The Somali National Army
continues to conduct offensive military operations
against Al-Shabaab. In the past three weeks, towns and
18/19

As a result of the heavy defeat of Al-Shabaab, it
has responded with desperate acts of terrorism against
soft targets and civilian populations. That was seen
in Al-Shabaab’s deliberate and indiscriminate attack
against the civilian population on the outskirts of the
city of Beledweyn on 3 September, which resulted in
the killing of 20 innocent civilians and the burning of
seven vehicles transporting food, amid a severe drought
in the country.
Despite the progress in the fight against Al-Shabaab,
challenges remain, in particular with regard to Somali
security troops being sustained by the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS), as the number of
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS)
locations and personnel will be reduced by 2,000 in the
first quarter of 2023. Support to stabilization efforts
in the transition phase is critical in consolidating the
operational gains made by the Somali security forces.
The Federal Government of Somalia has developed
a local Government capacity for service delivery,
increased legitimacy and strengthened ties with the
local communities. I would like to make the following
four points, which could pose a major challenge to our
stabilization efforts.
First, the UNSOS-managed Somali trust fund for
the Somali National Army has major structural issues,
as evidenced in the persistent shortfall of contributions
in the past few years. On our part, we have witnessed
delays in the provision of funding for quick-impact
projects and medical evacuations, as well as other
weaknesses in the fund. Therefore, we stand ready to
cooperate with our donor partners to identify a mediumterm alternative model for sustainable funding.
Secondly, the low level of recruitment of Somali
nationals in UNSOS remains unsatisfactory to the
Federal Government of Somalia. Therefore, we
reiterate that the discriminatory practices that have
been observed against Somali candidates for positions
22-58245

07/09/2022

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.9125

of or already working as Somali national professional
officers are unacceptable.

and look forward to ongoing political, technical and
logistical support from all our valued partners.

Thirdly, with regard to the mismanagement of
ATMIS food rations, we continue to observe United
Nations tax exemptions on food rations in our markets.
That is a major concern as it has an impact on troopand police-contributing countries and the delivery of
their mandates and tarnishes the image of the United
Nations. It also has an impact on Somalia’s economy,
especially on the livelihood of Somali traders.

As the Council is aware, my country is facing a
protracted, recurring humanitarian crisis, coupled
with the threat of flooding, the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the global economic downturn. Early
indications — the forecast for October, November and
December — point to yet another season with belowaverage rainfall. Our people’s coping mechanisms
have been significantly eroded. They have resorted to
negative coping mechanisms.

Fourthly, with regard to UNSOS waste management
practices, not much has changed and, regrettably,
accidental spills and improper waste management
continue to occur. We reiterate our call on the
Secretariat to remedy that outstanding serious issue in
a timely manner.
The Somalia Transition Plan provides strategic
directions for the exit of ATMIS forces in the transition
process in order to transfer security responsibility to
the Somali National Army. In that context, planned
activities will not succeed if the necessary international
support is not properly restructured and available and
aligned with the situation on the ground, including
investment in quick-impact projects in recovered areas.
It has been agreed that we would receive at least an equal
level of support to ensure a successful transition. That is
reflected in the concept of operations. We are committed
to the implementation of the Somalia Transition Plan

We thank humanitarian partners for their recent
appeal and generous contribution to assist in our
response to life-threatening needs. Nonetheless, we
emphasize that humanitarian assistance alone cannot
provide a sustainable or cost-effective solution to the
recurring climate shocks in Somalia, as it requires
substantial investment in development and climate
change mitigation, while strengthening the nexus
between humanitarian assistance and development
assistance. That will help us to achieve medium- to longterm solutions to reach the Sustainable Development
Goals and focus on our most vulnerable citizens.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

22-5824519/19
