TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

MEETING: 12 DECEMBER 1967
3

‘,/’

NEW

YO,RK

;

i’,
, ,,
CONTENTS

., ‘.

:
. . :.

,. ./

i

.t.

,/
‘I( ..

........,. ...................-

Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l384)

Expression

of thanks to the retiring President

. . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . +. , , . . , -

1

Adoption

of the agenda. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
Telegram dated 30 November 1967 from the President of the People’s Republic
of Southern Yemen addressed to the Secretary-General (S/8284)
..... .. .

1

1

S/PV. 1384

NOTE
Symbols of UnitedNations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such-a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FOURTH

MEETING

Held in New York on ‘hesday, I.2 December 1967, at 3 pm.
President: Chief S. 0. ADEBO (Nigeria).

5. I believe that with a minimum of goodwill and of
intellectual and moral integrity we can weather all the crises
which sorely try international peace and security,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

6. We cannot, however, derive any satisfaction from our
achievements so long as the resolutions we have worked out
in order to solve those crises remain unimplemented.
We
therefore take this opportunity to appeal to the parties to
persevere in the spirit of understanding, moderation and
co-operation which they have shown during our debates
and which ail of us have highly appreciated. I am certain
that they recognize the great responsibilities they have
today for safeguarding and maintaining international peace
and security, and I therefore know we can count on them.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 384)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Admission of new Members:
Telegram dated 30 November 1967 from the President of the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/8284).

7. I cannot conclude without thanking the members of the
United Nations Secretariat, in whom I found a devotion, a
loyalty, an enthusiasm and an impartiality commensurate
with the heavy responsibilities that were mine. I count
myself fortunate indeed at having enjoyed the benefit of
their official co-operation.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

1. The PRESIDENT: In the name of all the Security
Council members, I wish to express to our colleague, the
Permanent Representative of Mali, Ambassador Kante, our
thanks for the magnificent manner in which he presided
over our proceedings during the month of November 1967.
It wasnot an easy month and it was a very active one as we
had more than one delicate question to tackle. The fact
that we were able to make some headway and do something
positive and useful in regard to those items was, in great
measure, due to the Chairmanship of Ambassador Kante. It
is with great pleasure that, as President for this month, I
pay this tribute on behalf of myself and my colleagues to
his wise statemanship throughout all our deliberations
during that month.

8. As for yourself, Mr. President, your great competence,
your vast experience, your talents as a veteran diplomat,
your spirit of endeavour and your human qualities allow us
to predict that the presidency will be ably filled in
December. We are fortunate in your readiness to assume
these heavy and delicate responsibilities, weIl prepared for
them as you are. We know that you will be abIe to
discharge them in the sole interest of international peace
and security,
Adoption of the agenda

2. Mr. KANTE
(Mali) (translated
jkvn
French).
Mr. President, permit me to thank you for the highly
complimentary words you have just addressed to me.

The agendawasadopted.
Admission of new Members
Telegram dated 30 November 1967 from the Presidentof
the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen addressedto
the Secretary-General(S/8284)

3. You referred to my successas President of the Security
Council. That success was, unquestionibly, made possible
by all of you, the distinguished members of the Security
Council, through the perseverance, spirit of co-operation,
objectivity and understanding you have shown throughout
our work. If there is any credit to be earned, I share it fully
with you and with all those who, near or far, have helped to
solve the grave problems which have confronted the
Security Council during November.

9. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw attention to
the draft resolution contained in document S/8292, which
is co-sponsored by Ethiopia, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria and
the United Kingdom.
10, Mr, PARTHASARATHI
(India): My delegation is
happy to associate itself with the well-deserved tribute that
you paid to the representative of Mali for the admirable
leadership that he provided as President of the Council in
the month of November. His tenure of office, as President,

4. In this connexion, we cannot ignore the effective role
played by that other anonymous
force, world public
opinion, which has been constantly concerned with these
crises,
1

16. The independence of the People’s Republic of
Southern Yemen is a matter of particular satisfaction to my
delegation and to my country because of the very close
links that have bound our two peoples from time
immemorial. In this connexion, I would like to read the
statement which my Prime Minister made in the Indian
Parliament on 30 November 1967 announcing the reccgnition of the new Republic. The statement reads asfollows:

was a memorable one in which the Council took major
decisions and to which he made a significant contribution.
11. May I also take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of office as President. With your
vast experience of the United Nations and the great respect
in which you are held by all of us, we feel assured that you
will give us the lead in dealing with the many pressing and
important problems that face the Council this month. We
wish you every successin your task.

“After more than one century and a quarter of colonial
domination, South Arabia today emerges as a free aad
independent nation, the People’s Republic of Southera
Yemen. On this auspicious occasion we extend our
greetings and offer our good wishes to the government
and people of the new state. We also pay our tribute to
the valiant freedom fighters who have laid down their
lives during the struggle for their independence. We wish
the new state a happy and bright future.

12. It is always a matter for rejoicing when a people under
colonial rule succeed in breaking the chains of bondage and
achieve the supreme status of a free and sovereign nation,
on a footing of equality with the former colonial Power, as
well as with all other nations. It is more so particularly in
the United Nations, when the territory concerned is one for
whose independence the world Organization has devoted
considerable time and effort.

“There have been close and intimate relations for
centuries between India and South Arabia. It shall be the
earnest endeavour of the Government of India to further
strengthen our relations with the independent state aad
also to extend such economic and technical assistanceas
we can and which they may need.”

13. The question of Aden was first raised in the United
Nations in 1963. Since that date the General Assembly, the
Committee of Twenty-Four,’ a sub-committee of the
Committee of Twenty-Four and, last but not least, the
United Nations Special Mission on Aden spared no effort to
defend and further the rights and interests of the people of
South Arabia. South Arabia today is a sovereign nation
under the name of the People’s Republic of Southern
Yemen, thanks to the heroic struggle waged by its people
who did not consider any sacrifice too great for regaining
their human dignity. My delegation congratulates the
leaders and the people of the People’s Republic of Southern
Yemen and pays them a warm tribute on their success.

The Prime Minister added:
“AS the House is aware, India has consistently
supported the right to independence and sovereignty for
the people of South Arabia and for many years nowwe
have made earnest efforts for the achievement of this aim
through the United Nations and otherwise. Therefore,it
is a matter of great satisfaction and pleasure to us that
South Arabia is now an independent nation.

14. It is a great honour and privilege for my delegation to
introduce on behalf of the delegations of Ethiopia, Japan,
Mali, Nigeria, the United Kingdom and my own, the draft
resolution contained in document S/8292, by which the
Security Council would recommend to the General
Assembly that the newly independent People’s Republic of
Southern Yemen be admitted to the membership of the
United Nations. Ever since the question of Aden was first
raised in the United Nations, my delegation supported and
co-sponsored all the draft resolutions which recognized the
inalienable right of the people of South Arabia to freedom
and independence and outlined various measures to be
taken to enable the people to exercise that right. Today’s
occasion, therefore, is very special.

“Independence of South Arabia is yet another step
towards decolonisation in the world. We earnestly?!ope
that the day is not far off when the remaining colonised
peoples and countries will also become independent.. *.
I am sure that all members of this House, as also the
people of India, join me in extending a warm welcometo
the new state of the People’s Republic of Southern
Yemen in the comity of nations and wishing it a bright
future.”
17. We, the co-sponsors of the draft resolution, feel fully
assured that the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen, asa
Member of the United Nations, will play an active sad
constructive role in the achievement of the noble objectives
which we have all set for ourselves, We commend the draft
resolution to the Council and urge its unanimous adoptioaO

15. The people of South Arabia, by their indomitable will
and incessant struggle, have succeeded in establishing their
own sovereignty in their homeland. They are now seeking
membership to the world Organization, thus indicating
their desire to contribute to the other struggle which all of
us are waging here for the establishment and maintenance
of peace and security in the world. My delegation considers
itself highly honoured by the privilege it has been accorded
to be the first to present the new Republic’s candidature.

18. Mr. MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Mr. President, allowme
first of all to join my colleague, the representative of India,
in presenting to you the sincere congratulations of mY
delegation, coupled with my personal felicitations andbest
wishes on the occasion of your assumption of the high
office of President of the Security Council.
19. For the last year and a half it has been my Privilege
and pleasure to be closely associated with you in the work
of the United Nations Organization in general and of Our
African group in particular, and I must say that 1 have

1 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independcncc to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

2

found in you a good colleague, an understanding friend,
and an ever-dedicated initiator of understanding, of fair
play and of peaceful settlement in all of our councils and
consultations.

26. It is in this spirit that my delegation has co-sponsored
the resolution now before the Council, and I wish to
reiterate once again my Government’s congratulations and
best wishes to the new Republic and to its gallant people,

20. You have represented Nigeria at the United Nations
with dignity, responsibility and honour, and your recent
appointment to a high position in the Organization’s
Secretariat is but a clear recognition of the great qualities
you possessfor service in the international field. While we
regret the fact that your appointment is going to take you
out of our immediate official circle, we derive much
comfort and pleasure from the knowledge that your
valuable contribution to the United Nations effort will in
fact continue and that YOU will &ill remain in this great
world family. I join all your colleagues and friends in
wishing you the very best for the future.

27. Mr. TSURUOKA (Japan): Before commenting on
today’s agenda item, I should like to express my delegation’s warm congratulations to you on your assumption
of the Presidency. We also express our full confidence in
your wisdom and leadership as you guide the Council’s
work this month. I should also like to offer our warm and
respectful thanks to your predecessorin the Presidency, our
colleague Ambassador Kante, the representative of Mali,
who presided so effectively over the Council’s deliberations
and consultations during the month of November.
28. The Japanese delegation is very glad to note that one
of the early steps taken by the Government of the People’s
Republic of Southern Yemen following independence was
to apply for membership in the United Nations. The
achievement of independence by a people is always a source
of gratification to all those who cherish freedom, and it is
also very gratifying that the Government of a new country
declares its acceptance of the solemn obligations contained
in the United Nations Charter, and undertakes to fulfd
them. My delegation is glad, therefore, to join the delegations of Ethiopia, India, Mali, Nigeria and the United
Kingdom in co-sponsoring the draft resolution [S/8292].

21. My delegation wishes also to fully associate itself with
the high tributes paid to our colleague, the representative of
Mali, for the manner in which he has conducted our affairs
during the month of November.
22. On 30 November 1967, only some hours after the
proclamation of independence of the new Republic of
Southern Yemen, the Ethiopian Government accorded
recognition to the new independent State and issued an
official communiquB giving expression to the spirit in which
the Ethiopian nation has welcomed the emergence of this
independent State in our part of the world. That communique read in part:

29. It is a great pleasure for me to inform the Council
that, as of today’s date, 12 December 1967, the Government of Japan has recognized the Government of the
People’s Republic of Southern Yemen. We warmly congratulate the people and Government of Southern Yemen
on the achievement of independence and we look forward
to welcoming the representatives of that country to the
United Nations.

“It is gratifying that the hard and arduous struggle
waged by the gallant people of Southern Yemen has been
so successfully rewarded. Ethiopia welcomes the People’s
Republic of Southern Yemen into the family of independent States and looks forward to closer and
harmonious co-operation, confident that the existing
friendly relations between the two neighbouring States
will be further enhanced in the years to come.”

30. They will find here challenging opportunities to
participate constructively in the efforts of the international
community through the United Nations to further the great
cause of freedom and human rights for individuals and
nations, the economic and social advancesof peoples and,
above all, the maintenance of international peace and
security. The purposes and principles of the United Nations
are noble in character and the responsibilities and obligations of the membership are correspondingly great. We
are confident that Southern Yemen, inspired by the
nobility of the purposes and principles that must guide us
all, will know how to fulfil its responsibilities and obligations as a Member of the United Nations and, desirous of
making its maximum contribution to our co-operative
efforts, will successfully strive to servethe great objectives
of our Organization.

23. The above lines express the sincere sentiments of good
will which come from many centuries of close and
neighbourly association with all the peoples of the Arabian
Peninsula, including the people of Yemen. Having thus
maintained in the past relations based on mutual respect
and on good neighbourliness, the two countries have a
unique and challenging opportunity to contribute in -the
future, through understanding and beneficial co-operation,
to the tranquillity, stability and progress of this region of
whica they both form such a vital part.
24. In addition to belonging to the same region-a region
which provides a vital link between continents and servesas
the principal crossroad for international trade-the two
States enjoy a common membership of the Afro-Asian
community, while sharing with all of the world’s developing
States mutual aspirations for world peace and progress.

31. Anticipating that Southern Yemen will soon be
admitted to membership in the United Nations, I should
like to offer to the people and Government of that country
our best wishesfor their future peace and prosperity and to
pledge our harmonious co-operation with their representatives.

25. The prospects for greater co-operation and for beneficial relations are therefore immense, and I am confident
that the Governments of the two independent States will
use those opportunities for the mutual benefit of their
peoples.

3 2. Mr. KANTE (Mali) (translated from French):
Mr. President, permit me, on behalf of the delegation of

3

Mali, to perform a pleasant duty, one of the most
satisfying, that can fall to any man to recommend to the
Security Council, in my turn, the admission of the People’s
Republic of Southern Yemen to the United Nations; a
recommendation
contained in .the draft resolution of 11
December 1967 [S/8292/, sponsored by Ethiopia, India,
Japan, Nigeria, the United Kingdom and my own country.

39. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): In following the
distinguished

representative of Mali, I should like very
him on his term as President of
the Council. He led our deliberations in a critical month,
with patience, good humour and skill; and the month ofh&
presidency was distinguished by the fact that, during that
month,
on two matters of the greatest importance and
difficulty,
the Council reached unanimity.
We shall
remember the part he played, and he will no doubt
continue to be proud of the contribution which he made to
that result.
KXpeCtfUlly

33. On this occasion, we must recall that under the terms
of the consensus adopted by the United Nations General
Assembly on 30 November 1967: the People’s Republic of
Southern Yemen includes all the Territory of the former
British colony of Aden, including the islands of Kuria
Muria.

40. It is a good augury for the future. The Presidency of
this Council is an onerous and hazardous task-1 need not
remind you, Sir-and the President is not to be envied. But
his character and his leadership are of the greatest importance to our deliberations and we know that we are most
fortunate to face another difficult month with you, Sir,as
our chief, in what promises to be a month of important
decisions, and we extend to you our sincere congratulations
and our assurance of every possible support,

34. Mr. President, you will understand how deeply moved
I am on this happy occasion. You will understand, because,
Iike me, you come from a country which has known
colonial bondage.
35. This duty which destiny has given us to perform today
is a great honour, both for my country and for myself. The
delegation of Mali is justly proud to submit this draft
resolution to the Security Council. We are certain that the
members of the Council
will support it. Our brothers of the
People’s Republic of Southern Yemen cherish peace and
freedom, and have given ample proof of their devotion to
the ideals of the United Nations Charter, ideals for which
many of that country’s sons have made the supreme
sacrifice in unequal combat on the battlefield.

41. I had the opportunity a few days ago in the General
Assembly to welcome the birth of a new nation and to
express the hope shared, I am sure, by all of us that
independence will bring peace, happiness and progress to all
who live in the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen. The
new State has not emerged in peaceful and orderly
transition; it has been born after a long and painful travail.
It consequently faces formidable difficulties and dangers.
The leaders of the new State will be called upon to show
outstanding qualities of wisdom and courage. A million and
a quarter Arab people now embark on a brave enterprise
which will challenge them to show tolerance, patience and
perseverance of the highest degree. In that great endeavour,
we wholeheartedly wish them well. My country will give
what help we can. Others, and especially Arab States, will I
am sure wish to give support and succour to the new
nation, and here in the United Nations we shall all, I am
confident, welcome the application so promptly made to
achieve membership of our Organization and applaud, at
the same time, the pledge of the new State to honour its
international obligations.

36. We need not review here the background of the
People’s Republic of Southern Yemen, for it is widely
known and admired. We would merely recall that its
independence was won through its peoples’ arduous
struggle, Brothers of Yemen, your generation has earned its
place in the history of your dear land, which owes its
freedom to your heroic struggle against colonialism. You
have proved once again that no power in the world can
withstand a people’s legitimate resistance, Fate has smiled
upon you today. Your victory is also the victory of all
people who fight, just as you fought, against imperialism
and colonialism, On that common front of struggle, it is but
one victory in the giant battle against the forces of
domination and their henchmen,.

42. For our part, we have already invited the General
Assembly to make the necessary provision in its agenda fur
this session to deal with the application which we now
confidently join in submitting for the recommendation of
this Council,

37. We are certain that, side by side with your brothers,
you have made an active contribution to that common
struggle and that they will reap priceless benefit from your
rich experience. Our common fight will end only when the
last bastions of imperialist and colonialist resistance have
been destroyed. For you, independence is not an end in
itself, but rather a means and there can be no doubt that
your faith in your nation will enable you to transcend the
internal dissensions which the prophets of doom are
banking on and to achieve that national unity which is
indispensable if you are to win the battle for the development of your country.

43. I have already said that the time has come to heal the
wounds of the past; the time has come to replace dispute
and disruption and violence by conciliation, co-operation
and constructive effort. We rejoice that we can IIOW look
forward to progress in friendship. It is in that spirit that We
recommend the application to the favourable consideration
of this Council.
44. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
from Russian): Mr. President, first of a& 1
should like to express our deep satisfaction at the able and
responsible way in which the distinguished and important
task of President of the Security Council was carried out
during the month of November, under difficult and strained
(translated

38. In conclusion, the delegation of Mali congratulates the
heroic people of the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen
and its Government and wishes them good fortune.
2 1613th

Plenary

t0 COngrak&.te

Meeting.

4

circumstances, by our friend and colleague Ambassador
Kante, from the African country of Mali, with which the
Soviet Union maintains the most friendly relations and
whose progress in building their new life the peoples of the
Soviet Union are following with great admiration. We were
happy to co-0perat.e with Ambassador Kante and pleased to
be able to work together with a distinguished leader of the
new Africa ~110 has made a great contribution to the
common cause of all peoples in their fight for peace and
international security against the intrigues of aggressorsand
colonialists.

their freedom and independence, has always strongly
supported the right of the people of Aden and of all the
Southern Arabian peninsula to self-detemlination
and
independence. The Soviet Union has fully and unconditionally supported the decisions of the United Nations
calling for the speediest possible implementation of that
right. We have always favoured guaranteeing the territorial
integrity of the country in accordance with the demands of
its people, the withdrawal of the British colonialist forces
from the country, and the dismantling of the foreign bases
there, including the base at Aden.

45. Mr. President, it is with great pleasure that we see you
today and welcome you as President of the Council, a
representative of another friendly African country and a
colleague whose experience and wisdom will, we feel sure,
help LB to settle important problems confronting the
Security Council.

50. In accordance with this position, the Soviet delegation
strongly supported the decision taken by the General
Assembly at its current session on 30 November 1967,
welcoming the attainment of independence by the people
of
South Arabia and again reaffirming the unity and
territorial integrity of that country in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 2183 (XXI). By the unanimous adoption of this decision a few days ago, the General
Assembly has expressed its support for a young sovereign
State and has issued a grave warning to the colonialists, who
are continuing to hatch plans for the dismemberment of its
territory.

46, The Security Council is considering the application of
the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen for the admission
of this new independent Arab State to membership in the
United Nations. The telegram of President Al-Shaabi also
contains a declaration of the Government of the People’s
Republic of Southern Yemen to the effect that it accepts
the obligations contained in the United Nations Charter and
undertakes to fulfil them.

51, The Soviet Union hails the successof the struggle for
freedom waged for so many years by the peoples of
Southern Yemen. With the help of all progressive and
peace-loving peoples, this struggle has led to the downfall of
yet another outpost of colonialism and represents a further
step towards the demise of the shameful colonialist system,

47. The Soviet delegation wishes, first of all, to note with
gratification that the long and stubborn struggle of the
Arab people of Aden and Southern Arabia for their
freedom has been successfully concluded. On 30 November
1967 the people of Aden and Southern Arabia won their
independence in battle and put an end to more than a
century of colonial rule in that part of the Arab East. The
Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the
USSR, N. Podgorny, expressed the feelings and thoughts of
the Soviet people on this occasion in the following telegram
which he addressed to the Head of the State of the People’s
Republic of Southern Yemen on 1 December 1967:
“On the occasion of the proclamation of the independence of the Arab State of the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen, please accept our sincere
congratulations and best wishes for the well-being and
progress of the people of your country,

52. In conclusion, we should like to warmly congratulate
the people of Southern Yemen on the victory they have
won in their long and stubborn struggle for independence
and to wish them every successin building their new life,
The Soviet Union supports the application of the Govern.
ment of the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen for
admission to membership in the United Nations and will
vote in favour of a decision by the Security Council in that
sense as proposed in the draft resolution [S/8292] now
before the Council.
53. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): I wish to associate myself
fully with the highly deserved words of appreciation that
have been expressed in regard to the representative of Mali
and with the warm words of welcome to you,
Mr. President, on your assuming the Presidency of this
Council. We have the deepest trust and confidence in your
leadership,

“The Soviet Union, true tc its policy of developing ties
of friendship and co-operation with all peoples, hereby
recognizes the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen as
an independent and sovereign State and declares its
willingness to establish diplomatic relations with it.”

54. The Danish Government welcomes whole-heartedly
the attainment of independence by the People’s Republic
of Southern Yemen, and my delegation supports the draft
recommending the admission of
resolution [S/8292]
Southern Yemen to membership in the United Nations
which was co-sponsored by Ethiopia, India, Japan, Mali and
Nigeria, as well as by the former Administering Power, the
United Kingdom.

48. The course followed by the people of Southern
Yemen in attaining’ their freedom and independence was
not an easy one. The colonialist authorities tried by cruel
repressions, persecutions and the use of armed force, to
suppressthe national liberation movement in that territory.
But the struggling people did not lay down their arms and
their strength increased daily, Today, we have every
justification for saying that the sacrifices made by the
peoples of Aden and Southern Arabia were not in vain.

55. Over the years, Denmark has held that the United
Nations could play an important role in the process leading
towards the independence of Southern Yemen. We did so
because we saw therein one way in which to help promote

49. The Soviet Union, faithful to its basic policy of
assisting, by all possible means, the peoples fighting for
5

the ctmpletiorl
of this process in accordance with the
wishes of that people. The United Nations did play a role.
We may have encountered setbacks along the road, but
there can be no doubt that this Organization has contributed to the independence of Southern Yemen now
attained through an agreement: freely negotiated and
concluded.

statesmanlike manner. Mr. Kante had the distinction of
presiding over the Council during the final fonnulatiorl and
adoption of a resolution which, in its potential for good in
the Middle East situation indeed represented an historic
decision by this Council, of which he should be justly
proud.
61. The Security Council is now under the guidance of an
esteemed friend and colleague from Nigeria, for whom the
Canadian delegation has particular feelings of friendship
and respect, a representative whose conciliatory spirit,
broad experience and sure grasp of problems fills us with
confidence, and for whose country Canada has special ties
of brotherhood.

56. In accepting the obligations contained in the Charter
of the United Nations, the People’s Republic of Southern
Yemen has made a solemn pledge that will serve as a basis
for their participation in the international co-operation of
this Organization. We wish them well in their endeavours to
participate actively and constructively in that co-operation,
which is aimed at promoting peace among nations, international understanding and material progress for the whole
of humanity.

62. Today, the Council has met to consider the application of the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen for
admission to the United Nations, This application, following on the entry of so many new States during the past
decade, is another sign of the importance which the United
Nations has assumed in the community of nations, It is also
another step towards making this Organization asuniversal
and as comprehensive in its membership aspossible.

57. May I congratulate and welcome the representatives of
the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen. We are certainly
pleased to see them here today. We wish them, and through
them the Government and people of Southern Yemen, all
the best in their efforts to build up a new State, Obviously,
the prime goal of any new State is political stability and
economic progress. It is our wish that the People’s Republic
of Southern Yemen achieve both. We wish it for its own
sake and also because that new country, in accomplishing
these goals, will truly be able to play an important role in
co-operation among the nations of their region and, indeed,
of this Organization.

63. An application for membership in the United Nations
by a newly independent State is always an exciting event,
both for the new State itself and for the Organization. The
process of decolonization, to which Canada itself has made
a significant contribution,
has been fostered by this
Organization as country after country has made the
necessary and desirable transition from dependence fo
independence. This process, as we know, has created
difficulties and problems for both the emergent peoples of
the world and for those former colonial Powers who have
by stages promoted and encouraged it.

58. Mr. DE CARVALHO SILOS (Brazil): Mr. President, I
should like first of all to express the gratification of my
delegation at seeing you preside over this Council during
the current month of December. The role that you have
played in this Chamber in the last two years as representative of Nigeria has fully confirmed the esteem and high
regard in which you are held in the Organization at large. It
is also a pleasure to express to Mr. Kante, the representative
of Mali, the admiration of my delegation for the statcsmanlike manner in which he began his duties as President of
the Council for the month of November during the crucial
negotiations on the Middle Eastern question and, later, on
the crisis in Cyprus.

64. In this context, we welcome the achievement of both
the people of Southern Yemen and their representatives
and the United Kingdom and its representatives in making
possible the arrangements which led to the attainment of
this independence. Accordingly, Canada welcomes the
application for membership in the United Nations by the
People’s Republic of Southern Yemen and will be happy to
vote in favour of the draft resolution now before the
Council /S/8292/. We look forward to working in friendly
co-operation with representatives of the People’s Republic
of Southern Yemen as they take their place in this
Organization.

59. Allow me now to say a few words on the draft
resolution before us on the admission of the People’s
Republic of Southern Yemen to membership in the United
Nations /S/8292/. My delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution, and I wish to take this opportunity to
welcome the new nation into this Organization. The
admission of a new Member means a new hope and a new
voice. I am sure that this new voice will be a voice for
peace, for security, and for economic progress in Asia and
throughout the world, and that all of us here in the
Organization will profit from the contribution
that the
People’s Republic of Southern Yemen will make to the
cause of international co-operation.

6.5. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
Mr. President, I should like to associate myself with You
and those colleagues who have already so rightly congratulated the representative of Mali on the outstanding
manner in which he presided over the meetings of the
Security Council last month. Our colleague, Ambassador
Kante, had only just arrived at the United Nations and he
had#a particularly difficult task before him. To paraphrasea
line we both learned in school, I would say that he wanted
his first attempt to be a master stroke. And so it was.As
several of our colleagues have pointed out, Ambassador
Kante’s term of office as President was distinguished bY
two memorable events: the unanimous adoption of resolutions on the difficult questions of the Middle East and of
Cyprus. We wish to thank Ambassador Kante for his
successful guidance in these two matters.

60. Mr. IGNATIEFF
(Canada): Mr. President, I should
first of all, like my colleagues, associate myself with the
well-deserved tributes that have been paid to our colleague
Ambassador Kante of Mali, who carried out the duties of
his high office in the month of November in such a fair and
6

66, Mr. President, it is not yet four months since I[
returned to the United Nations and yet 1 feel as if 1 have
known YOU for years, Your outstanding graciousness, charm”
and intelligence make one feel that you are an old friend,
even though one has known you for only a short time, z
need hardly say that my delegation is delighted at your
presiding over the Security Council this month.

The role of a Council President is sometimes misunderstood by the public, because a Council President must be
the servant of the Council and he must also represent his
own country. Mr. Kante, in acting as a servant of the
Council, was able with great objectivity to make clear the
important distinction between these two roles. He presided
over the Council with very great impartiality and won the
friendship and great respect of us all in so doing. As for
Mr. Adebo, many of us call him “Mr. United Nations”. He
is an old and valued colleague and we will depend upon his
patience, resolve, determination and eternal optimism in
carrying out his most difficult duties.
72.

67. The delegation of France today wishes to welcome the
accession of the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen to
independence; the French Government has very recently
recognized that country and hopes to maintain fruitful and
friendly relations with it. My delegation will gladly vote in
favour of its admission to the United Nations, as proposed
by the delegations of Ethiopia, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria
and also the United Kingdom, which successfully guided
Southern Yemen to national sovereignty, despite serious
difficulties of which all of us are aware.

73. In turning to the item on the agenda, my Government
cordially welcomes the application of the People’s Republic
of Southern Yemen for membership in the United Nations.
We are particularly pleased that the distinguished Foreign
Minister of Southern Yemen is with us in this Council
chamber as we perform our very important duty of passing
to the Assembly the credentials of a new nation.

68. Aden and the surrounding region are well known in
world history. Since ancient times the south of the Arabian
peninsula, situated on the route to the Indies, has been an
important relay post in trade between east and west.
Guillaume Sanson wrote admiringly in 1683: “Aden is the
most beautiful and pleasant town in all Araby. It is
enclosed by walls on the seaward side and by mountains on
its landward side. On top of the mountains are several
magnificent castles. The country has a good 6,000 hotlses.
It lies beyond the Red Sea and at the entry to the Great
Sea.” The discovery of the Cape route diverted a‘good deal
of traffic from Arabia, but the country came into its own
again with the digging of the Suez Canal, an enterprise in
which my country had the honour of playing an important
part. Guardian of one of the gates to the Red Sea and a
port of call for ships crossing that Sea, Aden remains a busy
crossroads on one of the great sea routes of our time. As
long ago as 1663, if I may quote another l’lth-century
author, the Frenchman Claucle Morisot called Aden
“er?lporium, vetussimunz oppidum,--market
and now
ancient refuge”.

74. I have had the pleasure of meeting and talking with
the distinguished Foreign Minister and should like to say to
him here in the Council what I have said to him privately.
In our capacity as host Government to the United Nations,
we extend to you, Mr. Foreign Minister, the hand of
friendship; and we of the United States are anxious to do
everything in our power to make your sojourn in New York
and that of your countrymen as comfortable and enjoyable
as possible.
75. In its application, the Government of South Yemen
has declared its intent to accept the obligations of
membership contained in the United Nations Charter. My
Government, believing that South Yemen is both willing
and able to carry out these obligations, will be happy to
vote in favour of the draft resolution [S/8292/ which has
been tabled.
76. Like so many of the present Members of the United
Nations--now probably a majority-South
Yemen has
achieved independence in the course of the world-wide
independence movement, which is one of the great and
hopeful political phenomena of our age. The birth of this
new nation-like the birth of all nations-has noS been easy.
The fact that it has now been fully accomplished is a credit
to all concerned: to the people and leaders of the new State
who have shown their courage and their determination to
be free; to the United Nations, which has concerned itself
with the problems of this new State, and also to the United
Kingdom whose statesmanship has contributed much to
this historic development.

69. We are fully confident that the new Republic, born in
difficult circumstances at a troubled moment in the history
of that part of the world, will be able to strengthen its
unity and affirm its existence. Considering its size, its
population and its resources, it should be able to play an
effective part in the work of the United Nations. We know
what burdens and responsibilities that participation entails;
but newly independent States do not always at first
appreciate the full magnitude of those responsibilities.
The delegation of France is glad to welcome the
People’s Republic of Southern Yemen to the United
Nations and extends its sincerest wishes for happiness and
prosperity to that country’s leaders and people.
70.

77. Like every independent State, South Yemen will face
many problems in the years ahead, but it has a most
substantial asset, among others which it brings, and will
bring, to the solution of these problems; and that most
substantial asset is the people of the country. No asset can
bc greater than this. Its people, because of their location, at
historic crossroads of international commerce and trade,
have long been a part of the wide community of nations, in
touch with the cultures and civilizations of Asia, Africa and
Europe. They include able and experienced people in the
civil service, in the educational system, in the military and

71. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I should
like to join my colleagues in the very deserved tributes that
they have paid to the Council’s out-going and in-coming
Presidents, Ambassador Kante, of Mali and Mr. Adebo,
representative of Nigeria. My pleasure in doing so, however,
is diminished by the knowledge that their Governments’
term on the Security Council will expire at the end of this
month and that, therefore, we will be losing them as
colleagues on the Council.
7

-,I

t

so that the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen can jr9jfl
in our work before the end of the current Genc@l
Assembly session. Its participation will, no doubt, brir@ :r
further contribution to our efforts to maintain international peace and security.

police services, in the labour unions, and in the business
community. This is a very substantial asset indeed for any
new country-or old country. These people have already
made clear their commitment to popular self-government as
indicated in the stated intention of the new Government of
South Yemen to draw up a constitution based on this great
principle.

85. Mr. LIU (China): Mr. President, I wish first of all fo
add my tribute to you, Sir, not only as President, but as ~311
educated member of the Council who has made notable
contributions to our common effort and has always place 3
the interest of the United Nations above all consideratiorss*
I am sure, Sir, you will be greatly missed after this montlr in
our future deliberations.

78. The United States has long-standing ties with the
people of South Yemen, having had official representation
in this area for over eighty years. My Government now
looks forward to developing friendly and mutually
beneficial relations with the People’s Republic of Southern
Yemen and we wish its people and its Government
Godspeed in their new independence.

86. In line with the policy laid down some decades ago h>Dr. Sun Yat-sen, founder of the Republic of China, rs?_V
Government has consistently upheld the right of colonial
peoples to political independence and freedom, It is in this
light that my delegation welcomes the emergence of
Southern Yemen as an independent nation.

79. Mr. RUDA (Argentina) (@a&slated from Spanish):
Before I turn to the item on our agenda for today, my
delegation would like to add its congratulations to
Mr. Kante of Mali on his work as President of the Security
Council at a very trying time during the month of
November.

87. As the representative of the United Kingdom has $SSS
observed, the new State has not been born without lorr$
and painful travail. It is the earnest hope of my delegatiufr
that the people of Southern Yemen will now enter a rrcvc’
and constructive phase and press forward with the task 111’
building a stable and progressive nation. On behalf of rn*c
Government I fully support the application of the PeopLe’r
Republic of Southern Yemen for membership in the United
Nations and shall look forward to fruitful collaboraticlrt
with its representatives in furthering the purposes ar~ll
principles of the United Nations.

80. I should also like to express my delegation’s satisfaction at seeing Mr. Adebo presiding over the Council. His
ability, tact and culture give positive assurance that our
efforts will be successful.
81. My delegation supports the application of the People’s
Republic of Southern Yemen for admission to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General by the President
of that country on 30 November.
82. The recent accession of Southern Yemen to independence is another step in the great decolonization process
on which the United Nations has embarked. In this
particular instance, where, the road to independence was
long, arduous and difficult, my Government sincerely hopes
that this new country will enjoy political harmony and
national and territorial unity so that it can find the right
road to economic and social development.

8 8. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated frf WI
French): I should like to extend to our colleague front hIali
the most cordial congratulations of the People’s Rcpuhlic
of Bulgaria 011 his outstanding service as President of tiirc
Security Council during a most difficult and trying man 0%.
This was certainly a good start for a newcomer to t#r?cl
United Nations.
89. I should like to express my delegation’s CQIIgratulations to you, Sir, on your accession as President r.rt”
the Security Council. Your wisdom and intcllecln;ill
capacities are known to all of us, and with your skill a~+
choosing exactly the right moment to intervene wilh ;I
request for clarification, will enable you, I know, to
successfully discharge the important task facing you tbai.5
month.

83. The situation in this new nation seemed critical and
explosive, to use the words of resolution 2183 (XXI) of the
General Assembly, even more so in Marc11 1967, when the
United Nations Special Mission on Aden undertook the
responsibilities assigned to it under that resolution. Disturbances and incidents had been continuous since December
1963. Today, a few months later, the Territory is independent and we are privileged to be considering the
admission of this new State to the United Nations. My
delegation feels that this is due largely to the efforts of the
mission led by Mr. Manuel Perez Guerrero, the representative of Venezuela, here present, with the assistance of
the representatives of Afghanistan and Mali. We believe that
the skill with which the mission was conducted accelerated
the decolonization processin that region.

90. The Security Cow~il today has before it the reqrrc!,t
of the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen for adndssirara
to the United Nations. The delegation of the Peopl~‘s
Republic of Bulgaria takes great pleasure in wel~cnrmg .r
new State that has thrown off the colonial yoke and It11c
chains of colonialism and in saluting a new people’s
republic, the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen, as it
joins the United Nations family.

84. My delegation would also like to congratulate the
United Kingdom on their contribution towards the realization of the General Assembly’s historic resolution
1514 (XV). We hope that the recommendation which is
now before us /S/8292/ will be approved by the Council
and then unanimously adopted by the General Assembly,

91. The proclamation
of the People’s Republic cry
Southern Yemen marks an important stage in the struI&
of that country’s people and of Arab peoples in garreraf.
The birth of the new republic, the fourteenth indepcruletlt
Arab State, is a significant event closely linked with the
8

sometimes difficult and dangerous, but irreversible and
continuous process of national liberation and the ending of
all colonial oppression. The Bulgarian Government’s policy
on colonial problems is well known; it is one of consistent
rejection and condemnation of colonialism in all its forms
aad manifestations and of unreserved support for peoples
still under colonia,l oppression in their struggle for the right
to freedom and independent development. On the basis of
this principle my country has always defended, particularly
herein the United Nations, the courageous struggle of the
people of South Arabia, and especially of Southern Yemen,
to free themselves from colonial domination and to win
national independence and a better future,
92. This country’s accession to independence, after a long
sad courageous struggle involving enormous sacrifices, is an
event of indisputable importance in the life and development of the great and illustrious family of Arab peoples
struggling persistently for the liberation of all its members
aadfor respect for its independent sovereign States.
93. The particular circumstances which brought Southern
Yemen to independence are so well known that I need not
dwell on them at length. We wish only to express the hope
that the people of the People’s Republic of Southern
Yemen, with the help of all peace-loving and freedomloving countries, will be able to overcome all the difficulties
in its path to national unity and the unity of all patriotic
forces. We wish ‘it continued success, We hope that its
people, united and as one, will successfully overcome the
heavy consequences of colonial domination, persevering
and consolidating the country’s national sovereignty, its
territorial integrity and its economic and political independence.
94. In this spirit, and with a feeling of satisfaction, the
delegation of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria has decided,
on the instructions of its government, to support the draft
resolution [S/8292/
submitted by the delegations of
Ethiopia, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria and the United
Kingdom recommending to the General Assembly that the
People’s Republic of Southern Yemen be admitted to the
United Nations. We shall vote in favour of that draft
resolution.

96. Speaking as the representative of NIGERIA, I should
like to say that the Nigerian delegation is delighted to
associate itself with the expressions of congratulations and
good will which have been showered on the Government
and people of Southern Yemen on their achievement of
independence. As an earnest of our pleasure at that
achievement and of our best wishes for the future of
Southern Yemen, we have joined in the sponsorship of the
draft resolution [S/8292] recommending this new State for
membership of our Organization.
97. The road to independence for Southern Yemen was
not a very easy one. Indeed it wasa rather rugged one, and
yet, like the leaders of other countries which have
graduated from colonial status to independence in the last
decade or two, the leaders of Southern Yemen will quickly
discover that the struggle to maintain and make significant
their independence will tax their energies to the full, We
wish them successin that fresh struggle;.
98. From the statements that have been made today by
the members of this Council there can be no doubt that, in
facing their new responsibilities, both to their own people
and to the world community, they can count on the good
will, understanding, support and co-operation of fellow
Members of the United Nations.
99. Now speaking as the PRESIDENT, I should like to
invite your attention again to the draft resolution cosponsored by Ethiopia, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria and the
United Kingdom (S/8292]. That resolution reads as
follows:
“The Security Council,
‘Having examined the application of the People’s
Republic of Southern Yemen for admission to the United
Nations [S/8284],
‘Recommends to the General Assembly that the
People’s Republic of Southern Yemen be admitted to
membership in the United Nations.”
A vote was taken bJ) show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 3

95. The PRESIDENT: I should like first to express my
personal thanks and the thanks of my country for the
generous remarks made about Nigeria and myself in the
interventions of my distinguished colleagues this afternoon.
I am glad of their confirmation of what I already knew
from my previous happy acquaintance with them, namely,
that in the discharge of my duties as President they will give
me their wholehearted co-operation, As we all know,
without such co-operation no man, however able or
experienced, can make a successof the Presidency of this
Council.

100. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with rule 60 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, I
shall immediately request the Secretary-General to be good
enough to transmit to the General Assembly the text of the
resolution just adopted, together with the verbatim record
of this meeting.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m
3 See resolution 243 (1967).

HOW

T O OBTAIN

United

Notions

UNITED
publications,may

the world.
or Geneva.

Consult

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

your

ler
publications
dcs
ddporitaires
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section

KAK

NATIONS

IlOJlYYMTb

be

bookstore

obtained
or

write

from
to:

LES PUBLICATIONS

and

Notions,

NATIONS

distributors
Sales

M3AAHMR

OPI-AHM3AyMM

O6'I~C~IlllClllllJX
~lN"lOllLKi
JIll[Kl.

H~PtWlIllC
lIpO@iIiC

IIJII lIlllllllTC
II0 ElXpCCJ' : Opmllrr3nI~llJl
II3,t,Rllllii,
IIIdO-~O~1C
Ii.TIl X.Cf?liCLllL.

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicacioner
de las Nacioner
en todas
partes
del mundo.
Cons&e
Ventos,
Nueva
York o Ginebro.

hl(lIfl
IIRBO&lITU

Unidar
ertbn
o su librero

York

et les agencer
odrerrer-vous
b:

HAuMti

liylJHTla
n 1~llIl~liIll~lX
Jl~~33IIIIUX
II
06 Il3~UlllliX
R lltlIIICN
IiIIII~IiIIO~

okJe~llllClllIl~lX

DE LAS NACIONES

New

UNIES

06bEAMHEHHblX
hfOilill0
t!ll~~~llliIl

throughout

Section,

Nations
Unies
sent
en vente
dons
ler libroiries
entier.
Informez-vous
auprir
de votre libroirie
ou
des ventes,
New York ou GenBve.

~[H'~llllI3Zll~lIli
110 II(:CX

CONSEGUIR

bookstores

United

DES

~~3~3111ll1
U'CIlTl'TIIU

COMO

Litho in U.N.

PUBLICATIONS

Iral~llrl,

CCI;IIlIH

110

y cosos distribuidoras
Unidos,
Secci6n

de

UNIDAS

en venta en libreriar
o dirijose
o: Nacioner

Price: $U.S 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

35805-January

1971-2,100
