General Auembly-8eTenteenth Se.sion

48

beginning on the date of the present resolution and
ending on 31 December 1964.
1191st plenary meeting,
11 December 1962.

1796 (XVD). Appointment to fill a vacancy in the
membership of the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee
The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following person as a member of the
United Nations Staff Pension Committee:
Mr. James Gibson;
2. Declares Mr. Gibson to be appointed for a period
beginning on 1 May 1963 and ending on 31 December 1964.
1191st plenary meeting,
11 December 1962.

1797 (XVD). Integrated programme and budget
policy
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the objectives of the United Nations
Development Decade require the maximum concentration of efforts and resources in selected areas where
there are the greatest needs and opportunities for United
Nations action,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 920
(XXXIV) of 3 August 1962 establishing a Special
Committee on co-ordination whose functions include
keeping under review activities in the economic, social
and human rights fields and submitting to the Council
recommendations about priority areas and projects relating to the objectives of the United Nations Development
Decade,
Noting further Economic and Social Council resolution 909 (XXXIV) of 2 August 1962 requesting the
Secretary-General to review the studies and reports
which are included in the work programme of the United
Nations, with a view to making recommendations to the
Council at its thirty-sixth session as to which of them,
in the interests of concentration of effort and priority
use of the limited resources, might be eliminated, postponed or consolidated,
Having considered the observations on the processes
of programme development made by the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
in its report on the 1963 budget estimates9 and in its
report on the revised estimates for 1963 resulting from
decisions of the Economic and Social Council, 10
Requests the Economic and Social Council :
(a) To devise a framework within which the Council
can indicate the priorities to be accorded to United
Nations programmes and projects in the economic,
social and human rights fields, bearing in mind the
objectives of the United Nations Development Decade;
(b) To establish within this framework an order of
priorities for activities to be included in the work
programme;
(c) To review regularly the priorities in the light of
any more recent or more urgent needs and the resources
likely to be available to meet them;
9 Ibid.,

para. 47.

Seventeenth Session, Supplement No. 7 (A/5207),

10 Ibid., Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 62, docu-

ment A/5243, paras. 10 and 11.

(d) To give due, timely and adequate consideration,
as the work of the Council proceeds, to the financial
implications of its actions in the light of information provided to it by the Secretary-General;
(e) To consider, in connexion with sub-paragraphs
(a), (b), (c) and (d) above, any comments of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions concerning the administrative and financial
aspects of activities in the economic, social and human
rights fields.
1191st plenary meeting,
11 December 1962.

1798 (XVII). System of travel and subsistence
allowances to memben of organs and sub•
sidiary organs of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Believing that the payment out of United Nations
funds of travel and subsistence expenses to members of
organs and subsidiary organs of the United Nations
should continue to be based on the consolidated pattern
established in General Assembly resolution 1075 (XI)
of 7 December 1956,
Believing further that the provisions of that resolution require restatement in more comprehensive and
explicit terms in order to facilitate their interpretation
and practical implementation in current circumstances,
1. Decides that resolution 1075 (XI) shall be superseded by the present resolution ;
2. Decides that the following principles shall govern
the payment out of United Nations funds of travel and
subsistence expenses to members of organs and subsidiary organs of the United Nations:
(a) Travel and subsistence expenses shall be paid in
respect of members of organs and subsidiary organs
who serve in an individual personal capacity and not
as representatives of Governments ;
(b) Except as provided in paragraph 3 below, neither
travel nor subsistence expenses shall be paid in respect
of members of organs or subsidiary organs who serve as
representatives of Governments ;
3. Decides that, by way of special exception to the
basic principle laid down in paragraph 2 ( b) above :
(a) Travel but not subsistence expenses shall be paid:
(i) In respect of representatives or alternate representatives attending sessions of the General
Assembly, subject to the conditions established
in paragraph 1 of the annex to the present resolution, or as may be laid down by the SecretaryGeneral, and provided that the number of persons
whose expenses shall be so paid shall not exceed
five for each Member State in respect of regular
sessions, and one for each Member State in respect of special and special emergency sessions ;
(ii) In respect of one representative of each Member
State participating in a functional commission of
the Economic and Social Council or in a subcommission or sub-committee of a functional
commission, where such representatives are
nominated by their Governments in consultation
with the Secretary-General and subsequently
confirmed by the Council or where, in the case
of representatives nominated directly by their
Governments, the Council recommends and the
General Assembly decides that such payments
should be made;
