60

General Anembly-Twenty-thlrd SeHJon

lnformation from Non-SeJf.
2422 (XXIII).
Governing Territoriee tranemitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United
Natione
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study
the information transmitted to the Secretary-General
in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations and to take it fully into account in
examining the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolutions 2109 (XX) of 21 December 1965, 2233 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and
2351 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, in which it,
inter alia, approved the procedures adopted by the
Special Committee for the discharge of the functions
entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII) and
requested the Special Committee to continue to discharge those functions in accordance with the said
procedures,
Recalling further the provisions of paragraph 3 of
its resolution 2351 (XXII) in which the General Assembly once again urged ali Member States which
have or assume responsibilities for the administration
of Territories whqse peoples have. not yet attained a
full measure of self-government to transmit, or continue
to transmit, to the Secretary-General the information
prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as the
fullest possible information on política! and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
H avin,q studied the chapter of the report of the
Special Cornmittee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter and the
action taken by it in respect of that information,8
Having a/so examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on this information, 4
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with rcg2.nl to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from N on-Seli-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations;
2. Regrets that, despite the repeated recommendations of the General Assembly and the Special Committee, sorne Member States having responsibilities for
the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories
still have not seen fit to transmit information under
Article 73 e of the Charter, have transmitted insufficient
information or have transmitted information too late;
3. Strongly regrets the persistent refusal of tlie
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to transmit such information on
Southern Rhodesia and the decision of that Government to cease transmittin~ information on Antigua,
Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla and St.
Lucia;
3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-third
Session, Anneres, addendum to agenda itero 23 (A/7200/Rev.l),
chapter XXXII.
4 ]bid., agenda items 63 and 71, documents A/7281/Rev.l and
Addl.

4. Deeply deplores the fact that, despite the numerous resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
concerning the colonial Territories under Portuguese
domination, the Government of Portugal has maintained its refusal to transmit information under Article
73 e of the Charter with regard to those Territories;
5. Once again urges the administering Powers concerned to transmit, or continue to transmit, to the
Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article
73 e of the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional developments
in the Territories concerned;
6. Reiterates its previous requests, the most recent
of which is contained in General Assembly resolution
2351 (XXII), that the administering Powers concerned transmit such information as early as possible
and at the latest within a maximum period of six
months following the expiration of the administrative
year in the Non-Self-Governing Territories concerned;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), ;11 accordance with
the procedures referred to above.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.
2423 (XXIII). Offers by Member Statee of etudy
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territoriee
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2352 (XXII) of 19 December 1967,
H aving exaniined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of
22 November 1954, 5
l. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made scholarships available to inhabitants
of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Requests those Memb-er States offering scholarships and those which might subsequently do so to take
into account the necessity of furnishing complete information about the scholarships offered and, if p::issible,
to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Invites the administering Powers concerned to
provide ali the necessary facilities to enable students
to avail themselves of offers by Member States of
study and training facilities;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
1747th plenar.y meeting,
18 December 1968.
5 Jbid., document A/7308.
