VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

2. Welcomes the efforts of the Organization of African
Unity with a view to promoting a just and definitive solution
to the question of Western Sahara;
3. Remains convinced that only negotiation between
Morocco and the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Sa­
guia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro could create the objective
conditions for the return of peace in north-west Africa and
would guarantee the fair conduct of a general, free and
orderly referendum on self-determination in Western Sahara;
4. Appeals, to that end, to the two parties to the dispute,
Morocco and the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Sa­
guia el-Hamra y de Rfo de Oro, to enter into negotiations
with a view to achieving a cease-fire in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 36/46 and the decisions of the
Organization of African Unity;
5. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations to
co-operate fully with the Organization of African Unity in
the fair and impartial organization of the referendum;
6. Requests, to that end, the Secretary-General to take
the necessary steps to ensure that the United Nations par­
ticipates effectively in the organization and conduct of the
referendum and to report to the General Assembly and the
Security Council on this subject and on the measures re­
quiring a decision by the Council;
7. Urges the Secretary-General to co-operate closely
with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity with a view to the implementation of the pertinent
decisions of the Organization of African Unity and of the
present resolution;
8. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
to continue to consider the situation in Western Sahara as
a matter of priority and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
23 November 1982

37/29. Information from Non-Self-Governing Terri­
tories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Ar­
ticle 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations28 and the
action taken by the Committee in respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the question, 29
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
1963, in which it requested the Special Committee to study
the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in ac­
cordance with Article 73 e of the Charter and to take such
information fully into account in examining the situation
with regard to the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 36/49 of 24 November 1981,
in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970
(XVIII),
28
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 23 (A/37/23/Rev. I), chap. VII.
29
A/37/501.

227

Deploring the fact that some Member States having re­
sponsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories have ceased to transmit information under Arti­
cle 73 e of the Charter,
l . Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Ar­
ticle 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the
General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Terri­
tory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms
of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power con­
cerned should continue to transmit information under Arti­
cle 73 e of the Charter with respect to that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General
the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter,
as well as the fullest possible information on political and
constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
within a maximum period of six months following the ex­
piration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to dis­
charge the functions entrusted to it under General Assembly
resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established pro­
cedures, and to report thereon to the Assembly at its thirty­
eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
23 November 1982

37/30. Question of East Timor
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of all peoples to self­
determination and independence in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the Dec­
laration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Coun­
tries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, and other relevant United Nations
resolutions,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to East Timor30
and other relevant documents,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
question of East Timor, 31
Taking note of resolution 1982/20 adopted on 8 Septem­
ber 198232 by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Dis­
crimination and Protection of Minorities,
Having heard the statement of the representative of Por­
tugal, 33 as the administering Power,
Having heard the statement of the representative of
Indonesia, 34
Having heard the statements of the representative of the
Frente Revolucionaria de Timor Leste lndependente and of
various petitioners, as well as of the representatives of non­
governmental organizations, 35
30
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 23 (A/37/23/Rev. I), chap. X.
ll
A/37/538.
32
See E/CN.4/1983/4-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1982/43 and Corr.I, chap. XXI.
"Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Fourth Committee, 14th meeting, paras. 17-19.
4
' Ibid .. 23rd meeting, paras. 22-37.
" Ibid .. 15th-18th meetings.
