S/PV.8479

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8479th meeting

Thursday, 7 March 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-06237 (E)
*1906237*

S/PV.8479

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in French): I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador Anatolio
Ndong Mba, Permanent Representative of Equatorial
Guinea, for his service as President of the Council
for the month of February. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep appreciation
to Ambassador Ndong Mba and his team for the great
diplomatic skill and effectiveness with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month, including
during at times difficult conditions.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Miroslav
Lajčák, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and Minister for
Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Before giving the floor to Mr. Lajčák, I would like
to express my pleasure at welcoming him here today. As
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and former President of the
General Assembly, he is a natural bridge between the
two organizations.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lajčák.
Mr. Lajčák: It is a great honour for me to address
the Security Council today as Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). This meeting attests to the excellent
relations that the United Nations and the OSCE have
built on both the political and operational levels. As
the world’s largest security organization under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE
is committed to supporting the United Nations global
mandate at the regional level.
2/19

07/03/2019

I have a very simple message to deliver today. I
believe that we need to continue working together,
perhaps even more than we are doing now, because the
stakes are quite high and they concern the issues that
are at the core of the Council — peace and security,
or, in the words of the mandate governing this very
Organization, to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war.
As Chair of the OSCE, I will give the Council a
rundown of our priorities and activities through three
main points and will then listen carefully to any ideas
Council members may have on the way forward. First,
I want to talk about preventing and resolving conflicts
and mitigating their impact on people, because that is
our top priority.
I will start with what is happening in and around
Ukraine, which is, frankly, unacceptable. The crisis goes
against everything the OSCE and the United Nations
stand for. We must be very clear from the start — there
is no alternative to the Minsk agreements. That is why
we strongly support existing formats, in particular the
Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group.
But we cannot simply wait patiently for progress. There
are too many people suffering as we speak. I saw that
suffering at first hand when I travelled to the country in
January. It was my first trip as Chairperson-in-Office
and it is not one I will forget.
In the Luhansk region, elderly women and men on
sticks or in wheelchairs are forced every day to make the
risky journey across the only open entry-exit point — a
bridge on the line of contact in Stanytsia Luhanska that
has been severely damaged by the conflict. More than
10,000 people cross daily. They suffer and feel hopeless,
neglected and abandoned because the commitments are
not upheld, the trust keeps eroding and space for real
dialogue is disappearing.
We have been brainstorming since my trip on
concrete proposals that could bring about tangible
improvements for people on the ground. Some of the
measures we have identified include humanitarian
demining and repairing the Stanytsia Luhanska
bridge. Those measures, and more, have come about
through the close engagement with the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, the Project Coordinator in
Ukraine, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
the European External Action Service and the United
Nations Development Programme. I had a chance to
discuss them separately last month with Ministers
19-06237

07/03/2019

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Klimkin and Lavrov. I did not hear “no” a single time.
I therefore hope we can work to bring those proposed
steps forward in the coming months.
I also want to use the opportunity today to express
my sincere gratitude to the brave men and women of
the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. They are
the eyes and ears of the international community on the
ground. They are operating with great risk and deserve
our support.
I know that some people have been talking about a
United Nations mission in Ukraine. I want to point out
that that is not a new discussion. There is nothing I can
add to it today except to reaffirm that we stand ready to
engage on any concrete proposals or decisions coming
from this body.
While the crisis in and around Ukraine occupies
much of our attention, there are still other dark
spots of conflict in the OSCE area. The organization
works towards conflict resolution and mediation in
Transnistria, Georgia and Nagorno Karabakh. I am
glad we can turn the spotlight of the Council on those
contexts today as well.
Let me start with the Transnistrian settlement
process, where we have seen some real momentum.
That momentum needs to keep building. During my
trip to the Republic of Moldova in January I stressed
the need for progress on the package of eight measures
to continue. Next steps could focus on public transport
and telecommunications. With political will and real
dialogue, tangible results for the benefit of the people
on both banks of the Dniester can be achieved. We
are also prepared to host a 5+2 meeting in Bratislava,
depending upon further developments following the
recent parliamentary elections. The OSCE International
Observation Mission has issued a statement of
preliminary findings about the conduct of the elections.
I fully support it and want to underline more broadly
the crucial role of OSCE election observation, which
consolidates democracy in the OSCE region. That is
why OSCE participating States must do everything
possible to allow those missions to work unimpeded.
Let me now turn to Georgia, where our
chairmanship fully backs existing formats and remains
committed to the Geneva international discussions
and the incident prevention and response mechanisms.
I visited the administrative boundary line with South
Ossetia, where I saw for myself the urgent need to
reopen the crossing points that had been closed for a

S/PV. 8479

few weeks. Their closure creates daily obstacles for the
local population, such as limited access to health care.
In that connection as well, we aim to focus on projects
that could bring about small but concrete results and an
improvement of the situation for people on the ground.
There have been some steps forward in Nagorno
Karabakh, but we need to see more positive
developments. I returned from Azerbaijan two days
ago, where I welcomed the intensification of talks and
a reduction in ceasefire violations. I will also travel
to Armenia next week. Further trips to the Western
Balkans and Central Asia are planned. On those and all
of my other trips we are following the same strategy,
that is, to open up new space for dialogue and practically
address the challenges we face right on the spot.
There is a lot of debate about what to call those
conflicts. No matter what terms we use — frozen,
protracted, dark spots — we cannot escape an
undeniable fact, namely, that they have gone on for
far too long. Until they are resolved, there is always
a risk of escalation. Until they are resolved, people
will continue to suffer. And, until they are resolved,
they need our attention and our cooperation. United
Nations-OSCE engagement must be part of that.
There is already constructive dialogue between my
special representatives and United Nations envoys and
representatives. There are some very positive, concrete
projects being implemented on the ground. I think there
is still room for more, and that is what I am here to
explore today. Therefore, for my second point, I want to
talk about what lies ahead.
The United Nations was born from the ashes of
the Second World War. Later on the OSCE grew out
of Cold War divisions. They both channelled power
through systems of agreed rules, principles and
norms, which gave everyone a stake in the running of
international affairs. They both envisaged new forms
of cooperation between decision-makers, so that life
could be better for people on the ground. They both
aimed to create dialogue in places where there had
been none. Now our two organizations face a similar
challenge. We are learning how to deal with issues the
founders could scarcely have imagined, from climate
change to cyberterrorism and violent extremism That is
why we have chosen the theme “A Safer Future” as our
second priority. The security landscape is changing.
Unpredictability is increasing. Our institutions need to
adapt to suit a young century. Again, it is something we
can, and must, work on together.

19-062373/19

S/PV.8479

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The United Nations took steps to tailor its agenda
in 2016, when the Security Council adopted the
sustaining peace resolution to try to better address the
cycle of peace (resolution 2282 (2016)) — not waiting
until conflict has hit to react but, instead, removing
the conditions in which it can flourish. That means
pooling our capacities in the areas of sustainable
development, institution-building, the rule of law
and good governance. That is fully aligned with the
comprehensive approach of the OSCE to security. As we
all work to make sustaining peace a reality, the OSCE’s
conflict cycle toolbox and related work can offer some
lessons from the ground. Let me mention just a few
examples, starting with the counter-terrorism portfolio.
Terrorism and violent extremism are not exactly
new phenomena, but they pose bigger threats than
the founders of our organizations could ever have
anticipated. I was extremely glad to hear that a
memorandum of understanding had been signed
between the OSCE and the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism. Prevention mechanisms are
key. The more we work together, the more people we
can reach.
Another opportunity for enhanced cooperation lies
within the women and peace and security agenda. Both
the United Nations and the OSCE are doing valuable
work on the ground. We are both supporting women
peacebuilders. We are both advocating for inclusive
peace processes. We are both mainstreaming gender
throughout our field missions. And we are both working
to turn the tide on conflict-related sexual violence. The
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) is approaching. As it does, I urge us to look
at more ways by which we can reinforce and support
each other’s activities.
The same goes for youth and peace and security. The
narrative has been completely imbalanced for too long.
Young people were seen as risks, rather than assets, in
the context of peace and security. We are changing that.
I see many opportunities for cooperation as resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) are implemented. But if we
are to make any visible progress in any of those areas,
we must band together. I suppose members know where
I am going with this.
I want to conclude my briefing today by outlining
our third priority, one that is particularly close to my
heart: effective multilateralism. It appears the world
has started to forget the very urgent role played by
4/19

07/03/2019

multilateralism — this fundamental problem-solving
and war-preventing tool in international relations. Some
in the Chamber are from countries that are thousands
of miles outside the OSCE area, but we are not as far
apart as it may seem. In fact, many of the challenges
those here face are also being seen within the 57
participating States of the OSCE. For the spectrum
of challenges is global: climate change and its effects
on the most vulnerable societies; poverty and hunger,
which can fuel migration; and growing inequalities and
how they fan the flames of conflict and radicalization.
Those challenges are completely resistant to any
unilateral solutions.
Working together and using multilateral platforms
is not a luxury we can afford to opt out of; it is our only
choice. We have nothing to lose, and everything to gain,
in working together. Our people have everything to
gain. Fortunately, when it comes to the United Nations
and the OSCE, we are mindful of that. There is strong
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
entities in Vienna, with crucial projects taking place on
the ground. Our field missions, including the Special
Monitoring Mission, have benefited from United
Nations expertise and support, and we have more
memoranda of understanding and letters of agreement
than ever before.
The OSCE has a lot to earn from closer United
Nations engagement. This includes operational
readiness, capacities and capabilities at various stages
of the conflict cycle, as well as training and expertise
across a wide range of themes and issues. But the
OSCE has a lot to give too — from tailored regional
knowledge and niche expertise to lessons learned
from the ground. Moreover, in this climate of eroding
global arms control, the OSCE can be a platform for
confidence-building and increased transparency.
I think we could and should see even more
engagement in the coming months and years, because
there is absolutely no alternative when it comes to the
legitimacy the United Nations brings and the reach it
allows. And when it comes to the OSCE’s 57 members,
there is absolutely no alternative to local know-how and
field presence. When mobilized effectively and pulled
together, the results can be historic.
I came here to New York to talk to the Council’s
about the priorities of Slovakia’s OSCE chairmanship
and to focus on opportunities for stronger United
Nations-OSCE cooperation in bringing these priorities
19-06237

07/03/2019

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

to life. I thank Council members for the attention they
have given me today, but before I finish I want to make
one more thing clear. This briefing alone will not change
anything. It will not change anything in our work and
it will not change anything in the lives of people. That
is why it is so crucial that our words today be followed
up by action.
We are willing to do our part. I have already reached
out to the Secretary-General and other high-level United
Nations officials to invite them to participate in various
OSCE events this year. My team has also ramped up
coordination with the United Nations Liaison Office in
Vienna, and there is ongoing discussion about options
for deeper cooperation on the ground. The more we
work together, the closer we will get to our shared
goals. I am confident that today’s briefing is another
step along the way.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Lajčák
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Minister
Lajčák for his briefing and welcome him back to the
United Nations. The United Kingdom fully supports
his chairmanship and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and its work to address
the serious security challenges we face.
The people of Ukraine feel these challenges
acutely. The United Kingdom fully supports Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
including in Crimea as should every member here
today. Yet year after year, we see persistent disregard
for international law on the part of a permanent
member of the Council. Last month marked five years
since Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea. Russia
has continued this pattern of behaviour, blatantly
disregarding the principles set out in the Charter of the
United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act, and Russia
continues to destabilize eastern Ukraine, interfere with
Ukrainian elections and fuel the ongoing conflict, at a
devastating humanitarian cost.
Since the conflict in Ukraine began, over 10,000
people have lost their lives, almost 25,000 have been
injured and 3.5 million are in need of humanitarian
assistance. The efforts of international organizations to
deliver assistance to vulnerable people in the Donbas
are being restricted. Russia bears responsibility for

S/PV. 8479

this ongoing situation. This conflict will be brought to
an end only through the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, requiring a truly sustainable ceasefire and
genuine political will.
We welcome the personal commitment that Minister
Lajčák has shown to mitigating the humanitarian
consequences of this conflict. The OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine plays a crucial and
impartial role in monitoring the situation on the ground.
It deserves our full commitment and to be able to carry
out its mandate free from intimidation, restrictions
on access and interference with its equipment. The
United Kingdom will remain a resolute supporter of
the Mission.
The OSCE and the United Nations continue to
cooperate on shared goals. I would like to thank the
OSCE and UN-Women for co-chairing the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons. We
welcome Minister Lajčák’s plans to focus on trafficking
supply chains in the OSCE area.
Countering terrorism and violent extremism
is another area of important cooperation. Here, we
welcome the OSCE’s inclusive focus, embedding a
whole-of-society approach that fully incorporates
the rule of law, human rights, gender and prevention.
We also welcome the OSCE’s strong partnership
with the Security Council’s counter-terrorism bodies
and collaboration to implement multilateral counterterrorism frameworks.
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), women and peace
and security must also remain high on the agendas
of both organizations. I agree with Minister Lajčák’s
comments that we must do more, as the United Nations
and the OSCE, to reinforce each other’s work in this
important area.
The United Nations and the OSCE continue to
support the Western Balkans through coordination and
collaboration between our respective presences in the
region. We should jointly continue to ensure that OSCE
activities complement United Nations activities.
We welcome the recent progress in the OSCE’s
human dimension, with the adoption of a landmark
ministerial decision on the safety of journalists and
plans for the implementation of that decision. We look
forward to engaging with the OSCE Representative
on Freedom of the Media ahead of the international

19-062375/19

S/PV.8479

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

conference on media freedom to be hosted by the
United Kingdom in July.
The OSCE is a valuable forum for dialogue, and if
all States show political will to engage constructively
it can reduce risk and ultimately help rebuild trust.
The full implementation and modernization of existing
commitments are essential for achieving greater military
transparency and predictability. We hope that Minister
Lajčák’s approach as OSCE Chair will uphold these
imperatives. We share his priority of working towards a
resolution of the protracted conflicts in the OSCE area
and we welcome the commitment his has demonstrated
by visiting the region early in his chairmanship.
Finally, let me say that we completely share the
call Minister Lajčák made this morning for effective
multilateralism. We can only tackle our shared
challenges, such as climate change, terrorism and arms
control, by working together multilaterally under the
rules-based international system.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me first of all thank
France for convening this meeting and congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency. You may rest
assured that my delegation will cooperate very closely
with you during your presidency.
I would also like to thank the presidency of
Equatorial Guinea last month.
I would like to welcome the Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), Minister Miroslav Lajčák, to
the Security Council and thank him for his very
comprehensive briefing.
Considering the positive contribution of the OSCE
and other such organizations from other regions,
Indonesia would like to stress three points.
First, Indonesia welcomes the aims of the Slovak
OSCE 2019 chairmanship in promoting dialogue,
trust and stability in the OSCE area. Indonesia also
appreciates the three emphasis areas identified by the
Slovak chairmanship, namely, preventing, mediating
and mitigating conflict and focusing on the people
it affects; providing for a safer future; and effective
multilateralism. It is only through those measures
can we together overcome such increasingly complex
challenges as counter-terrorism, climate change,
women and peace and security and others. As we
live in a highly interdependent world, we have an
unshakeable belief in the virtue of multilateralism in
6/19

07/03/2019

finding solutions to global challenges and promoting
sustainable peace and development. The United
Nations itself is a manifestation of multilateralism
and outstanding proof that it can uniquely deliver on
solving challenges when everyone is fully committed to
the Organization’s purposes and principles.
Secondly, full respect for non-interference,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States is
fundamental in the relations among nations, and each
United Nations State Member must abide by those
principles. It is equally essential that everyone respect
the principle of refraining from the threat or use of
force in the resolution of conflicts. We sincerely believe
in the value of dialogue and the need to settle disputes
amicably, as also rightly emphasized by Minister
Lajčák. Political will to that end may not always be
a given, but with sustained dialogue, mutual respect
and credible peace efforts it can be nurtured. While
each conflict is unique, insufficient State capacity and
institutions often constitutes a critical impediment to
peacebuilding. Indonesia therefore also emphasizes
the need to adequately support affected countries, with
assistance being guided by their identified priorities.
Thirdly, Indonesia firmly believes in the pivotal
role of regional arrangements. Regional organizations
and countries, through their bonds of history, shared
culture and understanding, can have unique insights
into solving conflicts peacefully. We underscore the
continued attention by the United Nations to more
meaningfully profit from the regional entities, with
a view to promoting world peace and prosperity. The
Charter of the United Nations also highlights the
importance of regional arrangements in the maintenance
of international peace and security. Chapter VIII
of the Charter is specifically dedicated to regional
arrangements, underlining that the Security Council
shall encourage the development of pacific settlements
to local disputes through regional arrangements.
In our part of the world, we have the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Since its
inception in August 1967, ASEAN member countries
have shared the responsibility of strengthening peace,
stability and security in the region, free from foreign
military interference and undue pressure. ASEAN also
contributes to the promotion of peace and security in
the wider Asia-Pacific region. In that regard, ASEAN
has and will continue to engage with its dialogue
partners. We believe that genuine dialogue among
countries in the region, as well as beyond the region,
19-06237

07/03/2019

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

including interregional dialogue, will always provide a
solid base for a durable solution to any situation that
can be acceptable to all parties.
Let me conclude by wishing Minister Lajčák every
success during his term as Chairperson-in-Office of the
OSCE in implementing its noble aims and programmes,
as highlighted in his briefing.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Equatorial Guinea
for the excellent work it carried out as President of the
Security Council for the month of February. I also wish
to congratulate France on assuming the presidency for
the month of March and assure you, Mr. President, of
China’s full cooperation.
China welcomes the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and Minister for Foreign and European Affairs
of Slovakia, His Excellency Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, and
thanks him for his comprehensive briefing.
At present, the international situation is
undergoing more rapid and profound changes, with
increasing factors causing instability and uncertainty.
Unilateralism and protectionism are on the rise, which
jeopardize international order in the global governance
system. The world needs multilateralism more than
ever. The United Nations is the standard-bearer of
multilateralism, while the Security Council makes up
the core of the international collective security system.
Enhancing international cooperation, with the
United Nations at the centre, is a general trend in
our common aspiration. China supports the United
Nations in deepening its cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, with the
view to jointly maintaining international peace and
security. Such cooperation should resolutely follow the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,
vigorously facilitate the settlement of regional hotspot
issues through dialogue and consultations, actively
promote preventive diplomacy and diffuse tension
through peaceful means. Such activities by regional and
subregional organizations must be in conformity with
international law and the basic norms of international
relations, in particular respect for national sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
The OSCE is an important partner of the United
Nations. In recent years, the OSCE has been actively

S/PV. 8479

conducting preventive diplomacy, promoting regional
security and mutual trust and mediating regional
disputes. Since Slovakia assumed the chairmanship,
the OSCE has been giving priority to preventing
and mitigating challenges, thereby providing for a
safer future and enhancing multilateralism. China
commends such efforts. China supports results-oriented
cooperation between the Council and the OSCE in the
areas of peace and security, and hopes that the OSCE
will continue to play an active and constructive role in
safeguarding regional peace, security and stability.
On the question of Ukraine, the parties concerned,
including the OSCE, have made positive efforts
towards a peaceful resolution, which China welcomes.
We hope that the situation in Ukraine will be stabilized
as soon as possible and that the parties concerned will
effectively implement resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Minsk agreements, stick to the general direction of
political settlement and seek a comprehensive solution
through dialogue and consultations.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): As
this is my first statement in a public meeting under
your presidency, Mr. President, allow me to extend, on
behalf of Côte d’Ivoire, my warm congratulations and
best wishes to you and your country. I would also like
to commend Equatorial Guinea for its excellent work
during its presidency in February.
Мy delegation thanks Mr. Miroslav Lajčák,
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), whose briefing
informs us of the vision and priorities of Slovakia,
which holds the chairmanship for 2019. I would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate him on his
assumption of that position and wish him every success
in his new functions.
Since its accession to the OSCE chairmanship in
January, Slovakia has clearly stated the main focus of
all its actions, namely, prevention, mediation, conflict
mitigation, strengthening security and promoting
effective multilateralism.
With regard to multilateralism in particular,
Slovakia is committed to supporting the development
of strategic partnerships between the OSCE and
international organizations. The relevance of that
strategic choice is easily understood in the current
context, which is marked by a tendency to question
multilateral cooperation frameworks, although they

19-062377/19

S/PV.8479

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

07/03/2019

have demonstrated their full effectiveness in seeking
sustainable solutions to global challenges.

to play its role in supporting OSCE monitors and in
monitoring the ceasefire in Donbas.

The persistence of transnational security threats
and current economic and social development
challenges require combined efforts at the regional and
subregional levels. That is why Côte d’Ivoire welcomes
the OSCE as a model of virtuous cooperation — an
expression of the common vision of the 57 member
States to take ownership of their collective security. We
also note the quality of the OSCE’s cooperation with
the United Nations, which is fully in line with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Concerning its scope of activities, which extend
beyond European borders, the OSCE enjoys experience
that it could share with other regional and subregional
organizations. Threats to peace and security, the fight
against terrorism, climate change and the management
of migration flows are, inter alia, areas of cooperation
that the OSCE should explore with other regional and
subregional organizations. My country believes that,
while security in the geographical areas under the
OSCE’s purview and security in neighbouring regions
are closely linked, the security dynamics in sub-Saharan
Africa have no less of an impact on peace and security
in Europe. Accordingly, while we fully welcome the
constructive cooperation between the OSCE and its
Mediterranean and Asian partners, Côte d’Ivoire calls
for broadening such cooperation to include African
regional and subregional organizations, which entails
seeking lasting solutions, in a concerted spirit of
solidarity, to the current evolving challenges involved
in achieving peace, security and development.

Côte d’Ivoire appreciates the OSCE’s holistic
approach to addressing current security challenges,
which
integrates
political-military,
economic,
environmental and human dimensions. Côte d’Ivoire
welcomes the fact that its scope of action encompasses
the issues of arms control, the strengthening of
confidence and security measures, human rights, the
protection of national minorities, the promotion of
democracy and the fight against terrorism.
In view of the leading role of regional and
subregional organizations in conflict prevention and
management, based on the principle of subsidiarity,
Cote d’Ivoire urges the OSCE to fully play its rightful
role in strengthening peace and security in Europe in
accordance with its founding principles. In that regard,
my country encourages the Slovak chairmanship of the
OSCE to work tirelessly to restore peace and stability
in Ukraine and neighbouring areas by encouraging the
various stakeholders to overcome their differences, with
a view to the effective implementation of the Minsk
agreements. Given such a perspective, appropriate
measures must be urgently taken to overcome the
environment of mistrust that has taken root among
those concerned, which will enable maintaining the
gains made thanks to the efforts of the OSCE and
the international community, thereby fostering the
restoration of peace and stability in the region.
It is also important that the OSCE pursue its support
for existing mechanisms to resolve the conflicts in
Nagorno Karabakh and Abkhazia and South Ossetia
to advance peace talks on Transnistria and Georgia,
as well as to assist in the stabilization of Kosovo. In
that regard, my country welcomes the good offices of
Mr. Lajčák, in particular his 15 January visit to Kyiv,
the goal of which was to urge the parties to de-escalate
and allow the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination
8/19

In conclusion, my delegation once again wishes
Slovakia every success in its chairmanship of the OSCE
in the implementation of its priorities, including the
promotion of multilateralism, to which Côte d’Ivoire
remains strongly committed.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): First, let me
congratulate you, Sir, for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for March, and pay tribute to
Equatorial Guinea for its able work last month. I also
thank you, Sir, for facilitating today’s briefing by the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Miroslav
Lajčák, Minister for Foreign and European Affairs
of the Slovak Republic. I thank him for sharing with
us Slovakia’s vision in chairing the OSCE, centred
on conflict prevention and mitigation to preserve
peace and responding to new threats through deeper
cooperation, including the women and peace and
security agenda, the enlistment of young people and
effective multilateralism to address global and shared
challenges. It is always refreshing to listen to him. I
believe that he has literally continued where he left off
a few months ago at the helm of the General Assembly.
I welcome him back to the United Nations.
It is clear from his briefing that regional and
subregional organizations dealing with issues of peace
19-06237

07/03/2019

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

and security remain important for ensuring sustainable
peace and security in their respective regions. The
briefing also illustrated the importance of support and
cooperation from the United Nations, as the primary
international organization tasked with the maintenance
of international peace and security. Efforts to enhance
the relationship between the United Nations and the
OSCE are therefore welcomed. We wish to reiterate that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the furtherance of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations is necessary to ensure
closer coordination between our organizations.
We acknowledge, however, that every regional
organization is unique in terms of the challenges that
it faces in the maintenance of international peace and
security, as well as the manner in which it addresses
those challenges and threats. We must be clear, however,
that the efforts of regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security do not absolve the
Council of its Charter-mandated responsibilities as the
guardian of international peace and security. Those
efforts complement one another, and it is for that reason
that cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations is so important
to muster. Dialogue of such a nature allows us an
opportunity to share experiences and best practices
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
such as the OSCE.
I wish to reiterate South Africa’s support for the
work of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, which needs to continue to enjoy unhindered
access in order to monitor and verify compliance with
the Minsk agreements in terms of its mandate. Similarly,
my delegation believes that creating a conducive
environment towards compromise, reconciliation and
long-term stability in Kosovo is the responsibility of
all the relevant role players, including the OSCE as
one of the largest field operations in Kosovo. That
inclusive approach builds a strengthened foundation
for support and bolsters international trust-building
efforts. The work of the OSCE in Ukraine and Kosovo
and support for their efforts towards finding peaceful
and sustainable solutions will prove invaluable for their
people and the greater region.
I wish to conclude by reiterating that the Security
Council, regional bodies, international partners and
other actors, such as donors, civil society and youth
organizations, should continue to engage in dialogue

S/PV. 8479

and cooperation, in the interests of the people, as well
as for the stability of the broader region.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. I wish you every success, Sir, and I am very
pleased to offer you our full support. Allow me also
to express our appreciation to Equatorial Guinea for
its successful presidency last month. Allow me to turn
to Minister Miroslav Lajčák and welcome him to the
Security Council. We appreciate his comprehensive
briefing and are thankful for his setting out the
strategic priorities for the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The Minister can
count on our full support for his well-balanced and
realistic priorities throughout. We should all stand with
efforts to support effective multilateralism.
Preserving the security order based on international
law remains a core task for the OSCE. The compliance
of all participating States with the Helsinki Final
Act and subsequent agreements is a precondition for
stability and peace in our region. Regrettably, those
universal rules are now being challenged by one
permanent member of the Security Council, whose sole
responsibility is to protect and preserve those rules.
Five years ago, the Russian Federation violated
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine,
starting with the illegal annexation of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, which
we have not and will not recognize. Since then, the
Russian aggression against Ukraine has remained
the most important topic on the OSCE’s agenda, and
resolving the conflict continues to be an indispensable
step towards re-establishing European security. We
appreciate Mr. Lajčák’s decision to visit Ukraine,
including the Donbas region, for the first time in his
capacity as OSCE Chairperson-in-Office.
I want to emphasize that Russia’s unjustifiable
use of military force against Ukrainian vessels, which
resulted in its unilateral control over the Kerch Strait,
has not been not forgotten. The international calls for
the release of the 24 Ukrainian prisoners of war have
been ignored by the Kremlin ever since. Russia’s
impediments to the passage of ships through the
Kerch Strait have already caused major socioeconomic
damage to Ukraine.
Poland strongly supports the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine and insists that the

19-062379/19

S/PV.8479

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

safety of its monitors and assets be ensured. It should
have unhindered access to every conflict-affected area
in Ukraine. Steps must also be taken to strengthen the
monitoring of the Ukrainian-Russian border and ensure
an additional international presence in the conflict zone.
We want to once again commend Mr. Lajčák’s
initiative in visiting Georgia and Moldova, two
other countries affected by protracted conflicts.
We fully support the efforts of the OSCE Minsk
Group and its search for a fair and lasting political
settlement to the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh. We
attach great importance to the work of Ambassador
Andrzej Kasprzyk and his team, which is a valuable
contribution to reducing tensions and implementing
confidence-building measures on the ground. We have
noted the fact that the Transnistrian conflict remains
high on the OSCE’s agenda. It remains essential to reach
a comprehensive, peaceful and sustainable settlement
of this conflict, based on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Moldova.
With regard to the conflict in Georgia, we call on
Russia to implement the European Union-brokered
six-point ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008 that
ended the conflicts in Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali/
South Ossetia region nearly 10 years ago. Russia
should withdraw its military forces from the Georgian
breakaway regions with a view to creating the conditions
for a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
The security situation in the OSCE area is a
cause of growing concern. Military uncertainty is
being used as a political tool. Large-scale, no-notice
military manoeuvres along international borders and
military incidents undermine trust and create tensions
in the OSCE area of operations. That is why it is
urgent that we reduce any possible risk of a further
escalation of tensions by refraining from threatening
military action. We should remain committed to the
full implementation, in letter and in spirit, of existing
commitments on the political and military front. The
successful modernization of the Vienna Document
would be a positive step towards rebuilding trust
and confidence.
Poland opposes any attempts to weaken the
relevance of the OSCE’s human dimension, and we
want to reiterate our strong support for the work of the
OSCE’s autonomous institutions, particularly the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, located
in Warsaw. Let me express our full support for the
10/19

07/03/2019

promotion of democratic standards and for safeguarding
human rights and fundamental freedoms, which are
indelible components of comprehensive security, the
concept on which the OSCE is founded. In particular,
we would like to highlight the role of the Human
Dimension Implementation Meetings organized yearly
in Warsaw, which represent the biggest conference in
Europe dedicated to human rights and the promotion of
democratic values. We truly hope that they will be used
to further strengthen human rights protection across
the OSCE area and to enhance multilateral cooperation
in the field of human rights.
Tomorrow we celebrate International Women’s
Day, which gives me an excellent opportunity to pay
tribute to all women engaged in OSCE activities. We
hope that the OSCE will strive to maintain the current
momentum for further implementing programmes on
increasing the participation of women in the political
and public arenas, combating violence against women
and implementing resolution 1325 (2000), emphasizing
the involvement of women in conflict prevention, crisis
management and post-conflict rehabilitation.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to add our voice to the others congratulating
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month. We also congratulate Equatorial
Guinea for its hard work as President during a very
challenging February.
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
briefing. We recognize and greatly appreciate the
invaluable contributions that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to regional
peace and security for more than 40 years. As a former
OSCE desk officer in the State Department, I am
personally particularly pleased to be participating in
today’s discussion. I thank Mr. Lajčák for his briefing
on the OSCE’s activities and for his leadership of the
organization. The United States applauds the OSCE for
its critical role in developing a robust regional security
architecture and promoting human rights, democracy,
peace and stability across the vast area of its participating
States since 1975. The fundamental principles of the
OSCE, as a pillar of the international rules-based
system, must be upheld. We underscore its invaluable
role as a forum for addressing the most challenging
issues of the day through open and comprehensive
dialogue. Its unique field-office presence, particularly
in the Western Balkans, continues to play a significant
and influential role.
19-06237

07/03/2019

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Nowhere is the OSCE’s comprehensive approach to
security and its contributions to promoting the peaceful
settlement of conflicts more important than in Ukraine.
As has been pointed out, last month marked the fifth
anniversary of Russia’s illegal occupation of Crimea
and its instigation of conflict in eastern Ukraine.
Moscow’s aggression, beginning in 2014, marked
the first instance since the Second World War that a
European country has sought to redraw the boundaries
of another by force. It is particularly egregious that
the aggression was carried out by one OSCE member
against another. In November, Russia escalated its
aggressive activities against Ukraine when it attacked
Ukrainian naval vessels in the Black Sea. The United
States again strongly condemns that unjustified use
of force and again calls on Russia to return Ukraine’s
detained personnel and seized ships.
The United States commends the OSCE’s Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, which provides
the international community with the best source
of impartial information on the conflict in eastern
Ukraine. The OSCE’s work in negotiating ceasefires
has also been critical in alleviating the suffering caused
by Russia’s aggression. We applaud the courage and
dedication of the Mission’s unarmed monitors.
As we have stated repeatedly in this Chamber, the
United States fully supports Ukraine’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, within its
internationally recognized borders, including its
territorial waters, as should all OSCE member States.
We do not, nor will we ever, recognize Russia’s
purported annexation of Crimea. We join our European
and other partners in affirming that our Ukraine-based
sanctions against Russia will remain in place until
Russia fully implements its Minsk commitments, and
Crimea-focused sanctions will remain in place until
Russia returns full control of the peninsula to Ukraine.
The United States also opposes Russia’s continuing
occupation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which are
part of Georgia. There too Russia’s actions contravene
its international commitments and violate Georgia’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
within its internationally recognized borders. And
again in Georgia we have a concerted effort by one
OSCE member to destabilize another. Although Russia
participates in the OSCE’s 5+2 Transnistria settlement
negotiations, it has failed to honour its 1999 Istanbul
OSCE summit commitments to withdraw its forces
from Moldova. Russia has used the protracted conflicts

S/PV. 8479

in these nations to hinder the region’s gravitation
towards European and western institutions and to slow
the development of a rules-based order.
We have urged the OSCE Chairman-in-Office,
Slovakia, to support ongoing initiatives by the OSCE
and participating States, including the Geneva
international discussions and the 5+2 talks. The
international community must counter one State’s
actions, which fly in the face of OSCE principles and
commitments, undermining the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of other OSCE participating States. The
international community must also help prepare the
ground for the peaceful resolution of these protracted
conflicts, which, as Foreign Minister Lajčák noted,
have undeniably gone on for far too long.
Additionally, we thank the OSCE Chair and
participating States for their support of the Minsk
Group process. The United States, Russia and France
are working together productively as co-Chairs to help
the sides reach a settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict, between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
The OSCE’s crucial role in strengthening human
rights, democracy, peace and stability in Europe for
more than 40 years cannot be overstated. The United
States reaffirms the OSCE’s importance as a partner
to the United Nations and particularly to the Security
Council in addressing critical security challenges. We
will continue to support the OSCE’s vital work in these
and other conflicts.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): Allow me to join colleagues in
congratulating and pledging support to you in your role
as President and also to congratulate Equatorial Guinea
on its recent presidency.
The Dominican Republic wishes to thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Slovakia, Mr. Lajčák,
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for his informative
briefing on the activities of the organization. We
congratulate the presidency of Slovakia and avail
ourselves of this opportunity to express our support to
the OSCE and our appreciation for its tireless efforts
to promote security, stability and good governance
throughout the region. We note with satisfaction that
its priorities are consistent with the work done at the
United Nations and by the Council itself, in other words,
the prevention, mediation and mitigation of conflicts,

19-0623711/19

S/PV.8479

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

as well as a focus on those affected, in order to bring
about a safer future and effective multilateralism.
We acknowledge the fact that its agenda represents
both a challenge and an opportunity to follow up on
the political dialogue in the region, in keeping with
the commitments undertaken and in the framework
of the quest for a sustainable solution. We took
note with interest of the OSCE’s readiness to stress
the implementation of the agreements and related
responsibilities. In that context, it is an ongoing concern
of the Council to follow up on ongoing conflicts in
Europe, as promoting the parties’ commitment to the
implementation of the agreements reached will have
repercussions on the living conditions of the civilian
population, which usually is the most affected.
The Dominican Republic recognizes the
importance for the region of making progress in the
situation in eastern Ukraine and agrees with the OSCE
as to the need to stress the importance of respecting
and implementing the Minsk agreements. We thank it
for its availability to work on proposals that will help
to promote and restore peace and security to the region.
In that respect, we reiterate our support for the
territorial integrity of Ukraine and for the Special
Monitoring Mission of the OSCE, which remains
the barometer for the international community on
the ground.
We welcome the ongoing efforts of the OSCE to
resolve the conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Georgia
and Transnistria. We believe that sustained attention
to protracted conflicts must be maintained, as they
are the epicentre for the international community in
the areas of peace, stability and international security.
Our delegation believes that in keeping with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, joint work
with regional organizations can ensure a more effective
response in preventing, responding to and mitigating
conflicts. However, because of the prevailing lack of
confidence and because political interests often result
in losing sight of the human face of conflict, we must
ensure the success of organizations such as the OSCE in
resolving vital security situations. In this respect, it is
crucial to have the support and legitimate commitment
of the parties involved.
We welcome the practice of ensuring the greater
participation of women in the various areas of public
and political life, in conflict prevention, in crisis
management and in peacebuilding, as well as the key
12/19

07/03/2019

role played by youth in the strengthening of security
and cooperation. In that vein, we would stress the
importance of the OSCE’s various multidimensional
initiatives carried out jointly with and for young
people, and of giving priority to the bolstering of
inclusive youth policies. We deem it vital to continue to
hold the conferences on youth and security organized
by the OSCE, as they acknowledge the importance of
young people and their positive role in the promotion of
a culture of peace and in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, in accordance with resolutions 2250 (2015)
and 2419 (2018).
On the eve of International Women’s Day, we
would like to pay tribute to all the women of the world,
especially all those who have left, and continue to leave,
their mark on their communities and their countries in
the quest for a world that is more equitable, inclusive
and participatory.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): Allow me to echo my colleagues by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council and on its very effective
work last month. I wish also to thank Minister Lajčák,
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for his briefing.
Belgium associates itself fully with the three priorities
that he has just outlined with eloquence and, above all,
conviction. He can count on our full support.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe plays a key role in promoting dialogue in
a number of conflicts, from Nagorno Karabakh to
Transnistria, including the separatist territories of
Georgia. It contributes on a daily basis to reconciliation
efforts in the Balkans.
Today I wish to focus in particular on the situation in
Ukraine, which represents one of the greatest violations
of not only the founding principles of the OSCE but also
of the principles set out in the Charter of the United
Nations. In that respect, I wish to highlight the OSCE’s
efforts to prevent a fresh escalation of the conflict. We
hail the vital work of the Special Monitoring Mission of
the OSCE as an observer and a facilitator of dialogue
among all parties to the crisis.
We deplore the obstacles hampering the effective
monitoring and reporting work of the Mission in
Ukraine. We strongly encourage the parties to the
conflict to respect the Mission’s mandate and to give
it safe and unimpeded access to the entire territory
19-06237

07/03/2019

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

of Ukraine, including in Crimea and along the border
between Ukraine and Russia.
We join the call for a lasting political solution
to the conflict, which must be based on respect for
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. The full implementation of the
Minsk agreements is essential in that respect. We
continue to support ongoing efforts in the framework of
the Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group.
We are concerned about the situation regarding
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
attacks on human rights defenders and journalists
and growing intolerance in the many regions where
the OSCE is active. Respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of
law are essential to ensuring sustainable security. We
underscore our unwavering commitment to the human
dimension, which must be a common thread in the work
of the OSCE.
The OSCE makes a significant contribution to
preventing and combating transnational threats such as
terrorism, violent extremism and radicalization. In that
regard, we welcome the memorandum of understanding
agreed between the Office of Counter-Terrorism and
the OSCE. One of the most effective ways to promote
the implementation of the Council’s resolutions and
strengthen the capacities of Member States is through
good collaboration between the Office of CounterTerrorism and regional organizations.
With 57 members, the OSCE is the largest regional
organization of the kind envisaged in Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. It plays an
indispensable role in the protection of an international
order based on law and the promotion of peace and
security in Europe. The various dimensions of the
OSCE reflect the idea of an integrated approach to
security and sustainable peace, an approach that the
Security Council should support.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We join others in congratulating you, Sir, and your
delegation, on France’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month, and we reiterate
our gratitude to Equatorial Guinea for a successful
presidency last month. We welcome Mr. Miroslav
Lajčák, Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of
the Slovak Republic. We are sure that his background
and leadership will enable him to make a substantial

S/PV. 8479

contribution to the objectives of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as its
Chairperson-in-Office, as he did as President of the
General Assembly at its previous session.
In accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, Peru promotes and stresses the
importance of developing and strengthening synergies
with regional and subregional organizations with a
view to preventing and responding more effectively
to conflict situations within the framework of the
promotion of multilateralism. In that regard, we
underscore that the priorities of the OSCE for 2019,
as outlined today, converge with those established by
the United Nations, particularly many of the priorities
that guide the work of the Council. In that regard, we
believe it will be helpful to identify three areas where
we think complementarity can be exploited.
First, regarding conflict prevention, the Security
Council continues to promote the evaluation, analysis
and implementation of the sustaining peace approach,
while the efforts of the OSCE seek to build on what
it calls comprehensive security. Both visions prioritize
the crucial importance of people and their welfare. Peru
believes that the maintenance of security, including
peacebuilding, and the protection of human rights are
complementary and mutually reinforcing. We also
welcome the fact that the chairmanship of the OSCE
is emphasizing the importance of the challenges and
opportunities represented by the participation of young
people in the OSCE’s agenda.
Secondly, regarding the promotion of coordination
and regional participation, Peru believes that
regional organizations have a crucial role to play in
implementing the international normative framework,
including Security Council resolutions, and should
guide the sustaining peace approach based on the
unique characteristics of each subregion. In that regard,
I would like to highlight the OSCE’s commitment
and leadership in combating terrorism and violent
extremism. We especially welcome its close cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, a
relationship that we believe should be replicated with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
Thirdly, regarding political solutions, we welcome
the OSCE’s mechanisms for political support and
follow-up and for the peaceful settlement of disputes,
which have enabled it to contribute to stability in Europe
and Central Asia. We consider them a benchmark for

19-0623713/19

S/PV.8479

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

any regional mechanism that seeks to promote peace
and security, and in that regard we want to highlight
its work in Ukraine, especially on achieving the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, as well as its
work in Georgia, Transnistria and Nagorno Karabakh.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate the
importance of cooperation and the joint efforts of the
OSCE and the United Nations system, especially in
partnership with the Council, which my delegation
fully supports.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We wish you and your friendly country every success
in managing the work of the Council during this month.
We also thank Equatorial Guinea for its presidency of
the Council in February.
We welcome Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, Minister for
Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic,
who has joined us for today’s meeting. I would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate him on his
country’s assumption of the chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in 2019, in which we wish friendly Slovakia
every success. We also thank him for the valuable and
comprehensive briefing he provided at the beginning of
today’s meeting.
The commitment of the Chairperson-in-Office
of the OSCE to providing an annual briefing to the
Security Council dates back to 2004 and confirms
the determination of the OSCE to strengthen its
cooperation with the United Nations in order to establish
international peace and security, especially in the
regions covered by its mandate. As the largest regional
security organization in geographical terms, including
countries in Europe, Asia and the Mediterranean, the
OSCE adds enormous value to our joint quest to achieve
international peace and stability, maintain and promote
the principle of multilateralism and use it to address the
security challenges facing the international community.
As the number and complexity of conflicts
increase daily, there is an ever-greater need,
repeatedly demonstrated, for regional and subregional
organizations to settle internal or external conflicts that
the United Nations cannot resolve on its own. The two
organizations need and complement each other. While
the United Nations plays a key role in the resolution of
conflicts that extends to post-conflict peacebuilding and
14/19

07/03/2019

peacemaking, the support of regional and subregional
organizations remains indispensable.
In that regard, Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations guides us and even encourages us to
strengthen that cooperation. It is clear that regional and
subregional organizations are better and less costly in
terms of material and human resources at establishing
what is happening on the ground during a conflict. They
are also on the front lines in enabling the international
community to uncover, better understand and address
the nature of such conflicts.
We welcomed the first high-level meeting held
between the European Union and the OSCE in
September of last year. We are pleased that the two
organizations have decided to institutionalize this
practice by holding high-level meetings every year.
The European continent is a theatre of conflicts that
have lasted for too long and require radical solutions,
such as those in Nagorno Karabakh, Moldova, Georgia,
Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Cyprus. We
commend the role of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Missions, which have been deployed in many conflict
regions. We ourselves visited the headquarters of
the Mission in Georgia along the borders of South
Ossetia and noted first-hand the role that it has played
in deescalating tensions, monitoring the ceasefire,
encouraging confidence-building measures and
facilitating the movement of the population.
We note the OSCE’s important role in Ukraine
and stress the importance of resolving a crisis that has
entered its fifth year. We hope that all parties to the
conflict will fully implement resolution 2202 (2015), the
2015 Minsk agreements and the presidential statement
of 6 June 2018 (S/PRST/2018/12), while seeking a
comprehensive and balanced solution through dialogue
based on the Normandy format and the work of the
Trilateral Contact Group. In that regard, we commend
the role that the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine has played on the ground in facilitating
dialogue between the various parties to the conflict,
and we sincerely hope that those efforts will help to
bring an end to that conflict as soon as possible.
In conclusion, we wish the Foreign Minister
every success in achieving Slovakia’s priorities and
objectives during its chairmanship of the OSCE, as he
mentioned in his briefing, in order to promote the main
purposes and principles of the United Nations and help
to establish security, stability and peace in the world.
19-06237

07/03/2019

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for March and to wish you
every success. I would also like to commend Equatorial
Guinea for its conduct of the presidency in February.
We are grateful to Mr. Miroslav Lajčák,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Slovakia, for his detailed annual
briefing on the work of the Organization and the issues
on its agenda. His country’s chairmanship of the OSCE
comes at a difficult time, when the foundations of the
multilateral system and international law itself are
being severely tested. Lately we have been hearing a
great deal about the so-called rules-based order instead.
We are committed to constructive cooperation with
the Slovak chairmanship of the OSCE. For our part,
we believe that the OSCE should strive to fulfil the
functions for which it was established, that is, as a forum
for equal dialogue and collective decision-making on
security questions. The focus should be on issues such as
combating terrorism, drug trafficking and cyberthreats,
harmonizing
integration
processes,
supporting
traditional values, protecting the rights of national
minorities and countering neo-Nazism. We hope to see
constructive cooperation continue between the OSCE
and the United Nations in those areas, and much has
already been done in that regard. It is also important to
implement the confidence-building measures developed
within the OSCE to reduce the risks of conflict in the
area of information and communication technology
by preventing the militarization of the information
space, interference in the internal affairs of States and
violations of their digital sovereignty.
With regard to efforts to introduce into the OSCE’s
agenda topics such as security-sector reform and
governance that do not fall under its remit, we believe
that efforts on that front should be conducted within the
United Nations on the basis of resolution 2151 (2014),
which applies to countries that have been completely
ruined by conflict and are in the post-conflict
reconstruction phase. There are no such countries in
the OSCE area.
Mr. Lajčák has invaluable experience as President
of the General Assembly and knows the Organization
well. He knows that international organizations today
cannot act in isolation. It is in that context that we see

S/PV. 8479

the cooperation between the Organization and regional
and subregional organizations on the basis of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and the 2006
decision of the OSCE Permanent Council.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE on the ground should help to stabilize the
OSCE space. That is not possible without resolving
the question of Kosovo on the basis of resolution
1244 (1999), seeking compromises on the conflicts in
Transnistria and Nagorno Karabakh and establishing
a non-politicized dialogue between Georgia, Abkhazia
and South Ossetia in the framework of the Geneva
talks on security in the South Caucasus. We hope that
the implementation of the OSCE Ministerial Council’s
declaration on the Mediterranean in Milan will lead
to greater stability in the region and in the countries
of Europe.
We will continue to participate in the structured
dialogue on security threats, which is itself a
confidence-building measure and may open up
prospects for improving the situation in the EuroAtlantic area unless, of course, that format is
politicized. Listening to some of today’s speakers
without an understanding of what the OSCE does, one
might get the impression that Vienna considers nothing
but the situations in Ukraine and the post-Soviet space
generally. That is a well-known misunderstanding that
our Western partners seem to be trying to embed in
the public consciousness. We should not forget that the
OSCE, with its 57 member States, deals with security
issues in general, working to promote stability, peace
and democracy among a population of 1 billion people.
In that context, among other things, it discusses issues
of arms control, the fight against terrorism, human
trafficking, democratization, freedom of the media
and the situation of national minorities. There are quite
enough problems in those areas to the west of Vienna,
and we urge members not to forget that.
Unfortunately, in speaking about OSCE activities,
we cannot ignore the internal Ukrainian crisis. On
12 February, the Security Council met to discuss the issue
on the occasion of the fourth anniversary of the signing
of the package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements (see S/PV.8461). We are
grateful to Ambassador Apakan, Head of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, for his frank
assessments of the situation on the ground and in
particular for his affirmation of the lack of evidence of
a Russian military presence in Donbas.

19-0623715/19

S/PV.8479

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

In adopting resolution 2202 (2015), which endorsed
the package of measures as the basis for the Ukrainian
settlement, all the members of the Security Council
affirmed that the key to the country’s stabilization
was the comprehensive implementation of the Minsk
agreements. They reiterated it in June 2018, when they
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/12) in
support of the agreements, and reiterated it again on
12 February. Today we have already heard words in
support of the Minsk agreements and will undoubtedly
hear them again. And yet things are right back where
they started. We have to admit that without Kyiv’s
implementation of the Minsk agreements in good faith,
no genuine settlement can be achieved. Meanwhile,
Kyiv is openly sabotaging the Minsk agreements and
pointing fingers at Russia, as its Western partners are
also doing and as we have heard more than once today.
Kyiv’s sabotage is possible only because its Western
sponsors cover for it.
A settlement is impossible without the consent of
the people in these regions. Here at the United Nations
we call that inclusivity, and that principle applies
equally to the OSCE. In Syria, Yemen, Libya and
Afghanistan — everywhere, in fact — we call on the
opposing sides to sit down at the negotiating table and
reach a compromise. But for some reason that does not
apply to Donbas and its citizens.
For our part, we have a direct interest in a speedy
end to the conflict in Ukraine. We urge the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine to intensify
its monitoring activities in Donbas. What is needed is
not fragmented information but rather a comprehensive
look at the military situation of the armed forces in
Ukraine. We need a clear determination as to which
side is exacerbating the situation and the shelling, and
on the consequences for the civilian population and the
destruction of civilian infrastructure. We will insist
that the Monitoring Mission produce detailed thematic
reports on this issue. However, we should point out
that the OSCE’s mandate is not limited to Donbas but
applies to the entire territory of Ukraine. In particular,
the Monitoring Mission should be following the
situation throughout Ukraine regarding human rights
and national minorities, including on the linguistic,
religious and education fronts, and ensuring that they
are observed, with special attention to issues such
as the expansion of neo-Nazism, the falsification of
history and the persecution of journalists, which have
been flourishing unchecked in Ukraine.
16/19

07/03/2019

We are outraged by the declaration and the letter
from Pavlo Klimkin, Ukraine’s Foreign Minister,
sent to the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights (ODIHR) in January, concerning
Ukraine’s refusal to admit observers from Russia
into Ukraine for its presidential elections even under
the auspices of ODIHR. It is an unprecedented and
discriminatory ban and a gross violation of the OSCE’s
founding commitments, specifically paragraph 8 of
the 1990 Document of the Copenhagen Meeting of the
Conference on the Human Dimension of the Conference
on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Russia considers the OSCE an important
mechanism for building an equal and indivisible
system of European security, and we have an interest
in strengthening its role and authority. We would like
to wish Slovakia effectiveness and every success in its
work at the helm of the OSCE in the interests of all of
our countries’ cooperation and security. For our part,
we are willing to have an open and inclusive dialogue
on every aspect of its agenda.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We congratulate the French delegation
on assuming the presidency of the Council for the
month of March. We thank the French delegation
for its kind words about my delegation and wish it a
productive presidency.
The delegation of Equatorial Guinea would also
like to welcome to the Security Council Mr. Miroslav
Lajčák, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak
Republic, and to thank him for his informative briefing
on the programme and activities planned under the
Slovak chairmanship of the OSCE. We also congratulate
Slovakia on its assumption of the OSCE chairmanship
and on its commitment to the maintenance of peace
in Europe.
I would like to take this opportunity to support
the priority issues on the agenda of the Slovak
chairmanship of the OSCE, which focus on three areas of
action — preventing, mediating and mitigating conflicts
by focusing on the people they affect, ensuring a more
secure future and promoting effective multilateralism.
Since the continuing crisis in Ukraine is a priority
for the OSCE and one of the most critical issues in the
region, it is important to remember that the only possible
solution to the situation in Ukraine is by peaceful
19-06237

07/03/2019

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

means, through direct, frank and inclusive negotiations
on the basis of the Minsk agreements. Bearing in mind
the priorities of Slovakia’s chairmanship, we would
also like to support its new approach and determination
with regard to the so-called protracted conflicts
affecting Europe. We therefore welcome Mr. Lajčák’s
official visit to Moldova in January as part of Slovakia’s
approach to conflict prevention and mediation.
As one of the largest regional security organizations
in the world, the OSCE plays a very important role in
maintaining the stability and security of countries in
and around the region. As we said in last year’s Council
meeting (see S/PV.8200), it is important to further
strengthen cooperation between the OSCE and the
United Nations in order to enhance the OSCE’s role
in implementing United Nations decisions concerning
European conflicts for the benefit of international
peace and security.
On the eve of the commemoration of International
Women’s Day, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
considers it right that the OSCE chairmanship is
incorporating a gender perspective as a strategy to
promote women’s participation in conflict mediation
and resolution processes with a view to implementing
the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
OSCE’s excellent work as a mediator to help resolve
conflicts peacefully while ensuring that agreements
are implemented and fully respected. As we have noted
previously, we consider it very important to strengthen
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
OSCE as the sole mechanism for achieving peace and
greater stability in the OSCE regions. I would like
to wish the Slovak chairmanship every success in
fulfilling its priorities.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I too would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on taking over the joint
presidency and presiding over the Security Council
for the month of March. We will fully support you in
discharging your duties.
As we have said previously with regard to our desire
for somewhat more interactive discussions, I would like
to thank Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), for circulating the elements of his
statement in advance, which enabled us to prepare for
this debate. His efforts are very much appreciated. I

S/PV. 8479

would also like to underline what the President said
about Mr. Lajčák being a natural bridge between
the OSCE and the United Nations, given his former
and current roles. I think that bodes very well for
cooperation between the two organizations with a view
to ensuring functioning multilateralism. Mr. Lajčák
can count on our full support.
In his briefing today, Mr. Lajčák also made a point
that we believe is key — that his briefing alone will
not change anything. It is crucial to ensure that our
words today are followed by action. In the same spirit,
I was heartened that he cited Ukraine as one of the
most important areas of action, the same issue that we
mentioned in our 12 February debate (see S/PV.8461)
that our Russian colleague highlighted, the question of
humanitarian action in the occupied areas of Ukraine
and the bridge in Stanytsia Luhanska. I mentioned
this two weeks ago, and Mr. Lajčák picked up on the
same issue without us talking to one another, which
demonstrates how important it is. Given that tens of
thousands of people have to cross the bridge every day,
is there a chance to develop a road map or something
similar that we can not only talk about, but actually
implement to repair the bridge? The situation there
is terrible.
Together with France, Russia and Ukraine,
Germany will continue efforts within the Normandy
format to drive the process forward. We also believe
that the Minsk agreements form the basis of that. With
respect to the implementation of the Minsk agreements,
my appreciation of what is happening is a bit different
from that of our Russian colleague.
I want first and foremost to pay tribute to the
important work of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine. Under very difficult circumstances, it does
a tremendous job. About two years ago, a colleague of
the Special Monitoring Mission lost his life because his
car ran over a mine in an area not controlled by the
Government. Overall, the OSCE has continued to do
good work.
Our Russian colleague just said that the OSCE should
step up its monitoring activities, but unfortunately it is
all too often prevented from doing that. Last month,
the OSCE sent the latest report on the restrictions of
the Special Monitoring Mission to all OSCE member
States. The report says that in the latter half of 2018, the
number of the restrictions on the Special Monitoring
Mission’s freedom of movement rose. The Mission

19-0623717/19

S/PV.8479

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

encountered 720 restrictions and more than a 60 per
cent increase compared to the previous six months.
The majority of all restrictions were denials of access.
Similar to the first half of 2013, the majority of the
restrictions were in the areas not under Government
control — 75 per cent in the areas occupied and under
Russian influence.
At the same time, the report mentions a number
of drones that have been lost, the majority of them
over Government-controlled areas. Those are very
expensive and their loss is costly for the OSCE member
States. I have a specific question in that regard. The
report mentions that passage to Novoazovsk, close to
the border with the Russian Federation, was denied 54
times. Is there any speculation as to why that was the
case? That is a harbour town. Any information on that
would be helpful, although the question is probably
too specific. When I read the report in the context of
freedom of movement, that fact struck me.
With regard to the Sea of Azov, many have
mentioned the violation of international law and the
fact that the release of Ukrainian personnel has still
not happened. As our Russian colleague mentioned,
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission should cover the
whole of Ukrainian territory. Could the OSCE employ a
ship in the territorial waters of Ukraine to better control
the area? So far, there are cars and drones, but perhaps a
ship would also be useful.
With respect to Transnistria, we welcome the fact
that since 2016 there has been a number of concrete
developments in the Berlin Protocol, which is a positive
point we must highlight. I would like to echo what my
American colleague asked. Is there a chance that in
Transnistria we can also now make progress on the
implementation of the political declaration adopted
at the OSCE Istanbul Summit with regard to the
withdrawal of the illegally present troops?
On Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh, we would
like to support the Chairperson’s activities there.
Chancellor Merkel just met with the Prime Minister of
Armenia and encouraged him to use his broad mandate
to constructively engage in the peace process. There
again, the OSCE Minsk Group is in the lead, and I
would also encourage the same from the Chairperson.
Let me finish first by taking the occasion to thank
the Ambassador of Equatorial Guinea and her delegation
for their leadership last month. I would also like to echo
what some of those present have said, in particular
18/19

07/03/2019

the representatives of the Dominican Republic and
Equatorial Guinea mentioned International Women’s
Day. In the Chairperson’s briefing, he highlighted,
among other things, that he also wants to implement
the women and peace and security agenda. I wonder
if he has concrete plans to include quotas in the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. Also, as our
colleagues from Equatorial Guinea just proposed, in the
mediation talks, the Minsk Group, the 5+2 talks or the
Trilateral Contact Group in Kyiv, can the Chairperson
push a bit more to promote women’s participation?
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I would like to start by warmly thanking
Mr. Miroslav Lajčák for his insightful briefing on the
priorities of the Slovak chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We are
delighted to have him here with us today. Slovakia can
count on France’s full support in the implementation
of its programme of work, in which the issues of the
effectiveness of multilateralism and the protection of
civilian populations in conflict zones — two themes
that are at the heart of the joint presidencies of France
and Germany — are given priority. Two points deserve
particular attention in the context of the Security
Council’s cooperation with the OSCE. I will be brief.
First, with respect to the decisive role of the
OSCE in resolving the Ukrainian crisis, the crisis is
clearly one of the most serious and deadly violations
of the founding principles of the OSCE, which were
agreed in Helsinki more than 40 years ago. From the
very beginning of the crisis, the OSCE has risen to
the challenge. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine therefore contributes on a daily basis to
reducing tensions in the east of the country, on the
line of contact and throughout the conflict zone, and
has made progress towards the implementation of the
Minsk agreements by the parties.
We commend the courage of the women and
men who are engaged on the ground in that regard
and condemn in the strongest terms all actions that
undermine their security or seek to obstruct their
mission and destroy their equipment, as observed in
recent months, especially in the separatist zone.
The ОSCE also facilitates dialogue between
the parties within the framework of the Trilateral
Contact Group. It can count on the political support
19-06237

07/03/2019

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

of the Normandy format, as my Germany colleague
mentioned. However, we must note that those
discussions are now at an impasse. More than ever, they
require a re-engagement of all parties, in particular
Russia and the separatist groups that it supports. That
re-engagement can be demonstrated only by through
strong political resolve to support those talks, which
is both urgent and essential. The parties must assume
their responsibilities and meet the expectations of the
civilian populations trapped in the conflict. That more
constructive attitude should be observed in both the
Trilateral Contact Group and the Normandy format.
We cannot talk about the Ukrainian crisis without
going back to the illegal annexation of Crimea by
Russia five years ago. That violation of Ukraine’s
internationally recognized borders is the cause of
growing tensions in the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea.
In that regard, we reiterate our call for the unconditional
release of the Ukrainian sailors who have been detained
since the serious naval incident last November, as well
as for the return of the seized boats.
Secondly, with regard to the conflict in Ukraine,
we call on all actors in the protracted conflicts
and all Member States to support the OSCE’s
mediation efforts. The OSCE is contributing to the
peaceful and political resolution of the protracted
conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Abkhazia, South
Ossetia and Transnistria, but in that regard, too, only
the political will of the parties can bring negotiations
to a successful conclusion, leading to the settlement of
those crises. France will continue to be fully involved
in the mediation of the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh
in its capacity as co-Chair of the Minsk Group, together
with the United States and Russia. The commitments
undertaken by participating States and the dialogue
facilitation activities led by the OSCE demand respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms by all
States. The vision of peace and security in Europe,
as envisaged at the signing of the Helsinki Final Act,
rests on that pillar. France reiterates its commitment to
the OSCE as a platform for dialogue with regard to all
security issues affecting the European continent and its
multidimensional approach to security.
In conclusion, I will recall, on the one hand, the
priority that must be given to cooperation between the
United Nations and regional agencies in accordance

S/PV. 8479

with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
and, on the other, the large overlap between the work
of the OSCE and that of the United Nations. At a
time when divisions at the international level were
seemingly insurmountable, the Helsinki Final Act,
the cornerstone of the OSCE, opened a new chapter
in the history of multilateralism. We must now let that
example inspire us as a renewed and revitalized form of
multilateralism seems to us more necessary than ever
to meet today’s great challenges. Let us never forget
that the two secret weapons of such multilateralism are
respect and dialogue. The two organizations foster a
shared approach that combines security, development
and human rights. It is our duty to continue to support
the work of the OSCE to strengthen security at the
regional level, in particular in all crises in which that
organization is called upon to act. France’s commitment
in that direction is firm.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lajčák to respond to the
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Lajčák: I would like to thank all members
of the Security Council for their statements and
expressions of support for our chairmanship-in-Office
and its priorities. It is very encouraging to us. I am
also grateful for their assessment of the state of play on
different issues and challenges in the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We have duly taken
good note of them and will use them in our future work.
They are very valuable to us. I am also grateful for the
interactive approach of the Ambassador of Germany,
and we will provide answers to his questions outside
the Chamber. I would like to wish Council members
every success in their work because that is what we all
need — the successful work of the Security Council.
I am very much looking forward to our cooperation
throughout our chairmanship.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lajčák for his additional remarks and his personal
commitment and that of his organization to reinforcing
the partnership between the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

19-0623719/19
