A/62/PV.40

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

40

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 31 October 2007, 10.17 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 45
Sport for peace and development
(a) Sport for peace and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/62/325
and Corr.1)
(b) Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal
Draft resolution A/62/L.2
The President: I would like to say that I assume
that the Olympic spirit will prevail today, as Pierre de
Coubertin would have liked, and that attendance by
Member States will be more impressive.
I give the floor to the representative of China to
introduce draft resolution A/61/L.2.
Mr. Liu Qi (China) (spoke in Chinese): As
President of the Beijing Organizing Committee for the
Games of the 29th Olympiad, and on behalf of the
Chinese delegation, I have the great honour to
introduce draft resolution A/62/L.2, entitled “Building
a peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal”.
The Olympic Truce, a time-honoured tradition,
has its roots in the Olympic truce treaty among Greek
city-states participating in the ancient Olympic games,
which had a history of more than 1,000 years. The
treaty was thus observed longer than any other peace

accord in history. The modern Olympic movement,
which came into being in 1894, has inherited the
traditions of the ancient Olympic games. At its very
heart lies the pledge to safeguard world peace and
promote the common development of mankind, while
at the same time upholding the Olympic spirit: swifter,
higher, stronger.
The United Nations and the Olympic Movement
are natural allies. The Olympic ideal accords with the
United Nations purpose of promoting peace. Since
1993, the General Assembly has adopted seven
resolutions on the Olympic Truce, urging all Member
States to observe the Truce. The United Nations
Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2), adopted in
2000, also urged Member States to observe the
Olympic Truce and to support the promotion of peace
and human understanding through sport and the
Olympic ideal.
All of that amply demonstrates that the United
Nations and its Member States attach great importance
to the role played by sport and the Olympic ideal in
promoting world peace and that they hope to create a
favourable atmosphere and conditions for the success
of the Olympic Games.
In line with past practice, China, as the host
country for the Games of the XXIX Olympiad, has
proposed the draft resolution entitled “Building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal” (A/62/L.2). The draft resolution not
only captures the quintessential elements of previous
resolutions, but also features the three main concepts

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-57301 (E)

*0757301*

A/62/PV.40

that are at the core of the Beijing Olympic Games,
namely, the Green Olympics, the High-tech Olympics
and the People’s Olympics, and their vision to achieve
a harmonious development of society. It recognizes the
increasingly important role of sport in the
implementation of the internationally agreed
development goals and reaffirms the commitments
undertaken in this regard by the heads of State and
Government gathered at the 2005 World Summit. The
draft resolution urges Member States to observe the
Olympic Truce during the Games of the
XXIX Olympiad in Beijing, which will take place from
8 to 24 August 2008, and the subsequent Paralympic
Games in Beijing, which will take place from 6 to
17 September 2008.
The draft resolution also welcomes efforts of the
International Olympic Committee and the National
Olympic Committees of United Nations Member States
to undertake concrete actions to promote and
strengthen a culture of peace and harmony based on the
spirit of the Olympic Truce and calls upon all Member
States to continue to use sport as an instrument to
promote peace, dialogue and reconciliation.
China has received constructive comments and
suggestions from many delegations during the
consultations on the draft resolution. The draft
resolution is sponsored by 183 countries. On behalf of
the Chinese Government and the Beijing Organizing
Committee for the Games of the XXIX Olympiad, I
would like to convey my thanks to all countries for
their support for the draft resolution. It is my sincere
hope that the General Assembly will adopt the draft
resolution by consensus. The adoption of the draft
resolution will help enhance appreciation and
understanding by all peoples of the Olympic ideal of
peace and will contribute to world peace.
The Olympic Truce is not only the ideal of the
Olympic movement but also the common aspiration of
all peace-loving peoples around the world. The theme
of the Games of the XXIX Olympiad — “One world,
one dream” — and its core concepts of the Green
Olympics, the High-tech Olympics and the People’s
Olympics give full expression to the common desire of
the Chinese people and peoples of the entire world for
peace, progress, friendly relations and harmonious
development. To that end, the Beijing Organizing
Committee has launched various activities to promote
the Olympic Truce, enhance understanding of the

2

Olympic Truce in China and throughout the world and
increase the influence of the Olympic ideal of peace.
We have organized a series of events to promote
the concept of peace, including the campaign to solicit
songs for the Olympic Games; the “Fuwa — the
Olympic mascots — bring good luck to the world”
campaign; and an Olympic sculpture exhibition. We
have named the Olympic torch relay the Journey of
Harmony, a name that captures the vision of peace,
harmony and cooperation. We have distributed
Olympic readers and wall charts to schools designated
Olympic Education Model Schools, and have launched
the Heart-to-Heart Partnership Programme and a
Beijing Olympic Youth Camp. These educational
programmes are sowing the seeds of peace, friendship
and progress among the public, in particular among
young people. During the Beijing Olympic and
Paralympic Games, a wall for peace and friendship will
be erected at the Olympic and Paralympic villages to
collect signatures from athletes and other people and to
appeal for observance of the Olympic Truce and the
promotion of world peace.
The International Olympic Committee (IOC) and
its President, Mr. Jacques Rogge, have been working
tirelessly to promote the Olympic ideal of peace. I take
this opportunity to express our deep appreciation for
their commitment. Thanks to the concerted efforts of
the IOC and the parties concerned, the International
Olympic Truce Foundation and the International
Olympic Truce Centre have been established,
contributing to the promotion of the Olympic ideal of
peace worldwide.
We also thank Mr. Adolf Ogi, Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and
Peace, for his hard work, and we will continue to
support the work of his Office.
Peace and development are two major themes in
today’s world. Unfortunately, regional conflicts and
local turbulence still occur, making our quest for world
peace more of an uphill journey. The Olympic Games
may not change the world overnight, but we have every
reason to expect that the Olympic Truce, an ancient
Olympic tradition, will continue to inspire the world in
striving for lasting peace and common prosperity.
I wish to take this opportunity to call on all
Member States to adhere to the purposes and principles
of the United Nations, to observe the Olympic Truce
and to promote world peace. In 282 days, the Olympic

07-57301

A/62/PV.40

Flame — burning bright for solidarity, friendship and
peace — will be lit in the main stadium of the Beijing
Olympic Games. That is of great significance both to
the Olympic Movement and to China, an ancient
civilization with a time-honoured history. The
international community looks forward to the success
of the Beijing Olympic Games. At present, all of the
preparatory work is taking place as scheduled. All the
venues will be complete by the end of the year, except
for the National Stadium, which will be ready in early
2008 in accordance with plans for the opening
ceremony.

Sport helps to break down social, religious and
ethnic barriers by promoting tolerance and mutual
understanding. Sport can change lives for the better by
building self-esteem, leadership skills, community
spirit and bridges across ethnic and communal divides.
When teams and individuals come together to share
their common passion for sport, everyday differences
are set aside. Rivalries remain, but they are fought over
goals, fastest times or longest jumps. Sporting
spectacles provide the opportunity to transcend
everyday differences for the crowds that come to enjoy
them.

The Beijing Olympic competition schedule has
been finalized. To facilitate the coverage of the Games
by the foreign media, last year the Chinese
Government formulated regulations on reporting
activities in China by foreign journalists during the
Beijing Olympic Games and the preparatory period. In
addition, various programmes are already up and
running, including preparations for the opening and
closing ceremonies, the torch relay outside the Chinese
mainland, media and communications, Olympic
education and culture, and volunteer training.

Sport has also sometimes played a decisive role
in diplomatic life and in re-establishing good
relationships between countries. That is the
embodiment of the ancient Greek concept of ekecheria,
or “Olympic Truce”. The General Assembly considers
this concept to be an important part of promoting
international understanding and maintaining peace. The
fact that there are over 180 sponsors of the draft
resolution on building a peaceful and better world
through sport and the Olympic ideal is a testament to
the universal nature of sport and its importance in
human society.

I am convinced that, with the support of all
United Nations Member States and their peoples, the
games of the twenty-ninth Olympiad will surely be a
complete success.
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
Mr. Jacques Rogge, President of the International
Olympic Committee to the General Assembly, and
Mr. Liu Qi, President of the Beijing Organizing
Committee for the Games of the Twenty-Ninth
Olympiad.
Today, the General Assembly will hold a debate
under agenda item 49, “Sport for peace and
development”, and consider draft resolution A/62/L.2
regarding the contribution that the Olympics can make
to that overarching goal.
In 2005, world leaders committed to promoting
the role of sport in creating peace, achieving the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and
improving public health. The convening power of sport
is unsurpassed, even by the United Nations. While the
United Nations has 192 Member States, the
Association of National Olympic Committees has 205
members. As the President of the Beijing Organizing
Committee, Mr. Liu Qi, rightly pointed out, the United
Nations and the Olympic Movement are natural allies.

07-57301

I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate China on the honour of holding the
twenty-ninth Olympic Games in Beijing in 2008. The
main themes of the Games — “Green Olympics”,
“High-tech Olympics” and “People’s Olympics” — are
strongly supported by this house. I recently visited the
Olympic sites in Beijing and noticed with great
pleasure the enthusiasm and pride on the faces of the
Chinese people who are constructing them.
Sport contributes to economic and social
development. It improves health and personal growth,
in particular for young people, and provides real
alternatives to violence and crime. The United Nations
works closely with the International Olympic
Committee to develop strategic partnerships with the
international sport community to promote education,
health, HIV/AIDS prevention, gender equality,
environmental protection, peace and reconciliation.
The Secretary-General’s report, entitled “Sport
for development and peace: progress and prospects”
(A/62/325), sets out many concrete examples of
initiatives that Member States, United Nations funds,
programmes
and
agencies,
non-governmental
organizations and the private sector have undertaken to

3

A/62/PV.40

promote the agenda to implement the three-year Action
Plan nationally and internationally. I would like to
commend those Member States that have reported
taking concrete steps to enhance national policies and
strategies that advance sport for development and
peace, including by addressing gender equality and
women’s empowerment.
I would also like to note the work undertaken by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Liberia to use
sport to bring previously warring factions together; by
the United Nations Population Fund, working with
national Governments and sports associations to use
sport as a vehicle to promote life skills and responsible
sexual behaviour to prevent HIV/AIDS; and by the
United Nations Development Programme to mobilize
resources to achieve the MDGs in Africa, Asia and
Latin America by organizing football matches against
poverty, and in Burundi, Rwanda, Sri Lanka and
Indonesia, where sport has been integrated into postconflict and humanitarian programmes.
However, the Secretary-General recommends a
more systematic follow-up by all Member States and
United Nations bodies to more effectively use sport as
a tool to achieve the Millennium Development Goals,
and greater recognition of its value to promote healthy
lives and peace.
If we are going to build a world of greater
tolerance, mutual understanding and peace, sport must
continue to be used to channel energies away from
aggression and self-destruction and into learning and
self-respect. That is, indeed, the essence of the
Olympic spirit and ideal.
Mrs. Moutawakel (Morocco) (spoke in French):
It is an honour and a privilege for me to address the
Assembly in my capacity as Minister for Youth and
Sport of the Government of His Majesty the King of
Morocco, and as an Olympic champion and member of
the International Olympic Committee (IOC).
Ever since the establishment of ekecheria, or
“Olympic Truce”, in ancient Greece, the permanent
immunity of the Olympia sanctuary has been
recognized. Athletes, artists and their families, as well
as ordinary pilgrims, were able to travel safely in order
to participate in and attend the Olympic Games and
then return home. As the opening of the Games
approached, the sacred Truce was advocated and

4

announced by people travelling from one citadel to
another to transmit the message.
It is on the basis of that ancient international
agreement that the IOC took the initiative of ensuring
respect for the Olympic Truce, with the support of the
General Assembly, in a world where armed conflicts
are constantly increasing. Thus, at its forty-eighth
session, the General Assembly adopted on 25 October
1993 a resolution on respect for the Olympic Truce, of
which the Kingdom of Morocco was a co-sponsor. At
that session — a historic one for the Olympic
Movement — another resolution was adopted
proclaiming 1994 as the International Year for Sport
and the Olympic Ideal, commemorating the centenary
of the IOC, founded in 1894 at the Sorbonne
University in Paris by the French pedagogue Baron
Pierre de Coubertin.
It seems clear to me that the basic principles of
the Olympic Charter are very closely linked to the
objectives of the United Nations. The effort to educate
and protect young people so that they can help build a
better and peaceful world is a noble objective that the
Kingdom of Morocco has always supported by
sponsoring United Nations resolutions in that area. The
social and universal dimension of sport has been
frequently
stressed
by
His
Majesty
King
Mohammed VI, as evidenced by the special importance
that the Government of Morocco attaches to making all
sports available to everyone throughout the country for
the well-being of young people and the population as a
whole.
Sport is an instrument that can usefully serve to
promote peace, dialogue, reconciliation, solidarity and
the search for diplomatic and peaceful solutions. Sport
also involves competition and an effort to surpass not
only an adversary, but oneself as well. It represents a
civilized approach involving civilized behaviour in
strict respect for rules.
Many
United
Nations
institutions
have
successfully cooperated with the Olympic Movement
in the humanitarian sphere by popularizing measures
through the spokesmanship of world-renowned
athletes. The United Nations has also worked to
promote sport for the building of peace. The substantial
contribution of sport to the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals has not only been
highlighted, but is stressed in resolution 55/2 of

07-57301

A/62/PV.40

8 September 2000, entitled United Nations Millennium
Declaration.
Sport is a human right. The Charter of Physical
Education and Sport, adopted by UNESCO in 1978,
stipulates that all human beings have the fundamental
right to physical education and sport. Similarly, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child recognizes the
right of the child to rest and leisure, to engage in play
and recreational activities appropriate to the age of the
child.
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women also stresses the
importance of access to sport. Women have the right
and the capacity to be involved at all levels of social
life. It is therefore our duty to expand the role of
women in society and to make it easier for them to
assume positions of responsibility. I am pleased and
proud to note that there are seven women ministers in
the current Government of Morocco under the
leadership of Prime Minister Abbas El Fassi.
We are also all concerned about protecting the
environment. Although significant progress has been
made since the 1992 Rio Earth Summit, the IOC was
the first body to ensure that its Earth Covenant was
signed by all national Olympic committees and
international federations at the 1992 Barcelona
Olympic Games. The main issue, however, is that,
when they engage in sport, human beings want to do so
in an unpolluted environment, thus helping to protect
the natural world that fills us with joy and gives us
food and drink. To be sure, the Olympic Games and
sport cannot make the world better definitively, but
sport requires sharing, gives men and women the
opportunity to get in good physical shape, and helps
children to understand the meaning of victory,
excellence and team spirit.
I ran for the pleasure of sport. That opened so
many horizons for me and helped me to deal with
numerous social pressures. I consider myself today to
be an ambassador of sport and of my country, dutybound to share the experience that I earned so dearly,
as well as the true value of sport in comforting all
those who suffer under prejudice and unequal
opportunities.
Volunteers are the most important resource that
sport enjoys in its development. It is therefore
necessary to promote the work of volunteers who serve
communities in a spirit of solidarity. However, we need

07-57301

to combat such scourges as drugs, doping and
HIV/AIDS in order to protect the health and well-being
of our young people. Violence and racism in the
context of sport have also become an issue of serious
concern, and we must therefore stress a policy of
preventive education to ensure that they do not spread,
particularly among young people.
In August 2005, the Kingdom of Morocco hosted
the Second Pan-African Youth Leadership Summit and
identified its priority objective as mobilizing young
people through sport and encouraging actions
undertaken by private and public partners to raise
young Moroccans’ awareness of the benefits of sport,
education, health, development and peace. In
application of the principle of sport for all and in
keeping with General Assembly resolution 61/10,
entitled “Sport as a means to promote education,
health, development and peace”, Morocco has
undertaken a series of activities to ensure that sport is
understood as the right of all individuals, without
distinction of race or social class.
The sport policy adopted by the Kingdom of
Morocco has allowed us to promote activities for
young people in rural and exurban environments and to
prioritize the participation of girls and women in sport.
Our policy has had the positive impact of significantly
raising the number of members of national sport
federations. In 2006, it helped over 292,000 young
people by instituting a national sport programme
involving sports schools and awareness-raising
activities for various sports, as well as inter-communal
tournaments. Moreover, Morocco’s resolve to ensure
the participation of disabled people in sport has made
sport a tool of social integration for that sector of the
population by encouraging the disabled to participate
in various international sporting events.
The national human development initiative
launched by His Majesty King Mohammed VI on
18 May 2005 attaches particular importance to sport in
the implementation of development projects throughout
the country. It recognizes that participation is critical to
the success of sporting activities designed to benefit
the youth of Morocco. Indeed, the projects that have
been undertaken in the context of that initiative have
created a true socio-cultural dynamic in the less
prosperous rural and urban districts through the
organization of events and the construction of sports
facilities. In 2006, over 70,000 people, including
26,000 women, participated in sporting events, and

5

A/62/PV.40

21 sports facilities were constructed, while 13 others
are in the process of completion.
I was privileged and honoured to participate as an
athlete in the Olympic Games and through my
responsibilities in the international Olympic family to
contribute, on behalf of my country, to the
implementation of the Olympic ideal that is dear to all
of us and should guide our steps as we seek to build a
world of peace, development and well-being for all.
My presence here in the General Assembly is, in fact,
but the simple continuation of my country’s
commitment to implementing the aims and principles
of the United Nations and to promoting and applying
the Olympic ideal.
In that regard, I take this opportunity to express
my country’s support for draft resolution A/62/L.2,
entitled “Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal”. As a sponsor of the draft
resolution, Morocco seeks to demonstrate its tireless
support for the principles and ideals contained therein.
I also take this pleasant opportunity to
congratulate the people and Government of China,
which are preparing to host the summer Olympics in
August 2008. My delegation is convinced that the
games to be held in that great country, with its
millennial civilization, will be an opportunity once
again to reaffirm our devotion to Olympic values and
will certainly make a significant contribution to
renewing the Olympic ideal.
The Kingdom of Morocco is convinced that sport
is a preparation for life that guarantees the
development of the individual and the enhancement of
the individual’s ability to serve sustainable
development, community and country. Better yet,
sport, which propagates such humanist values as
tolerance and understanding among peoples, is an
indispensable element and enduring school of life that
we must continue to cultivate to ensure peace and
solidarity in the international arena.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea, who will
speak on behalf of the Asian States.
Ms. Park (Republic of Korea) (spoke in
Chinese): On behalf of the Asian States, the delegation
of the Republic of Korea is speaking in support of the
draft resolution entitled “Building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal”. We are

6

convinced that the August 2008 Olympic Games to be
held in Beijing under the themes “Green Olympics”,
“High-tech Olympics” and “People’s Olympics” will
be crowned with success.
As a country of Asia, which has twice hosted the
Olympic Games, the Republic of Korea expects the
Beijing Games — the third to be held on our
continent — will contribute to world peace and
conciliation, as well as to regional peace and
reconciliation. We also hope that Members will respect
the Olympic Truce and support the initiative of sport
for human development.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Peru, who will speak on behalf of the
Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Next year, Beijing will host the twenty-ninth Olympic
Games from 8 to 24 August and the 2008 Beijing
Paralympic Games from 6 to 17 September. Those
events will focus the world’s attention on thousands of
athletes who will do their best in the practice of a
number of activities within the 35 Olympic sporting
disciplines.
The impressive mobilization of resources, efforts
and dreams that are part of the Olympic Games also
offers another opportunity to recall the Olympic ideal
and to use sport as a means to promote peace and
understanding among human beings. The embodiment
of that ideal involves the athletes, their trainers, the
judges, the sports authorities and the many others who
will gather in Beijing next year. However, it is also an
opportunity to promote the ideal of peace through the
observance of the Olympic Truce. We hope that the
Truce will be observed around the world, and that, at
the very least, the clash of arms and the tragedy of war
will be suspended during the celebration of the
Olympic Games. The Olympic Truce also must be an
occasion to open a space for dialogue, peace and
reconciliation where conflicts and violence are
entrenched.
The practice of sport is also an opportunity to
promote the development of human beings. It is
therefore necessary to recall the important role that
sport should play in the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals agreed in 2000, as
well as the commitments assumed in that regard by our
heads of State and Government at the 2005 Summit.
The United Nations must continue supporting such

07-57301

A/62/PV.40

initiatives in order to put the incentives and potential
resulting from the practice of sport within reach of all
human beings.
Taking such considerations into account, and on
behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, I am pleased to express the support of our
region for the draft resolution submitted by the
delegation of China under the title “Building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”,
as well as our commitment to helping ensure that the
Olympic ideal is the best legacy of the Olympic and
Paralympics Games that Beijing will host in 2008.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Benin, who will speak on behalf of
the African States.
Mr. Ehouzou (Benin) (spoke in French): The
African Group thanks you, Sir, for convening this
plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the
importance of promoting sport for peace and
development. We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the item under consideration.
We welcome the presence here today of the
President of the International Olympic Committee, the
President of the Beijing Organizing Committee for the
Games of the Twenty-Ninth Olympiad, and
Mrs. Moutawakel, whose name is well known among
young Africans because of the extraordinary feats of
prowess she has accomplished, thereby earning special
renown for African women and African sports.
The report offers a thorough overview of the
various aspects and issues involved. It identifies in a
very explicit and informative way the progress
achieved during the first year of the three-year road
map for the implementation of the United Nations
Action Plan to strengthen the contribution of sports to
peace and development.
In describing activities carried out at various
levels, the report helps us to appreciate the extent to
which sport has been instrumental in fostering peace
and development. We commend the fact that the report
encompasses all actors and stakeholders, with due
regard for the dynamic of their mobilization, and
accounts for the policies and strategies applied.
Mr. Jallow (Gambia), Vice-President, took the
Chair.

07-57301

The report attests to the flourishing in many
countries of the invaluable potential of sport as a tool
for strengthening international peace and security and
understanding among the people of the United Nations.
The activities carried out have given true meaning to
the spirit of the Olympic Truce. We welcome the
peacebuilding initiatives launched in countries
emerging from conflict, and especially the assistance
provided to them in restoring their full participation in
the world Olympic Movement and international events.
Similarly, the report shows that sport has been a
powerful lever in the pursuit of the internationally
agreed development goals, especially the Millennium
Development Goals, and the high value assigned to
social integration efforts targeting the various
categories of people with special needs.
We welcome with genuine satisfaction the
manifold partnerships and initiatives that have paved
the way for a worldwide mobilization involving not
only Member States, but also the United Nations funds,
programmes and specialized agencies, as well as
governmental and non-governmental organizations and
sports organizations. We particularly commend the
United Nations Office of Sport for Development and
Peace, and especially the Special Adviser, for their
endeavours to ensure the necessary support for the
most important events staged in the process of
implementing the Action Plan. It is worth highlighting
in this debate the fact that the Office displayed a high
degree of commitment by organizing the Global Youth
Leadership Summit in 2006, an outstanding initiative
for which it deserves full recognition.
We commend the Special Advisor for his
endeavours to help establish close cooperation between
the African Union and the European Union, with the
full involvement of African institutions, devoted to
promoting the development of sporting activities in
African countries.
As regards the draft resolution entitled “Building
a peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal” and the issues it addresses, we should
like to place on record the adherence of the African
Group, which shares the concerns motivating it and the
solicitations it contains.
In less than a year, the twenty-ninth Olympic
Games will take place in China. We welcome the
resolve of the Government and people of China to
perpetuate that global sporting event, which will take

7

A/62/PV.40

place in the spirit that was born with the first games in
ancient times. The modern Olympic Games represent a
meeting of young people for peace in 2008 in full
compliance with international standards, because sport
promotes the building of a better world and encourages
development, including the fulfilment of the
Millennium Development Goals. We congratulate
China for having earnestly assumed the task of
organizing the Olympic Games to be held in Beijing, in
accordance with international norms under the motto
“One World, One Dream”, as well for its joint
endeavours in the social field at the local, national,
regional and global levels.
Africa will make its contribution to the
observance of the Olympic Truce called for in the draft
resolution. No other continent needs more than Africa
to harness the positive energy generated by sport for
such
encounters,
mutual
understanding
and
reconciliation. It is in the interest of African
Governments and peoples to take advantage of that
opportunity to enhance awareness of the need to foster
the culture of peace within and among the countries
through the promotion of dialogue by maximizing the
impetus anticipated from active participation in the
forthcoming Beijing Olympiads.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): My
delegation has taken note with great satisfaction of the
Secretary-General’s report entitled “Sport for
development and peace: progress and prospects”,
which he has submitted to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session to review the steps taken over the
past year to implement the three-year Action Plan
included in last year’s report of the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General’s report recalls yet again
the source of the enthusiasm for sport for development
and peace. Sport is an effective and efficient tool for
meeting so many of humanity’s challenges. As
reported, many Member States, as well as United
Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies,
have benefited over the past year from sport in
successfully addressing such pressing issues as racism,
the plight of street children, gender inequality,
traumatized youth and obesity all around the world. It
is all the more encouraging as a clear sign that the
International Year for Sport and Physical Education in
2005 and previous General Assembly resolutions are
having a lasting effect. Sport is no longer seen merely
as a desirable asset; it is now recognized as a costeffective tool for advancing human development. The

8

fact that this shift has been achieved within only a few
years is remarkable in and of itself.
Switzerland is therefore pleased by the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to renew the mandate of his Special
Adviser on Sport for Development and Peace. The
current Special Adviser and his support team have
again this year delivered a convincing performance and
Switzerland thanks them for their fruitful efforts.
However, we agree with the recent statement of the
Secretary-General that their work is not finished.
The Special Adviser must remain the global
advocate to lead the efforts of the United Nations
system to promote sport as a tool for development and
peace. Moreover, as reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the Special Adviser is in a unique
position to facilitate partnerships across all sectors of
society. The United Nations needs a Special Adviser to
pursue that useful and important task.
Finally, the Special Adviser represents the
Secretary-General and the United Nations system at
various global sporting events, such as the 2008
Olympic Games in Beijing. That allows him not only
to promote sport for peace and development, but also
directly to address people around the globe on behalf
of the United Nations.
Since its inception, Switzerland has been one of
the main supporters of the Office of the Special
Adviser. In addition, together with the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations, we
chair the Group of Friends of Sport for Development
and Peace, composed of 28 permanent representatives
to the United Nations.
To date, the status of the Office of the Special
Adviser has been provisional and somewhat uncertain.
Given the Secretary-General’s recent decision to renew
the Special Adviser’s mandate, Switzerland, on behalf
of the Group of Friends, has been collaborating with
the Office of the Special Adviser and the Secretariat,
along with all other interested Members, to identify
feasible options for a more stable arrangement. We
therefore welcome the Secretariat’s plans to establish a
trust fund on sport for development and peace within
the secretariat in Geneva, with a point of contact in
New York.
The formal establishment of an Office of the
Special Adviser would be a strong signal that the
United Nations intends to continue promoting the use

07-57301

A/62/PV.40

of sport as a tool for advancing development and
peace. Moreover, we hope that the new arrangement
will ease the way for more Member States to provide
financial support for the activities of the Special
Adviser. There is urgent need for such support and we
call on them all to provide additional resources to
enable the Special Adviser’s team adequately to
support the core functions of the Special Adviser.
Switzerland is prepared to continue to do so. We also
hope that the General Assembly will have the
opportunity at this session to decide on a resolution on
sport for peace and development. Such a resolution
could welcome a more stable structure, confirm its
strategic orientation and ask the Secretary-General to
report back on this issue at the sixty-third session of
the General Assembly.
My delegation takes this opportunity to express
its full support for the draft resolution entitled
“Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal”. We are convinced that such
initiatives can have concrete results and ensure that the
Games are conducted in peace.
Mr. Pataki (United States of America): Today,
the Assembly has the honour of invoking the spirit of
the Olympic Truce. For several Olympiads, the United
Nations has advocated the Olympic Truce with a view
to protecting, as far as possible, the interests of the
athletes and sport in general, and to contributing to the
quest for peaceful and diplomatic solutions to conflicts.
It is a distinct privilege to welcome as witnesses
to our work this morning members of the International
Olympic Committee (IOC), led by IOC President
Jacques Rogge and including senior American
members Ms. Anita DeFrantz and Mr. James Easton.
Further, it is with delight that the United States
delegation notes the presence of the United States
Olympic Committee, led by its Chief of International
Relations, Mr. Robert Fasulo. The distinguished
service of those leaders and countless other volunteers
has indeed built a better and more peaceful world
through sport and the Olympic ideal. Let me just add
that it is an honour for me, as a former Governor of the
state of New York, which is proud to have twice hosted
the winter Olympics, to rise in honour of this
delegation.
The practice of heralding an Olympic Truce
during the games to enable the safe passage and
participation of attendees through areas of conflict is

07-57301

among the oldest of accords, dating from 776 BC.
History reveals that the Olympic Truce has transcended
differences whenever people meet people on the fields
of fair play.
As has been the case on eight occasions in this
Hall since 1993, the United States is honoured to be
among the sponsors of today’s draft resolution
proclaiming the Olympic Truce, entitled “Building a
better and more peaceful world through sport and the
Olympic ideal”.
But it is not so much that the Assembly proclaims
the Truce as that its action today essentially validates
the natural, truce-like atmosphere that prevails
throughout the world community whenever countries
meet on Olympic fields. In that sense, the Olympic
Truce was revived not by this Assembly in 1993;
rather, it was revived upon the convening of the
modern Olympic Games themselves in 1896. As in
ancient times, the Olympic Truce’s central purpose has
been to enable the safe passage and participation of all
concerned with the Games. Indeed, it has contributed
to that end through the centuries during war and peace.
Historical interpretations differ slightly. Did the
ancient games come before the Truce among warring
States, or was the ancient Truce necessary for the
passage and participation of those who were otherwise
enemies to meet at ancient Olympia? What is certain is
that the Olympic Truce, attributed to the Oracle at
Delphi, is at the pinnacle of the principles and purposes
of Olympism.
To understand better the heritage of the Truce,
Olympic historians are now identifying more closely
the wording of the ancient Truce. They know that it
was inscribed on a discus solemnly displayed in the
Temple of Hera adjacent to the ancient stadium at
Olympia.
The world witnessed extraordinary human
achievement in the shadow of that temple, not only
centuries ago, but in recent months. Superhuman
efforts contained by mere metres the rampaging fires
that nearly engulfed the ancient sites of Olympia.
Brave firefighters preserved the sites from which the
heralds were sent forth to call for the safe passage of
all the Games. The ferocious fire threatened the heart
of the Olympic Movement; the fire was overcome.
Having been tamed, now it will ignite the Olympic
torch on its way from the ancient fields to modern
Beijing.

9

A/62/PV.40

Today’s draft resolution exhorts the world to
overcome similar threats — geopolitical threats — and
to similarly tame them so as to ignite humankind to
pursue the goals and ideals of international
understanding, security and prosperity, as envisioned in
the United Nations Charter.
Today, Member States adopt the Olympic Truce
at the United Nations. Next August, competitors will
swear the athletes’ oath of fair play at the opening
ceremonies. Let those solemn practices inspire all
others to make their own truces with conflicts in their
lives that keep them from pursuing their own goals and
ideals. Bringing the Olympic Truce closer to home
takes us from being spectators of excellence to being
actual participants. Let today’s draft resolution be
implemented at all levels: intergovernmental, national,
community, household and personal.
Intergovernmentally, the Olympic Truce will
continue to enliven various forms of United Nations
collaborations in the field to promote peace through
sport. Nationally, the Olympic Truce might be further
interpreted to suggest a time-out from societal unrest as
each country supports its Olympic competitors.
Communities and households can draw heavily on the
example of Olympic accomplishment, and so inspired
might commit to excellence in everyday pursuits.
Individual witnesses to the Games can see fair play at
work, and so moved might commit to fighting
temptations that otherwise would keep them from
realizing their goals and ideals.
So today, our consideration here reminds the
world to prepare for the forthcoming Games in spirit as
well as in body. Sport is not an end in itself, but rather
a means to educate the youth of the world for the
harmonious development of mankind.
To promote the Olympic Truce into concrete
action, the IOC established the International Olympic
Truce Foundation, which is based in Athens. Its
programmes lead to global support and observance of
the Olympic Truce and to the steady shaping of a
culture of peace. To promote dialogue, the Foundation
conducts the prestigious International Forum on Sport
for Peace and the Olympic Truce that meets biennially
in Olympia.
Promoting such initiatives in favour of the
Olympic Truce requires partnerships among the
members of the Olympic family, international and
national
organizations
and
non-governmental

10

organizations that contribute to the cause of peace.
Above all, the Truce and its initiatives are those of the
people of the world for the people of the world.
The United States delegation recognizes and
supports opportunities such as today’s draft resolution
for building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal.
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that, immediately following the adjournment
of this meeting, there will be an informal segment to
hear a statement by the President of the International
Olympic Committee.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for the report that forms the basis of today’s
debate, as contained in document A/62/325 and entitled
“Sport for development and peace: progress and
prospects”.
We also welcome the efforts of Mr. Adolf Ogi,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sport for
Development and Peace, and his contribution to the
dissemination of messages regarding the value of
sports for development.
My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Peru on behalf of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States regarding draft resolution A/62/L.2,
entitled “Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal”. I should like to take this
opportunity to make some specific comments on the
broader subject of sport for peace and development.
The Government of the Republic of Guatemala
attaches great importance to that subject, because
physical activity for health as well as sport and
recreation in all their forms are considered a right of all
Guatemalans.
Since the signing of the Agreement on a Firm and
Lasting Peace in 1996, the Ministry of Culture and
Sports has made every effort to contribute to its
implementation. That institution has aimed all of its
programmes and activities at building a culture of
peace based on the attitudes and values developed by
Guatemalan
society.
Mindful
of
Guatemalan
multiculturalism, the Ministry seeks to strengthen
peaceful coexistence through socio-cultural exchanges,
respect for differences, appreciation of creativity,
social organization and links between human beings

07-57301

A/62/PV.40

and between them and nature — all in a context of
long-term activities to promote peace and sustainable
human development.

of the International Olympic Committee in July. We are
grateful for the support of all those who participated,
and we hope to see them in our country once again.

Recently, the Ministry of Culture and Sports,
together with the Presidency of the Republic of
Guatemala, has implemented a programme to bring
recreation to detention centres. The programme
consists of promoting sport as a means of social
integration, rehabilitation and equal opportunity. In
addition, a social reintegration programme is aimed at
individuals and groups considered socially at risk:
prisoners, members of street groups, child workers and
refugees, including handicapped members of such
groups.

Furthermore, I wish to stress the need for
continued efforts to fully incorporate sport and
physical education into development programmes.
Appropriate assistance should also be given to
developing countries in order to mobilize the resources
necessary to improve sports infrastructures and
facilities, which benefit the health and wholesome
development of children and young people.

Among the activities carried out with these
groups, we should mention schools for chess, training
and recreation, aimed at juvenile delinquents; sport
events for street children, workers and shantytown
residents; national barrier-free games and a chess
school for the blind. There are also other initiatives
that involve recreational sports training schools, such
as the “Peace Bowl” rural soccer championship and
sports coaching for disabled persons, and programmes
to exchange war toys for educational toys, supported
by volunteers from civil society.
Furthermore, specific programmes have been
developed for children, young people and older adults.
The children’s programme provides children with sport
and recreation opportunities through various activities
enabling them to use free time in a healthful way. It
encourages children to participate in sports such as
athletics, basketball and soccer, and it seeks to promote
moral and social values through physical activities.
The main objective of the youth programme is to
promote productive activity by young people through
sports and to identify, support and strengthen youth
leaders who can promote sports in their communities.
The programme for older adults, aimed at those aged
50 and above, seeks to improve their quality of life
through physical, recreational and cultural activities. It
is worth noting that 75 per cent of those participating
in this programme are women.
My delegation welcomed the entry into force of
the International Convention against Doping in Sport
on 1 February 2007 and wishes to report that it is
already under consideration by the Congress of the
Republic for approval. Likewise, Guatemala was also
pleased to have successfully hosted the 119th session

07-57301

I also wish to commend the work carried out in
collaboration with United Nations peacekeeping
missions and with the support of the International
Olympic Committee. We are confident that such
initiatives and programmes will also be implemented
with the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
to benefit the Haitian people.
In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms the
importance of implementing strategies that incorporate
sport more effectively into various health, education,
development and peace programmes at the local,
national, regional and global levels. In that connection,
we welcome the initiative of the Regional Bureau for
Latin America and the Caribbean of the United Nations
Development Programme, in collaboration with the
United Nations New York Office of Sport for
Development and Peace. The initiative is aimed at
implementing a programme in Central America to use
sport as an instrument for the inclusion of young
people and the promotion of peace.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I am
speaking on behalf of Chile to express our support for
draft resolution A/62/L.2, entitled “Building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”,
just introduced by Mr. Liu Qi, President of the Beijing
Organizing Committee for the Olympic Games. We are
convinced that sport is an effective vehicle for
promoting not only peace and development, but also an
environment of tolerance, dialogue and respect —
which are so necessary in today’s world — in the spirit
of the Olympic Truce.
I should like to recall that the link between sport
and peace is not just theoretical. In the case of Haiti
and the United Nations Mission in that country, it has
hosted soccer teams from Brazil and Chile, impressing
on tens of thousands of Haitians the idea of solidarity

11

A/62/PV.40

and peace through sport. We should have more such
occasions.
On behalf of Chile, I should also like to say that
we received with great interest the report of the
Secretary-General entitled “Sport for development and
peace: progress and prospects” (A/62/325 and Corr.1),
which describes the first year of implementation of the
Action Plan, which we adopted some time ago. We are
optimistic about the Plan, because we consider it an
excellent road map that will enable us not only to guide
the efforts of Governments, civil society and
multilateral organizations, but also to have a very
positive impact through the expansion and
strengthening of plans and programmes being
implemented in all of our countries.
One problem that we find particularly worrisome
derives from the relationship between sport and
physical health. According to international studies,
people who do not engage in physical exercise form a
high-risk group with significantly higher mortality
rates than people who exercise sufficiently.
For that reason, this draft resolution presented by
China, as well as others that will be presented soon,
should contribute to the implementation of public
policies to promote sport and physical education,
derived from the creation of a worldwide culture of
sport and physical education. This programme should
bring together young people, adults and seniors;
handicapped athletes; men and women; inhabitants of
developed and developing countries — everyone
should come together to improve their quality of life
and contribute to a less violent, healthier, more tolerant
world — all within the Olympic ideal.
Of course, promoting sporting activities and
physical education is the sovereign responsibility of
each country. But at the multilateral level there is a
need for a permanent, sufficiently representative
structure to allow us to cooperate with national efforts.
In principle, we are pleased that the Office of the
Secretary-General’s Special Adviser on Sport,
Development and Peace was established in Geneva,
with a liaison office in New York, under the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs. However,
we need such a structure to be established in a
permanent way with sufficient financial resources to
suitably carry out its mandate. That financing should
be stable and predictable and should preferably come
from the regular budget or from the donors community.

12

In a different but related context, we would like
to congratulate the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Sport for Development and Peace,
Mr. Adolph Ogi, whose Office, together with other
bodies, has taken a number of actions to promote sport
and physical education; the New York Office has
joined in these efforts in an outstanding way.
Finally, we believe it necessary to establish
strategic alliances among the United Nations, the
private sector and civil society in order to mobilize
resources and create national capacities. Here,
foundations, non-governmental organizations and
sports federations have a central role to play. At the
same time, the United Nations should strengthen its
ties with international organizations such as the
Fédération internationale de football association
(FIFA) and the International Olympic Committee.
As we promote sport, peace and development, we
are
facilitating
the
implementation
of
the
internationally
agreed
development
objectives,
including those of the Millennium Development Goals,
as my colleague from Benin has stated on behalf of the
African Group. As a member of the Group of Friends
of Sport for Development and Peace, Chile is satisfied
with the work the Group has done thus far, and will
continue to work actively with other delegations as we
try to achieve the goals we have set for ourselves.
Mr. Naik (India): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on “Sport for peace and
development: progress and prospects” (A/62/325 and
Corr.1). We note the well-organized structure and good
presentation of information in the report, which
provides an overview of activities undertaken on
various fronts by Member States, the United Nations
system and other stakeholders. It also makes
recommendations for further action based on lessons
learned.
India supports the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to highlight the useful role that sport can play
in consolidating peace and furthering development.
Sport is an easy and relatively inexpensive way of
engaging the energies of youth in a positive and
constructive manner. It teaches the spirit of
sportsmanship that generates tolerance of spirit and
action and respect for the opponent. It also inculcates
discipline through the observance of the rules of the
game. It develops camaraderie and good fellowship

07-57301

A/62/PV.40

that enhances the ability of communities to coexist
peacefully.
The contribution of sport to furthering
development is also recognized. A healthy mind lives
in a healthy body. Sport provides physical activity,
enhances oxygen intake and improves stamina. It
brings people together for a common purpose. Its
enjoyable format provides a good vehicle for
propagating difficult social messages. Sport improves
productivity and fosters social harmony and discipline.
Indeed, sport can play a subtle, positive and
constructive role in development and peace.
India believes that activities related to sport and
physical education are a necessary component of
human resource development. India has a long tradition
of sport and physical education. Ancient Indian
scriptures and literature describe the important place in
princely education of such sports as archery, weightlifting and wrestling. A mastery over such sports was
considered as important as the knowledge of scriptures.
Education in modern India is trying to continue and
build upon this heritage and respect for sport and
physical education.
In view of the key role of sport and games in
national life, the Government of India has taken a
number of initiatives to improve the standard of sport
in the country. There is wide recognition of the need
for broad-basing sport and for the provision of modern
sport infrastructure. The Government has made efforts
towards upgrading the skills of the coaching fraternity,
the creation of sport infrastructure and the construction
of an adequate sport-science backup. Efforts are also
being made to encourage national sport federations to
make their operations more effective and focused.
The involvement of society at large, particularly
business and industry, is adding to the efforts of the
Government. To encourage sport and sportspersons, a
number of prestigious awards are bestowed to
recognize their achievements. Several schemes have
been put in place to propagate sport and to provide
incentives for sporting activities. These include
schemes such as the Sports Fund for Pension for
Meritorious Sportspersons, as well as the Promotion of
Sports and Games in Schools programme.
While the welfare of young sportspersons is
covered by the Sport Scholarship Scheme, a National
Welfare Fund has been established to assist retired
sportspersons. A National Sports Development Fund

07-57301

has been set up to mobilize resources. The Ministry of
Youth Affairs and Sports in the Government of India
represents sport at the national level. The Government
has also established the Sport Authority of India to
pursue the twin objectives of broad-basing sport and
nurturing talent in children through the provision of
necessary infrastructure, equipment, coaching and
other facilities. These include a Sports Medicine
Centre and Dope Control Centre.
We agree with the Secretary-General on the need
to enhance the use of sport to help reverse disease and
obesity, especially among young people. The report
mentions the role of sport in reversing the spread of
HIV/AIDS. While sport may have only a limited role
in this regard, the promotion of sport can play a more
critical role in reversing the growing trend of juvenile
diabetes in urban areas. Regular practice of a sport can
also help lower anxiety and high blood pressure caused
by the pressures of modern living among the younger
generation of today.
We note from the report of the Secretary-General
that despite uneven progress, there is evidence
indicating a better integration of sport across all
geographical regions. However, the report points out
that the lack of adequate resources, facilities and
trained personnel continues to be a key constraint in
many countries. Developing countries have to deal
with enormous challenges with limited resources.
These challenges are even more daunting for the least
developed countries.
The complexion of sport has undergone a
transformation in the modern world. The pursuit of
sport today requires the availability of modern and
highly sophisticated equipment, infrastructure and
training. The ready availability of and easy access to
such facilities in the developed world tilts the
international sporting arena towards the developed
world. There is, thus, a solemn need for international
cooperation and assistance for encouraging the
development of sport infrastructure in developing
countries.
In this context, we agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to make sport and physical
education more accessible to larger segments of the
world’s population, especially to those who lack the
opportunity and facilities. We also agree with the need
to promote investment in the expansion of sports
infrastructure and facilities, including through

13

A/62/PV.40

enhanced resources, sports sciences and sports
medicine programmes, particularly in the developing
world. We support the Secretary-General’s call for
greater efforts for promotion of sports and physical
education. That could include advocacy through
participation in sports and non-sporting events. We are
convinced, however, that sporting activities themselves
are the best advocacy tool for the promotion of sports.
We hope therefore that the United Nations system will
focus its efforts on promoting sports through sports
themselves, rather than through conferences and
meetings.
Sport is an inalienable part of the educational
process and a factor for promoting peace, friendship,
cooperation and understanding among peoples. We
agree with the Secretary-General that sport and
physical education are not luxuries in society, and
much less so in the developing world. We must
therefore invigorate our efforts for the promotion of
sports for development and peace.

power of creating a culture of sport as an effective tool
for ethos-building among the youth of all our countries.
Also, the focus of our discussion today is how the
concept of sport, and the virtues it entails, relates to the
core human instincts of peace and security. Let us take
the tradition of the Olympic Truce as an example. The
cessation of all hostilities before, during and after the
Olympic Games in antiquity is a practice recalled and
revered as much today as it was then. So why are we
then unable today to cease hostilities on any grounds,
including through the pursuit of sport, whose purpose
is to remind us that humankind was created for pursuits
more noble than conflict?

Mr. Mavroyiannis (Cyprus): Cyprus has had
strong links with the Olympic concept in modern as
well as ancient times — as matter of fact, since the
inception of the Olympic Games in 776 B.C. — and I
wish to make a few remarks.

If the ancients, with their limited means of
disseminating knowledge and information, were able to
observe such a truce, despite the immense difficulties,
why can we not, with all the means we have to ensure
collective ethos and civilization and to protect human
life as our most valued possession, achieve at least as
much by establishing a corresponding contemporary
practice? The task of ensuring safe passage for athletes
to reach the Games through the Olympic Truce might
be less pertinent now than in the past. But the biggest
contribution of that tradition has never been one of
practical arrangements.

At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
Chinese delegation for tabling resolution A/62/L.2,
entitled “Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal” and wish the Government
of the People’s Republic of China, the host of the 2008
Summer Olympic Games, every success in that
endeavour. I wish also to express appreciation for the
presence here today of the President of the
International Olympic Committee, Mr. Jacques Rogge,
as well as other distinguished representatives of the
Olympic movement, within the framework of
promoting the Games and the preservation of the
Olympic ideals, including fair play.

The creation of a peaceful environment, with the
hope that this would have implications more lasting
than the duration of the Games themselves, was always
consubstantial to the Olympic ideal. More importantly,
inherent in the tradition of the Olympic Truce, there
have always been three key messages: first, the futility
of war, the denunciation of violence and subjugation,
and the superiority of pursuits that bring people
together; secondly, the quest for freedom, shared
values, and the intrinsically noble character of fairness
and synergy; and, thirdly, the recognition of their
contribution to the prosperity of all and to the further
development of culture and civilization.

Sport, especially in the context of the Olympic
Games, whether as an historical or contemporary
concept, is a momentous and perpetually relevant
element in all facets of human life and no less in our
work here at the United Nations.

However, we should recognize that the content of
the draft resolution before us, to which we lend our
support as we traditionally have done, has never been
fully implemented in all its elements, despite its
biannual adoption and unanimous support. We hope
that its letter and spirit will gradually be embedded in
international human custom and that its observance
will be one of those instances when history will repeat
itself.

Sport is an integral part of human development
and well-being, both individual and collective. Its
contribution to development, capacity-building, unity
and bringing people closer together has been evidenced
on many occasions. Often unnoticed, however, is the

14

07-57301

A/62/PV.40

Mr. Noghès (Monaco) (spoke in French): A few
months from now, the People’s Republic of China will
be hosting the twenty-ninth Olympic Games followed
by the Paralympic Games. The Olympics are
traditionally the most widely followed sporting event
throughout the world and that is because they inspire
all peoples in all their diversity to come together in
their admiration for athletes who are doing their best in
peaceful competition.
As was the case for the athletes who met at each
Olympic Games since the forty-eighth session, the
General Assembly has revived the ancient Greek
tradition of the Olympic Truce to recall the extent to
which the Olympic ideal can and must be an example
for promoting peace and understanding among peoples.
Monaco continues to co-sponsor with pride and
conviction the draft resolution entitled “Building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal” (A/62/L.2).
Sport brings together positive energies, when
practiced with respect for effort and work, without
cheating nor the use of stimulants or doping
substances. In hosting his counterpart Ministers of
Sports on the occasion of the twelfth Games of the
Small States of Europe, our Minister of Sports,
Mr. Paul Masseron, Government Advisor for the
Ministry of the Interior, stated that
“doping cannot be accepted, neither in high-level
sports where it jeopardizes competition nor in
individual competition where it destroys the
whole educational thrust of sport, because doping
is no longer today a question of level, age or
discipline”.
Since 2003, the Principality of Monaco has had
an antidoping committee that is involved in
implementing antidoping policies in keeping with the
objectives of the International Convention against
Doping in Sport. Over 150 tests will be conducted in
the Principality this year. His Serene Highness, Prince
Albert II, former Olympic athlete and member of the
International Olympic Committee, has been paying
particular attention to ethics in sports. We therefore
welcome the entry into force of the International
Convention against Doping in Sport in February 2007.
With their breadth, the Olympic Games are a
showcase for 36 different sports. The sense of
brotherhood in sport is within everyone’s grasp. From
refugee camps to street children, from schools to

07-57301

business firms, sports promote the development of the
human being.
A recognition of the humanist aspect of sport
underlay the signing of an agreement between our
Government and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) on 27 June 2007, setting up an
innovative programme on humanistic sport for the
development of urban youth. Drawing on the
educational values of humanist sport, the project is
designed to contribute to the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). It aims to reintegrate young people in
difficulty in disadvantaged areas. Cape Town, South
Africa, was chosen for this partnership with UNDP.
The establishment of a football training centre for
young people is also being studied, along with literacy
and professional training courses.
Members know Prince Albert II’s commitment to
the protection of the environment. The host of the next
Games is the city of Beijing, and we congratulate
Beijing on its efforts at “greening” the Games, as
reflected in the report of the United Nations
Development Programme. Indeed, this is a phenomenal
task in terms of transport management, water
purification, waste recycling and energy efficiency.
New urban centres, with a forested park of
580 hectares, the use of solar energy — all of these are
indispensable investments.
Last June, the Principality of Monaco hosted the
twelfth Games of the Small States of Europe. Prince
Albert II wanted to ensure that this event was
ecologically effective. Following the event, a
declaration was adopted by the heads of State or
Government of the Principality of Andorra, the
Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Iceland, the
Principality of Liechtenstein, the Grand Duchy of
Luxembourg, the Republic of San Marino and the
Principality of Monaco. The declaration recognized the
important potential of sport as a vehicle for values and
a factor in the creation of a true ethic of sustainable
development. Secondly, it recognized that the sport
must be in harmony with the environment. Thirdly, it
stated that the Games of the Small States of Europe
must respect the environment, and called in particular
for carbon-neutral Games in order to minimize their
environmental impact. The organizing country would
commit itself to compensate for greenhouse gas
emissions and any other negative impact relating to the
Games or their preparation, through such initiatives to
protect the environment as it deems most appropriate.

15

A/62/PV.40

Finally, the signatories stated the intention to develop
in their respective countries environmental awareness
based on a spirit of solidarity and leading to
environmentally friendly behaviour. At the initiative of
the Prince Albert II Foundation, it was decided to
measure the greenhouse gas impact of the Games and
to reduce it by all means possible. Monaco will offset
this, including by planting trees.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Sport, peace and development are closely
interconnected. The absence of war is a precondition
for sporting competition. Sporting competition is not a
struggle between enemies, but rather a competition
among partners in their common aspiration for
development. In this period of globalization, when the
world is facing new challenges and threats and when it
is necessary to have a dialogue between civilizations,
we are convinced that international cooperation in the
area of sport can play an important role in overcoming
national and religious enmity and in bringing together
the world community.
The role of sport as an ambassador of peace is
particularly significant when linked to the noble
traditions of the Olympic Truce. It is necessary to
inculcate in future generations a spirit of the culture of
peace, non-violence and tolerance, showing that the
Olympic ideal is not out of date and is still significant.
In this connection, Russia has sponsored and
fully supports draft resolution A/62/L.2 on building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal, and we call on all to observe this
Olympic Truce.
The flame of the Olympic torch should light the
way, leading humankind into the third millennium: a
beacon indicating a world without enmity and violence.
Next year, this flame of peace will illuminate the
ancient city of Beijing, the host of the 2008 summer
Olympic Games. We sincerely wish our Chinese
colleagues every success in organizing this global
event.
Seven years from now, the Olympic baton will be
passed to the Russian city of Sochi, which will host the
Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games. We are
convinced that the Olympics to be held in our country
will provide a significant impetus to the Olympic
Movement and strengthen the values of a healthy
lifestyle. At present, Sochi is building the most modern
sporting facilities and is working at full steam to

16

improve its infrastructure so as to ensure the success of
this major event.
Russia highly values the activities of the United
Nations in enhancing international cooperation in sport
and confirming the ideals of the sporting movement
throughout the world. We welcome the joint initiative
of the United Nations and the International Olympic
Committee (IOC) to promote the inclusion of sport and
physical education in programmes in the fields of
education, health, environmental protection, combating
hunger and improving the status of women.
We believe that support for sport, including at the
political level, may help countries achieve the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). We welcome
the report of the Secretary-General on sport (A/62/325
and Corr.1). A very important role here falls to
Mr. Adolf Ogi, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Sport for Development and Peace. We are
ready to continue our fruitful cooperation with the
Special Adviser, and we support the ongoing activities
of the New York-based United Nations Office of Sport
for Development and Peace, headed by Mr. Djibril
Diallo.
Sport is a universal language, thanks to which
competitors come from many countries, cultures and
faiths. We can thus talk about the significant potential
of sport for diplomacy as a way of ensuring a channel
to promote a culture of peace and dialogue among
civilizations. Pierre de Coubertin said that sport was an
ambassador of peace and a reliable bridge of friendship
and mutual understanding between peoples. We must
make full use of its potential.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report entitled “Sport for
development and peace: progress and prospects”
(A/62/325 and Corr.1). It gives us an overall
assessment of the progress achieved over the past year
on the national, regional and international levels in
implementing strategies and programmes on sport for
development and peace.
As noted in the report, sport has great potential in
making a substantive contribution to enhancing peace
and achieving development goals, as formulated in the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The
increasing role of sport in achieving international
agreement in the field of development, including the

07-57301

A/62/PV.40

MDG targets, was reaffirmed by heads of State or
Government at the 2005 World Summit.
In this context, we certainly value the measures
undertaken by the Secretary-General in implementing
the Action Plan intended to expand and strengthen
United Nations partnerships with Governments, sportrelated organizations and the private sector. The
participation today by the President of the International
Olympic Committee (IOC), Mr. Rogge, in the
consideration of this particular item, underscores the
fact that this Organization of ours and all of its
structures are actively working with this most
prestigious sporting organization on a global level.
The delegation of Kazakhstan welcomes the entry
into force on 1 February 2007 of the International
Convention against Doping in Sport. We believe that
the Convention will make a very significant
contribution to preventing the use of doping in sport,
and will do a lot to eradicate it. In this connection, we
would like to note that an anti-doping laboratory for
sports has begun operation, and in 2007 in Kazakhstan
it was given full laboratory status from the World AntiDoping Agency.
Kazakhstan welcomes the activities of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sport for
Development and Peace and notes the importance of
sport in achieving the goals of development and peace.
We would also like to note with satisfaction a
global summit of young leaders held last year in New
York under the auspices of the United Nations, which
made possible a discussion on the important questions
of propagating sport and mobilizing future youth
leaders.
As we know, sport and physical education are an
important way of teaching tolerance and a culture of
peace, and also of bringing people closer together. In
this connection, the delegation of Kazakhstan
welcomes the activities of the Office of the Special
Adviser and the Information Centres of the United
Nations aimed at propagating the idea of sport as an
instrument for development and peace, and also the
measures undertaken to enhance the role of sport in
building peace.
On behalf of our delegation, I would like to thank
the delegation of China for its draft resolution on peace
and building a better life on the planet through sport,
and the implementation of Olympic sporting ideals. In

07-57301

this connection, Kazakhstan is one of the Members of
the United Nations that co-sponsored this resolution
“Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal” (A/62/L.2). Of course,
Kazakhstan will be most pleased to be participating in
the twenty-ninth Olympic Games in a neighbouring
country, and we have already been taking all of the
necessary steps to ensure that we have as many spots
as possible for our participants in these Olympic
Games. We certainly hope that we will win a good
number of medals as well.
Kazakhstan has been taking comprehensive
measures to make use of sport to the benefit of peace.
In December 2006 a Presidential decree confirmed our
State’s programme to develop physical education and
sport in Kazakhstan for the years 2007 thru 2011. The
programme calls for a set of measures aimed at
ensuring participation in physical education and sport
is as broad as possible, in particular among young
people. This is important for improving their health,
ensuring that we have many skilled athletes and for
bringing our sportsmen up to the international level.
We are working to bring disabled persons into
sports as well. A club of disabled sportsmen is
operative in every region. In the south of Kazakhstan,
we held our second Paralympic Games, with over 500
sports participants from all regions of the country.
Considerable work has been done to develop boarding
schools for children gifted in sports, regional Olympiclevel training centres and Republican Schools for
sports excellence. We would like to note that just this
year, the Republic organized and held over 10,000
events on healthy-lifestyles, involving the participation
of over 1.5 million people.
In 2011, Kazakhstan will be the host of the
seventh Asian Winter Games, and active work is being
done in our country today for holding this very
important event. The appropriate Ministry has already
engaged in negotiations with leading international
architects. We have called for bids for building
facilities near Almaty, and we are designating areas for
these sports facilities. The overall expenditure will
reach $1 billion.
Thus, my delegation believes that we must
maintain the dynamism set by the United Nations and
continue that educational path in implementing broader
measures as well. This is something that we can do to
enhance the cooperation and coordination between

17

A/62/PV.40

Member States in order to come up with a general
vision for the development of sport to benefit peace
throughout the world.
Mr. Mourikis (Greece): It is a great honour for
me to take the floor on agenda item 45 (b) in order to
express my country’s wholehearted support for draft
resolution A/62/L.2.
Four years ago, Greece presented a similar
resolution as it was preparing for the 2004 Athens
Olympics. This year, it is China’s turn to keep the
tradition and table a resolution urging Member States
to observe, within the framework of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Olympic Truce during the twentyninth Olympic Games and Paralympic Games to be
held in Beijing. The wide support extended to this
year’s resolution stresses the international community’s
recognition for the principles it embodies and our
common goal: to celebrate the Games in peace,
harmony and friendship. We wish China every success
in organizing the Olympic Games.
In bringing the idea of the Olympic Truce to the
forefront, we encourage the notion that it is possible to
create lasting peace from a pause in hostilities. That is,
in fact, how the Olympic Games were conceived in the
first place. In antiquity, the implementation of the
Olympic Truce entailed a cessation of all hostilities in
order to allow the athletes and spectators to travel to
and from Olympia to attend this sacred celebration of
human achievement.
In today’s world the message could not be more
relevant. We strive for dialogue among civilizations
and cooperation among the rich and the poor, yet
everyday we witness our shortcomings. The Olympic
Truce could be a constructive new approach to help
resolve conflicts. The Olympic ideal speaks the
universal language of peace, in which all peoples can
communicate and share in its values.
The United Nations and the Olympic movement
are natural allies. They share the same goals and
observe the same principles. They are useful tools in
the hands of the international community. It is up to us,
the Member States, to seize the opportunity presented
by this resolution and to observe the Truce for the
benefit of our peoples. We express our appreciation and
support to the International Olympic Committee for its
tireless efforts to promote the Olympic Ideal and build
bridges of understanding and cooperation.

18

Let me stress once again that by adopting, today,
the resolution entitled “Building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal” we take a
positive stance towards life and reality, without any
illusions. We simply state the obvious: that if we can
have peace in the world for just 16 days, then maybe
we can have it for much longer.
Before concluding, may I thank former Governor
Pataki for his reference to the recent fires at the ancient
sites of Olympia. Indeed, the world witnessed
extraordinary human achievement, and I can assure the
Assembly that Olympic torch will ignite again in
Olympia before embarking on its long trip to Beijing.
Mr. Khalfallah (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
should like to start by congratulating the SecretaryGeneral on his report entitled “Sport for development
and peace: progress and prospects” (A/62/235 and
Corr.1), the title of which, by itself, carries hope and
great significance for the future of sport as an activity
that the United Nations is comprehensively supporting.
Tunisia would also like to express its gratitude to
Mr. Adolf Ogi, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Sport for Development and Peace, for all
his efforts and for his activities to ensure the success of
programmes to promote sport throughout the world and
for the benefit of all.
Tunisia fully endorses the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Benin on behalf of the
Group of African States and reaffirms its determination
to continue its work to make sport an activity that
brings peoples together and a factor for world peace
and stability — two essential goals of our
Organization.
Solidarity among peoples at the beginning of the
twenty-first century is not a mere option; it is a
necessity that, we are convinced, sport is capable of
bringing to fruition. We support Mr. Ogi’s activities to
promote, in the words of the Secretary-General’s
report, “a common road map and coherent framework
for action to build global partnerships around sport and
physical education” (A/62/325, para. 72).
Indeed, our President, Mr. Zine El Abidine Ben
Ali, decided to dedicate an entire year to physical
education, in accordance with the Assembly’s launch of
the International Year of Sport and Physical Education
2005 (see resolution 59/10), during which the world
celebrated sport through a broad range of diverse and

07-57301

A/62/PV.40

uniformly important activities, thereby highlighting the
importance unanimously attach to sport and to the
universal nature of this activity. Our duty is now to
press on in this respect and to confirm that this was the
correct choice, to which increasing resources are being
allocated by everyone.
It is beyond dispute that sport today is of growing
interest to the international community. This is seen in
the vast number of sporting events, discussion forums
and activities to popularize sports that have given rise
to an international awareness that favours the role of
sport as a fundamental support for the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals. Sport is also a
symbol of cooperation and of healthy, constructive
friendship.
By sponsoring draft resolution A/62/L.2, entitled
“Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal”, Tunisia expresses once again
its full commitment to the Olympic ideal. We remain
convinced that the forthcoming Olympic Games in
Beijing will be a complete success and a sporting and
moral victory for all participants.
Tunisia is very pleased to note the Secretariat
proposal regarding a fund for sport for development
and peace and hopes that, once it is finalized, all the
arrangements
will
allow
for
the
effective
implementation of the objectives we have set.
Moreover, we are convinced that the formal
establishment of the Office of the Special Adviser will
help to promote the activities undertaken in the sphere
of sport for development and peace and will prove to
be a most valuable asset for the United Nations, which
will thus have a tool to bring people together in a
world that thirsts for dialogue, mutual understanding
and tolerance.
The presence here of the President of the
International Olympic Committee, the President of the
Beijing Organizing Committee for the Games of the
XXIX Olympiad and the Special Adviser for Sport for
Development and Peace shows the scope and
importance that sport has acquired and the need to
ensure that this activity is supported by all.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): Allow me to congratulate
Mr. Kerim on his leadership of the Assembly and to
thank him for convening this important joint debate.
Israel is proud to lend its support to draft
resolution A/62/L.2, entitled “Building a peaceful and

07-57301

better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
Similarly, we welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral, entitled “Sport for development and peace:
progress and prospects” (A/62/325 and Corr.1), which
summarizes the steps taken during the first year of the
three-year road map to implement sport for
development and peace programmes.
Sport offers a common language that speaks of
international friendship and harmony and that can
bridge the global seams of friction. The spirit of
healthy competition provides a channel through which
people of different religious, cultural, racial and
political backgrounds can interact and enhance their
respect for one another.
Within the context of the United Nations, as the
Secretary-General’s report shows, sport contributes to
achieving the Millennium Development Goals and
peace, by raising awareness and promoting values of
cooperation and mutual understanding. No doubt, using
sport as a universal focal point for interaction will bear
fruit in the promotion of education, health,
development and peace.
In our region, we have tried to harness the spirit
of sport to forge relationships and build bridges across
the dark waters of conflict. We hope that these types of
competitions will continue to develop and expand in
the future. Israel has a visibly active network of
organizations that sponsor sport for peace and
development days and that bring children — Jews and
Arabs, Israelis and Palestinians — together under the
umbrella of sport. A number of sport for peace
programmes and festivals occur regularly; notable
among them are those sponsored by the Peres Center
for Peace, founded by our current President, Shimon
Peres. These sport and competition days emphasize
teamwork and cooperation, alongside fostering
commonalities and sharing.
Similarly, the legendary story of Sons of Sakhnin
United, a multi-ethnic Israeli soccer team comprising
Jews, Arabs and others, and its quest to win the
Premier League in Israel, continues to inspire hope and
confidence in the capacity for sport and competition to
inculcate respect and mutual understanding. This year,
the prominence and power of this Cinderella story was
brought to wide attention with the release of a
documentary film on the subject and its appearance in
internationally recognized film festivals.

19

A/62/PV.40

Sons of Sakhnin United embodies the message of
sport as a medium for peace and understanding in
another modality as well. The team plays in a stadium
widely known around the country as the Doha Stadium,
which was built with public funds largely from the
State of Israel and the Qatar National Olympic
Committee. This joint venture between Israel and Qatar
is a sign of the quest for peaceful and neighbourly
relations within our region and the willingness to cross
boundaries to achieve peace and harmony through
sport. The Sons of Sakhnin United team, as we speak,
holds the third position in Israel’s top soccer league.
Unfortunately, not all sporting events are carried
out with the same positivity. Although it is a painful
part of our history, it is also worth remembering what
happened at the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich, when
gunmen from the terrorist group Black September,
disguised as athletes, broke into the Olympic Village
and killed 11 Israeli athletes, coaches and referees. The
reverberations of that abhorrent and monstrous act of
terrorism are felt in Israel — and around the world, for
that matter — to this very day.
In that regard, we hope that the upcoming
summer Olympic Games, to be held in Beijing next
year, will adhere to the values of sport as an ideal way
to stimulate body, mind and spirit, and in turn
overcome barriers of language, politics and religion.
The abuse of sport and international competition for
political purposes is an affront to the very ethos and
virtues of the Olympic tradition.
On the other hand, we know that sport can be
utilized for great good. Just two weeks ago, the Israeli
delegation to the 2007 Special Olympics, held in
Shanghai, returned home from the games with
tremendous pride and in high spirits. The Special
Olympics prove to the world that determination, will
and faith in one’s abilities can overcome any
limitation, regardless of the challenge. The resilience
and commitment of those athletes should inspire us to
utilize sport as an expression of the boundlessness of
the human potential.
While sport has the power to bring people
together, it alone cannot foster enduring peace.
Supporting factors — such as an interest in peace
among different groups, media involvement, strong
participation by civil society and dedication by sport
organizations — are needed if sport is to be an
effective vehicle of peace. Israel strongly believes that

20

to be true. We call on the nations of the world to use
the opportunities provided by sport to foster peace and
development, and to continue promoting those
supporting factors to ensure the widest possible appeal.
Israel pledges itself to fully support such endeavours.
Mr. Seakamela (South Africa): We thank
Mr. Srgjan Kerim, President of the General Assembly,
for organizing today’s debate on the SecretaryGeneral’s report on sport for peace and development
(A/62/325 and Corr.1). We also wish to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for that
comprehensive report.
Since its establishment, the Office of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sport for
Development and Peace has made significant strides
towards the attainment of the objective of utilizing
sport as a tool for development and peace. South Africa
commends the work of the Office in New York and
Geneva. Both offices have contributed to the
advancement of advocacy work within the United
Nations system and beyond aimed at promoting
understanding and support for sport as a tool for
development and peace.
South Africa is committed to the objectives
related to the use of sport as a tool for development
and peace. As a member of the New York-based Group
of Friends of Sport for Development and Peace, we
have worked with others to encourage Member States
to actively integrate sport into their international
cooperation and development policies through the
implementation of relevant United Nations resolutions.
My delegation believes that sport provides a
forum in which to learn skills and discipline,
confidence and leadership, and that it teaches core
principles, such as tolerance, cooperation and respect.
Our leaders have persistently highlighted the potential
that sport has in building social cohesion and national
reconstruction and unity. In this connection, we
remember how our nation was bound together in joy
when we won the Rugby World Cup in 1995 and the
African Soccer Cup of Nations in 1996, and more
recently when we won the Rugby World Cup for the
second time, earlier this year.
South Africa has also partnered and adopted
measures, in compliance with General Assembly
resolutions on sport for development and peace. In this
context, since 2004 we have conducted the Siyadlala
Community Mass Participation Programme and the

07-57301

A/62/PV.40

School Sport Mass Participation Programme. In
addition, our country has partnered with other
countries such as Angola, Australia, China, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and others in
the area of sport for development and peace. We have
also ratified the UNESCO International Convention
against Doping in Sport.

underline the importance of strengthening the sporting
programmes that were launched in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Liberia, in partnership
with United Nations peacekeeping missions in those
countries, and supported by other partners. We
welcome the commencement of similar projects in
other countries, such as Lebanon and Côte d’Ivoire.

South Africa is honoured to have been awarded
the rights to host the Féderation internationale de
football association (FIFA) World Cup in 2010. This is
the first time that this global game is being hosted on
the African continent. The tournament is an important
milestone for the entire continent, and we believe it
provides our country, the region and the continent with
a golden opportunity to boost our sport and tourism
industries. The 2010 World Cup tournament can help
advance our economic development to a higher notch
and fast-track the attainment of elements of the
Millennium Development Goals.

In recognition of the progress made thus far in
the area of sport for development and peace, it is
important that we build on past success and establish
more sustainable progress. In this context, we
encourage the broader international community and, in
particular, the United Nations system to provide
support in promoting sport as a tool for achieving
peace and development.

The African Union (AU) has declared 2007 the
International Year of African Football, underscoring
the United Nations view that sport can be an
instrument to promote unity, solidarity and peace. In
this context, the AU collaborated with the South
African Government and the New York Office of the
Special Adviser on Sport for Development and Peace
on the activities for the International Year of African
Football, as well as for the fiftieth anniversary of the
Confederation of African Football and the lead-up to
the 2010 World Cup.
My delegation expresses its appreciation for the
contribution made by the New York Office of the
Special Adviser on Sport for Development and Peace
in shaping the concept, activities and innovative
approaches of the International Year of African
Football, which was launched at the eighth Summit of
African Union Heads of State, held in Addis Ababa in
January 2007. The Office’s active participation in the
technical workshop for the 2010 FIFA World Cup
African Legacy Programme, which was held in Pretoria
in March of this year, and in the first ministerial
meeting of Ministers of Sport and Youth, which was
held in Addis Ababa, was instrumental in enhancing
the momentum of using sport as a tool for development
and peace.
South Africa supports the efforts of the Office of
Sport for Development and Peace focusing on the role
of sport in peacebuilding activities. In this context, we

07-57301

In conclusion, South Africa supports the draft
resolution (A/62/L.2) introduced by the delegation of
China.
The Acting President: I now call on the observer
of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Archbishop Migliore (Holy See): The role of
sport within and among societies can be traced to some
of the earliest civilizations. However, never before has
the practice of sport become as firmly established as it
is today. Sport has become a mass phenomenon
capable of engaging huge crowds on a grand scale,
breaking down geographic, racial, social, economic,
political and cultural barriers.
Next year, the global community will once again
come together to celebrate the ancient tradition of the
Olympic Games in its twenty-ninth modern edition, to
be held in Beijing. As the world prepares for that
important event, we are reminded of the role that sport
can play in the life of every individual and society.
Citius, altius, fortius: those three Latin words,
used a century ago by Father Henri Martin Dideon to
describe his students’ achievements in sport, were
adopted as the Olympic motto because the aspiration to
be “swifter, higher, stronger” aptly describes the goals
of great athletes all over the world.
Sport practiced in a healthy and harmonious way
is a means of bringing together peoples of different
cultures and traditions in a respectful and peaceful
manner. Through the greater use of sport as dialogue
and encounter, the Greek tradition of the Olympic
Truce can give way to genuine and long-lasting peace.

21

A/62/PV.40

In fact, dialogue and encounter through sport
hold great potential in the area of peacebuilding and
conflict prevention. While the rule of law and justice
remain the foundations of durable peace, sport
provides a tool enabling warring factions to come
together for a common purpose. Such moments of
unity may be brief and at times fleeting; nonetheless,
they are an important reminder that, in human
experience, there are many more things that bind us
together than there are things that tear us apart. In that
regard, my delegation notes with appreciation the work
of the United Nations New York Office of Sport for
Development and Peace to foster such dialogue in
conflict-ridden places such as the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Liberia. We look forward to seeing
greater consolidation of its activity.
In addition to fomenting dialogue across cultures
and fostering peace, sport can serve as a means for
greater personal and social development. Through
sport, people develop creativity and talent, overcome
personal challenges, acquire a sense of belonging and
solidarity and learn discipline and a sense of sacrifice.
Those values redound to the benefit of the greater
community and help us understand the value of the
common good over personal glory. Thus, we encourage
sports figures to be models for youth and to help foster
the positive values of sport.
Today’s society has seen an increasing number of
cases of abuse and deviance in the practice of sport,
which lead to a sport culture devoid of human values.
However, the world of sport continues to have
authentic role models and generous protagonists who
strive to reclaim the ideal of sport as a real school of
humanity, camaraderie, solidarity and excellence. A
renewed and widely shared emphasis on a humancentred approach to sport would help ensure that the
important virtues learned through sport become one of
the means for developing and fostering healthy and
responsible human interaction.

22

The Holy See’s Office for Church and Sports was
created with that ideal of sport in mind. It works with
schools, youth groups, amateur sport associations and
athletic professionals to promote a healthy approach to
sport and to help young people understand the positive
impact that sport values can have on both the local and
global communities.
The Olympic creed reminds us that the most
important thing in life is not triumph, but struggle.
May the 2008 Olympic Games contribute to the
common struggle to make the world a better place for
one and all through the promotion of the inseparable
and mutually reinforcing values of peace, development
and full respect for basic human rights.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 45 and its
sub-items (a) and (b). Before proceeding to take action
on draft resolution A/62/L.2, I should like to announce
that, since the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors: Belize, the
Gambia, Honduras, Lithuania and Zambia.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/62/L.2, entitled “Building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”
under sub-item (b) of agenda item 45.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/62/L.2?
Draft resolution A/62/L.2 was adopted (resolution
62/4).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
45 and its sub-items (a) and (b).
Before I adjourn the meeting, and as announced
earlier, I would like to invite members to remain seated
for the informal segment after the adjournment of this
meeting, to hear the President of the International
Olympic Committee.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

07-57301
