s

UNITED
NATIONS
Distr.
GENERAL

Security Council

S/24720*
28 October 1992
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL:
FRENCH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3126th meeting, held on 27 October 1992, in connection with
the Council's consideration of the item entitled "Letter dated 27 October 1992
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council":
"The Security Council has taken note of the letter dated
27 October 1992 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Council concerning the situation in Angola.
It expresses its serious
concern at the deterioration of the political situation and the rising
tension in that country.
"It once again calls on the parties to the Peace Accords to respect
all the commitments undertaken in accordance with these accords, in
particular with regard to the confinement of their troops and weapons,
demobilization, and formation of the unified national Armed Force.
It
also calls on the parties to refrain from any act that might heighten
tension, impair the conduct of the electoral process and threaten the
territorial integrity of Angola.
"The Security Council calls on UNITA and the other parties in the
electoral process in Angola to respect the results of the elections held
on 29 and 30 September 1992, which the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General certified as being generally free and fair.
It urges
the leaders of the two parties to the Peace Accords to engage in a
dialogue without delay so as to enable the second round of the
presidential elections to be h~ld. The Security Council will hold
responsible any party which refuses to take part in such a dialogue,
thereby jeopardizing the entire process.
"The Security Council strongly condemns the attacks and baseless
accusations made by Vorgan radio of UNITA against the Special

*
92-67466

Reissued for technical reasons.
3553g (E)

031192

031192

I• • •

S/24720

English
Page 2

Representative of the Secretary-General and the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM II).
It calls for the immediate cessation
of these attacks and accusations, and reiterates its full support for the
Special Representative and for UNAVEM II.
"The Security Council reiterates its readiness to act without delay
on the basis of recommendations that the Secretary-General might make
concerning the contribution of the United Nations to the completion of
the electoral process."

-------------- - - -
