S/2004/461

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 June 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 7 June 2004 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
Following my meeting on 19 January 2004 with the Iraqi Governing Council
and the Coalition Provisional Authority, I responded positively to their request for
United Nations assistance in Iraq’s political transition process. My Special Adviser,
Lakhdar Brahimi, has since undertaken three missions to Iraq between February and
June 2004 to help facilitate a process of national dialogue and consensus-building
among Iraqis. I am pleased to attach herewith a copy of the briefing of 7 June by my
Special Adviser, which constitutes the report on his third and latest mission to Iraq
(see annex).
During his first visit, from 6 to 13 February, my Special Adviser and a team of
the United Nations Electoral Assistance Division carried out a fact-finding mission
which concluded, inter alia, that credible elections could not take place by 30 June
2004 and that an interim government would have to be formed through other means,
as described in the report annexed to my letter dated 23 February 2004 to the
President of the Security Council (S/2004/140).
During his second visit, from 26 March to 16 April, my Special Adviser was
able to develop, on the basis of extensive consultations with a broad spectrum of
Iraqis, the Governing Council and the Coalition Provisional Authority, provisional
ideas for the formation of an interim Iraqi government to which sovereignty would
be transferred on 30 June 2004. These ideas were welcomed in a statement by the
President of the Security Council on 27 April 2004 (S/PRST/2004/11).
During his third visit, from 1 May to 2 June, my Special Adviser helped to
facilitate a consultative process among Iraqis, resulting in an agreement on
transitional institutions and arrangements, including the structure and composition
of a sovereign and independent Interim Iraqi Government, which is to assume power
by 30 June 2004. Consensus was also reached on a chairman for the Committee that
will prepare for a national conference in July 2004. At the same time, United
Nations electoral experts helped Iraqis to lay the essential groundwork for the
holding of elections by January 2005, including through the establishment of an
Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq as well as through basic agreements on
the legislative framework for elections.
I welcome the outcome of my Special Adviser’s mission and fully endorse the
observations contained in his briefing. Through the good offices of my Special
Adviser, the United Nations has accomplished its task on time and in full. While the

04-37875 (E) 080604

*0437875*

S/2004/461

report speaks for itself, I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize some
observations.
The United Nations has consistently held that there is no substitute for the
legitimacy that comes from free and fair elections. The elections scheduled to take
place in January 2005 are therefore the most important milestone in Iraq’s
transitional political process. The formation of the Interim Iraqi Government marks
a first step in that process.
The United Nations was fully involved in facilitating consensus on the
structure and composition of the Interim Iraqi Government, which resulted from a
consultative process that encompassed a large and diverse range of Iraqis, as well as
those who had explicitly sought the assistance of the United Nations, namely, the
Governing Council and the Coalition Provisional Authority.
Though they are not elected, we have in place a capable and reasonably
balanced Interim Government poised to take power by 30 June 2004. I believe that
this is the best outcome achievable under the circumstances. The Interim
Government is well positioned to bring the country together and lead it effectively
during the next seven months. The Interim Government marks a new phase and
deserves to be given a fair chance and full support. I hope that the Iraqi people will
judge it by its actions and results.
Let us be clear, however, that Iraq’s current challenges will take years, not
months, to overcome. A major and most immediate task for the Interim Government
will be to start taking ownership of the solutions that must be found to the grave
insecurity that continues to affect Iraq. The forthcoming National Conference,
scheduled to take place in July 2004, will provide an ideal opportunity to start a
process of national consensus-building.
To create the right conditions for elections, as well as to surmount the
challenges that lie ahead, the people of Iraq urgently need help. I appeal to the
Security Council and the international community at large, Iraq’s neighbours in
particular, to respond favourably and generously to the Interim Iraqi Government’s
request for assistance and support. It is my hope that through our combined efforts
we can help to promote a process that impacts positively on the overall security
environment and reverses the logic of violence on all sides.
The United Nations stands ready to do its utmost to contribute to the
restoration of peace and stability in a unified and democratic Iraq. To that end, I
look forward to seeing the role of the United Nations clearly defined, with
maximum specificity, and to the creation of the conditions — including the
provision of security for our staff and adequate resources — which would allow us
to implement the mandate given us to the satisfaction of the people of Iraq.
I should also like to take this opportunity to pay special and heartfelt tribute to
my Special Adviser, Lakhdar Brahimi, to Ms. Carina Perelli, and to their respective
teams, for working with such dedication to complete their mission, under
exceptionally difficult and dangerous conditions. Each and every one of them is a
credit to the United Nations. We owe them thanks.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

S/2004/461

Annex
Briefing of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, Lakhdar
Brahimi, to the Security Council on the political transition process
in Iraq
7 June 2004
Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General:
It is, as ever, a privilege to address the Security Council, and I am particularly
honoured to be speaking under your presidency, Mr. Ambassador.
The Secretary-General has been far too kind and generous, and I thank him on
behalf of my colleagues and on my own account for his confidence, his
encouragement and his support. I am also deeply grateful for the assistance that the
members of the Security Council have given us.
The Secretary-General mentioned that the process of forming the interim
Government that is poised to take power in Iraq by 30 June did not begin in May,
but much earlier. I hope the Council will permit me to describe that process in some
detail, especially as concerns last month’s events. The United Nations account of
how the process has unfolded should be a matter of public record.
My own personal involvement commenced with the fact-finding team I was
privileged to lead to Iraq in the beginning of February. During that visit, the first of
three in total, my team and I began a process of consultations with Iraqi political
parties, professional associations, trade unions, religious and tribal leaders, women’s
groups and youth movements, intellectuals and academics, amongst others.
It was on the basis of those consultations, in addition to those with the
Coalition Provisional Authority and the Governing Council, that we formulated the
observations and recommendations in the fact-finding team’s report. That report,
which the Secretary-General transmitted to the Security Council on 23 February
(S/2004/140), made clear that there was an overwhelming desire on the part of Iraqis
for an elected Government to take over from the Coalition Provisional Authority.
But there was also an understanding that such a Government would not be viable if
the elections held for it were not genuine and credible. Our technical assessment was
that the conditions simply were not there for this to happen before 30 June. Eight
months at the very least would be needed to organize a proper election from the time
that an electoral authority and an electoral framework had been put in place.
Naturally, delaying the end of occupation was not an option. There was
therefore no alternative but to accept that restoration of sovereignty by 30 June
would be made to a non-elected Government.
What was the alternative to the caucus-style system that had been rejected? It
was naturally not possible to present a preferred option from the United Nations. It
was up to the people of Iraq to reflect on this question, free of the sometimes
politically motivated rhetoric that had surrounded the debate on whether credible
elections could be held by 30 June. This was not a time to hastily push through a
solution, especially because, as we pointed out in the fact-finding team’s report, the
country was so divided.

3

S/2004/461

The Council will recall that the Transitional Administrative Law was adopted
by the Governing Council and the Coalition Provisional Authority on 8 March 2004.
Article 2(B)(1) of the Transitional Administrative Law stated that the interim
Government to take power by 30 June would be
“constituted in accordance with a process of extensive deliberations and
consultations with cross-sections of the Iraqi people conducted by the
Governing Council and the Coalition Provisional Authority and possibly in
consultation with the United Nations”.
Then, in a letter to the Secretary-General dated 17 March 2004 (S/2004/225,
annex II), the President of the Iraqi Governing Council reaffirmed that the
Governing Council welcomed United Nations consultation in the national dialogue
on the shape and scope of the interim Government. In a letter dated the same day,
Ambassador Paul Bremer indicated to the Secretary-General his hope that my team
and I would “return to Iraq ... to help build consensus among Iraqis on the powers,
structure and composition of the interim Government and the process for its
establishment” (S/2004/225, annex IV). The Secretary-General informed the
Security Council the following day of the letters that he had received, as well as of
his positive response to them.
Against that backdrop, my team and I returned to Iraq for a second time, from
4 to 15 April. On arrival, we found that some members of the Governing Council
were arguing that continuity above all would be required to face the magnitude of
the challenges that would persist through the next phase of the transition. For that
reason, they favoured transferring sovereignty by 30 June to themselves or to an
expanded version of their Council. On the other hand, our extensive consultations
with people outside the Governing Council revealed a desire for a more pronounced
change.
In the end, the Governing Council itself recognized that the 15 November 2003
agreement, as well as the Transitional Administrative Law, had called for its
dissolution, along with that of the Coalition Provisional Authority, by 30 June. A
consensus appeared to emerge on the formation of an interim Government composed
of a President, two Vice- Presidents and a Cabinet of ministers headed by a Prime
Minister. Outside of the Governing Council there was a call for the Government to
consist of honest and competent people who would effectively run the country for
seven months or so while preparations for elections were being made. Once again,
the people of Iraq, in all quarters, stressed that the elections were the most important
milestone for them.
On 14 April, I informed the Iraqi public of the status of our work in progress at
a joint press conference with the then President of the Governing Council,
Mr. Massoud Barzani. After returning to New York for consultations with the
Secretary-General, I briefed the Security Council in greater detail on 27 April. In
that briefing, members will recall, I added that, ideally, those serving in the
Government would choose, themselves, not to stand as candidates in the elections
for the National Assembly that is to be elected by next January.
I also stressed that the formation of the interim Government alone would not
be sufficient to help turn the tide of violence. Confidence-building measures would
also be needed, in tandem, to address such controversial and divisive issues as the
manner in which the new army would be formed, de-Baathification, and the issue of

4

S/2004/461

detainees and due process. Within this context, we suggested that a national
conference be convened once sovereignty had been restored, in order to provide a
forum for Iraqi men and women around the country to debate and hopefully to forge
consensus on the challenges that they face for their immediate and long-term future.
We also proposed that this conference, bringing together 1,000 to 1,500 people
reflecting the diversity of the country, should select a smaller national council that
could continue the discussions and advise the interim Government throughout its
short tenure. In order for this national conference to be well prepared, we
recommended that a diverse preparatory committee should be formed as quickly as
possible.
A few days after I briefed the Council, my team and I departed again from
New York, arriving in Baghdad on 1 May, for our third and final visit. Our
immediate task was to gauge the reactions to the preliminary ideas that we had
presented. After all, these were not ideas that we had come up with on our own, but
rather were a reflection of what we heard Iraqis telling us. Did they believe that it
was a faithful reflection? With the benefit of some time to think about the proposals,
did they have additional views? If they were on board with the framework, what
names did they see best matching up with the positions?
These are the questions we put to our interlocutors during this third visit as we
resumed our consultations. What we found was that there was virtual consensus on
the structure of the Government. It had the merit of simplicity while containing
enough positions of real and symbolic importance to allow most, if not all key
constituencies to feel represented.
There was debate, however, on two key issues. First, how was this Government
to be selected? Secondly, to what extent should political parties be represented in it?
The idea that an Iraqi Government could be even partially selected by
foreigners, understandably, did not sit well with some. On the other hand, many
voices were heard demanding that the United Nations alone be involved in this
exercise, without the participation of the CPA and the Governing Council. On both
sides of this debate, it was argued that if sufficient time were not available for a
credible national conference to be convened by 30 June, then we should take six
weeks or so to bring together an even smaller round table of notable figures, who
would be charged with selecting the interim Government.
Our concerns with this suggestion, however, were three-fold. First, if we left
the formation of the Government until the eve of 30 June, then it would not have
sufficient time to prepare to take power or the opportunity to engage in the
discussions on the draft resolution now before the Council. Secondly, the choice of
who should participate in the round table would be influenced by foreigners and
would be no less controversial than the choice of the Government itself. Thirdly, if
the round table failed to reach agreement on the composition of the Government by
30 June, then the termination of the occupation would be delayed. This would not be
acceptable to anyone in Iraq.
At the end of the day, there was no getting away from the fact that the interim
Government would not be elected. It would be an imperfect and ambiguous process
of selection, and it would not be fair to the people of Iraq to pretend otherwise.
As concerns the participation of political parties in the interim Government,
we discovered that the leaders of those parties were not alone in support of their

5

S/2004/461

participation. Quite a few independent Iraqi figures argued in favour of it. They
stressed that, by definition, any composition of the Iraqi Government selected
through these means would be controversial. They added that the magnitude of the
challenges the Government would face from the outset made it imperative for its
composition to be as inclusive as possible. The interim Government could ill afford
to start its work with influential opposition surrounding it on all sides. Inclusion
thus meant the inclusion of the larger political parties as well, and there were plenty
of highly competent professionals within their ranks. The key would be to ensure
that the participation of political parties did not lead to rising sectarianism, the
crowding out of competent independent candidates or the disproportionate influence
of any one political party in the Government.
When the time came to start discussions on actual names, we proposed the idea
of forming a working group comprised of the United Nations, the CPA and the Iraqi
Governing Council. It would have been impractical to include all 24 members of the
Governing Council in this working group. So, instead, we suggested working with a
troika of the past, present and future Presidents of the Governing Council. They
were Massoud Barzani, a Kurd; Ezzedine Selim, an Arab Shia; and Sheikh Ghazi
Al-Yawer, an Arab Sunni. It was in that forum that we began to discuss formally the
criteria for determining which names would be considered for the positions in the
interim Government, including the post of prime minister.
That the CPA and the Governing Council would need to be formally included
in the discussions was, of course, a foregone conclusion for us from the outset. After
all, it was they who had requested the United Nations assistance and not the other
way around. Furthermore, the CPA was running the country and the Governing
Council had been officially recognized by the Security Council as the highest Iraqi
institution in the country.
However, the CPA and the Governing Council members themselves recognized
that they could not legitimately claim to speak for all Iraqis. It was for that reason,
among others, that they called on the United Nations to assist in the process in the
first place. Both parties accepted, therefore, that the United Nations would introduce
into the discussions the views we had been hearing from Iraqis around the country.
To be sure, due to time and security constraints, we did not consult as visibly
or as widely with a sufficient number of the many civic associations or the several
hundred political parties that are said to exist. Nevertheless, we did meet, during our
three visits, with thousands of Iraqis from around the country — many of whom
travelled to Baghdad, Erbil, Mosul and Basra to see us — when we could not go to
them. I sincerely apologize to all those who sought to see us and were unable to do
so.
We made a particular effort to seek out the views of the extreme critics. We
also tried to give a voice to those who had been relatively silent to date, including
by their own choice. One of their concerns that we kept at the forefront of our minds
during the working group’s discussions was a desire to avoid the reinforcement of a
purely sectarian mindset in the new Government.
This working group proved to be a reasonably effective forum for thrashing
ideas out. Tragically, just one day after the working group had met in Erbil,
Ezzedine Selim was assassinated in Baghdad on 17 May 2004. His death was not
only a blow to the process, but a real loss for the country. He was a remarkably

6

S/2004/461

thoughtful and decent man who had no particular personal agenda other than to help
move his country in the right direction. Soon thereafter, we invited Mr. Hamid Majid
Moussa, Chairman of the Governing Council’s Committee on the Transfer of
Sovereignty, to replace Ezzedine Selim on the working group.
While we discussed options for different positions in the interim Government,
people around the country, as well in the international community at large, were
particularly focused on the prime minister. Our discussions in the working group, as
well as with many groups outside of it, revealed difficulty, at first, in reaching
consensus on any one particular name.
At the end of the day, the name that appeared to be gathering the most support
within the Governing Council and the CPA, as well as with key communities, was
that of Mr. Ayad Allawi. Though his political party is not religiously based, he
maintains good relations with important religious figures. Though known for his
attempts to overthrow the former regime, with outside help, he has in the past year
been publicly critical of the CPA’s approach to the de-baathification policy and the
manner in which the former army was disbanded. Though a Shia, he enjoys good
relations with key Kurdish and Arab Sunni actors alike. His résumé understandably
provokes controversy, but whose name, in connection with the post of prime
minister, does not in today’s Iraq?
The case of Mr. Hussein Shahrastani is a good example of how difficult it is to
build consensus around anyone’s name. Here was a brilliant scientist and head of a
charity who spent 11 years in jail. He is secular, but a devout Muslim. He is close to
religious leaders and he has been active and effective in providing aid and relief to
the needy. Yet his name provoked strong opposition from almost all quarters, not
least among those who later opposed strongly the selection of Mr. Ayad Allawi.
Be that as it may, we made it clear to the members of the working group that
we were ready to respect the emerging consensus on Mr. Ayad Allawi’s selection as
prime minister and that we were ready to work with him in the selection of the
cabinet. The list of the full Cabinet was finalized on Tuesday, 1 June, on the basis of
the recommendations that we had formally handed over to Mr. Allawi.
Prior to describing to the Council the nature of the Cabinet, I should say a
word about the manner in which the three-person Presidency Council was formed.
Although some very difficult compromises and statesmanship were required on all
sides, consensus eventually emerged on the choice of Mr. Ibrahim Jaafari and
Mr. Rowsch Shaways as Deputy Presidents. Both men command a great deal of
respect and enjoy popularity in their respective communities and beyond. As for the
position of President, the field narrowed relatively quickly to two candidates:
Mr. Adnan Pachachi, the former Foreign Minister of Iraq, and Sheikh Ghazi Mashal
Ajil al-Yawer, who, as President of the Governing Council during the difficult
month of May, earned the support and respect of his colleagues. In the end,
Mr. Pachachi declined the position and Sheikh Ghazi became President. I am
confident that the President and his two Deputies will demonstrate the leadership
and the example of unity required to help bring the country together as we travel the
difficult road ahead.
As for the Council of Ministers, it is full of promise. It includes some of the
best-performing incumbents, such as Ms. Nasreen Berwari, Minister of Public
Works, and Mehdi Al-Hafidh, Minister of Planning. They will help bring continuity
to the work already started over the past year or so. But there are also many new

7

S/2004/461

faces, including the Ministers for Defence, Interior, Trade and Finance. Almost two
thirds of the Cabinet is new, and only two former members of the Governing
Council will be taking up Cabinet positions. The newly appointed Ministers include
some of Iraq’s most highly qualified and educated professionals. For example, few
in Iraq can dispute the fact that the new Ministers of Oil, Health, Housing and
Construction, Justice and Transport, among others, are among the most qualified
people in their respective fields.
The Council of Ministers reflects to a large extent the rich regional, ethnic and
religious diversity of the country. Very able Ministers from the Turkomen and
Caldo-Assyrian communities are represented in the Cabinet. There are also new
political figures in the Government from constituencies that had not been well
represented on the Governing Council.
The Council of Ministers is composed largely of technocrats, although some of
them are politically affiliated, as is often the case in many countries. I am also
pleased to note that almost 20 per cent of the Council are women. Those women are
known for their competence, their expertise and their dedication to the
empowerment of women in public life.
Taken as a complete package, the interim Government has a great deal of talent
and is well positioned to bring the country together during the next seven months or
so. As Ayatollah al-Sistani recently said, it deserves to be given a fair chance and
full support. At the same time, the Iraqi people will ultimately judge the interim
Government on the basis of what it does.
The interim Government will need to start taking ownership of the solutions
that must be found to the grave insecurity that continues to affect the country. Iraq
will need an effective police force and a well-trained and professional army. Efforts
to bring those about must be expedited. So, too, must the right legal, political and
practical arrangements be worked out between the interim Government and any
foreign forces that are sought to assist with the maintenance of security in the
meantime. How that relationship is managed will greatly affect the interim
Government’s credibility in the eyes of the people.
In that context, it is encouraging to hear that the Prime Minister has reached
agreement with the concerned parties for the dissolution of militias. That, as
members may recall, was listed among the urgent confidence-building measures that
we recommended after our second visit to Iraq. An equally important and urgent
matter is the grave issue of the prisoners detained in the notorious Abu Ghraib
detention centre and elsewhere. It would greatly help the new Government if that
problem were to be completely solved even before 30 June.
We must also bear in mind that the majority of Iraqis with whom we met
stressed that the problem of insecurity cannot be solved through military means
alone. A political solution is required. The interim Government will need to lead the
discussions on what that political solution should comprise. It will need to reach out
to those who have been vocal critics of this past year’s process and engage them in
dialogue. It will need to resist the temptation to characterize all who have opposed
the occupation as terrorists and “bitter-enders”.
The National Conference provides an ideal opportunity to start that process of
outreach and to build a genuinely national consensus on how to address the
prevailing insecurity. Mr. Fouad Massoum will head the Committee that has been
charged with preparing the National Conference, to be held in July. Mr. Massoum

8

S/2004/461

has already started to reflect on the composition of the Committee, drawing on
numerous recommendations that my team and I have passed on.
During that process, I am sure that Mr. Massoum and his colleagues on the
Preparatory Committee will recall that the Governing Council was established
strictly on a quota basis, which was universally decried and rejected. Yet all wanted
fair representation for their communities and groups. It was not possible at this stage
to avoid reproducing the balance of the Governing Council in the interim
Government. But everyone said that that should not be a precedent and that, in
future, Iraq may well have a Kurdish President or an Arab Sunni Prime Minister or,
indeed, that it may see those positions occupied by individuals from smaller
communities.
We believe that the National Conference should not be convened on the basis
of any quota system, although care should be taken to reflect the country’s diversity.
In that connection, I feel that I must convey the justified demand of the Turkomen to
be recognized as the third-largest community in Iraq. Similar demands have been
formulated by other, smaller communities. I believe that those legitimate demands
should be heeded and that they can be accommodated in the forthcoming
constitution.
In conclusion, as the Secretary-General said a moment ago, the United Nations
has completed its task for this particular stage in full and on time. After a long,
complicated and delicate process that took place under less- than-optimal
conditions, Iraq now has two institutions that are essential for the next phase: an
interim Government and a national Independent Electoral Commission. As Council
members may have seen through the media, that Government is generally found to
be acceptable by the Iraqi people. Some are more cautious, and in some quarters
there may be stronger opposition, but the Iraqi people seem to be willing to give the
Government a chance to prove itself. There should be no illusion, however. The
days and weeks ahead will severely test this new Government, and the solutions to
Iraq’s current challenges will take years, not months, to overcome. On 30 June, Iraq
will reach a new phase of the political process, not the end of that process.
The fact remains, however, that neither the interim Government nor the
National Council that we expect to be chosen by the National Conference will be
elected bodies. And only an elected Government and an elected legislature can
legitimately claim to represent Iraq. All of the work that needs to be done now —
especially with respect to security — must be focused on the objective of creating
the conditions for genuine and credible elections to be held by January 2005.
In order to create the right conditions for elections, as well as to face the
enormous challenges before them, the people of Iraq urgently need the help of the
international community. Iraq needs the clear and united support of its neighbours.
Iraq needs the generosity of its creditors. Iraq needs the patient, strong and sustained
support of this body, the Security Council, and that of the United Nations as a
whole.

9
