A /67/PV.41

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

41st plenary meeting
Tuesday, 27 November 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 38
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/354)
Draft resolution (A/67/L.16)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.16.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): It is an honour for my
country to introduce this year’s draft resolution on the
situation in Afghanistan (A/67/L.16).
The past year has seen a number of important
milestone events for Afghanistan that have redefined
and reinvigorated the long-term partnership between
Afghanistan and its regional and international partners.
In that context, the draft resolution sends, yet again, a
positive signal of sustained support to Afghanistan, its
Government and its people. We are happy to see that
that message is reinforced by the outstandingly high
number of delegations that have joined in sponsoring
the draft resolution. Germany, as facilitator, would
like to take this opportunity to briefly highlight four
key messages of the draft resolution that reflect those
developments.
First, the draft resolution is about transition in the
field of security. We note with satisfaction that transition
is progressing continuously. The implementation of the
first three tranches of transition is currently unfolding.

Mindful of the many challenges in the process, we are
looking forward to its phased completion in the rest of
the country. The mid-2013 milestone, when Afghans will
be living in areas where the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) have taken lead security responsibility,
is a particularly encouraging step in that regard.
The focus of the draft resolution is on improving the
operational capabilities of the Afghan National Security
Forces. At the Bonn Conference, the international
community committed itself to supporting the Afghan
Government throughout transition and beyond to that
end. Increasing emphasis will be put on training,
equipping and advising the Afghan National Security
Forces as they gradually take over full security
responsibility throughout the country. With a view to
the end of transition at the end of 2014 and as part of
the wider objective of further empowering and enabling
Afghan institutions in line with the Kabul process, that
is where our priority rightly belongs.
At the NATO Summit held in Chicago earlier
this year, the priority to continue to develop the
Afghan National Security Forces so that it is capable
of providing security to all Afghans was reaffirmed.
NATO allies and International Security Assistance
Force partner countries committed themselves to work
towards establishing a training, advising and assistance
mission. They also reaffirmed their commitment to play
their part in the financial sustainability of the ANSF
in the long term, with a view to the assumption of
increasing financial responsibility by the Government
of Afghanistan.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-60766 (E)

*1260766*

A/67/PV.41

A stable security environment guaranteed by the
Afghan National Security Forces is key to the further
development of Afghanistan. In that context, long-term
strategic partnership agreements concluded between
the Government of Afghanistan and its partners will
contribute to creating an environment conducive to
establishing lasting peace, security and stability in
Afghanistan and the region.
Secondly, the draft resolution is about a longterm commitment by the international community
throughout the transformation decade declared by
the Government of Afghanistan and its international
partners at the Bonn Conference. During the past
decade, Afghanistan has made notable progress in
many fields of governance and development, including
health, education and infrastructure.
Yet challenges remain in many fields. Afghanistan
and the international community therefore renewed and
reinvigorated their long-term partnership at the Tokyo
Conference in July. Building on a unique framework
of mutual accountability, the international community
has generously pledged to provide $16 billion through
2015 to support the economic and political stabilization
of Afghanistan. Furthermore, the international
community will sustain its support at or near levels of
the past decade through 2017.
In return, the Government of Afghanistan has
committed itself to achieving its development and
governance goals, such as conducting credible,
inclusive and transparent elections, fostering respect
for the rule of law and protecting and promoting human
rights, in accordance with the stipulations of the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework. Afghan ownership
is again the foundation for the transformation decade,
as clearly reflected in the principles of aid effectiveness
contained in the Accountability Framework. Today, the
General Assembly will send that renewed message of
solidarity to our Afghan partners.
Thirdly, the draft resolution is about regional
cooperation. Under the able leadership of Afghanistan
and with the strong support of regional and international
partners, the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and
Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan has
shown continued momentum since the Heart of Asia
Ministerial Conference held in Kabul in June. A set
of six confidence-building measures will contribute
to fostering regional cooperation to enhance political,
security and economic stability throughout the region.

2

The Istanbul Process is intended to bring greater
coherence to the diversity of valuable regional
initiatives. Furthermore, the Process reflects the
interconnectedness of many challenges in Afghanistan.
Within that framework, the fight against terrorism and
against the production and trafficking of illicit drugs
is complemented by confidence-building measures in
the areas of education, infrastructure and economic
development that are aimed at reducing poverty and
creating alternative sources of income for the Afghan
population.
Fourthly, the draft resolution is about support to the
peace and reconciliation process. The appointment of
Salahuddin Rabbani as the Chairman of the High Peace
Council has revitalized the peace and reconciliation
process after the heinous assassination of his father and
predecessor in office.
For this Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process to
yield sustainable results, it needs to be inclusive and
must respect the Afghan Constitution and its human
rights provisions, the rights of women in particular,
as well as the set of principles outlined most recently
in the Bonn Conference conclusions. In that context,
the draft resolution reiterates appreciation for the
efforts of the Government of Afghanistan on its path
to advance the process and reaffirms the continued
support of the international community in that regard.
Last year, by establishing the Committee pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011), the Security Council set up
an institutional framework conducive to fostering the
peace and reconciliation process. The first results are
encouraging.
To conclude, I would like to express my gratitude
to all the delegations from all regions of the world
that have actively participated in this year’s informal
consultations on the draft resolution. Their tireless
efforts and sense of responsibility are the foundation
upon which the strong message of the draft resolution
rests. We are therefore happy to suggest that the General
Assembly once again adopt the draft resolution on the
situation in Afghanistan by consensus.
I would like to extend my appreciation to my
colleague Ambassador Zahir Tanin, as well as to
Counsellor Youssof Ghafoorzai and their colleagues,
for their excellent cooperation, trust and friendship.
Germany also wholeheartedly thanks the United
Nations offices in Afghanistan and New York alike for
their excellent work for the future of Afghanistan. The

12-60766

A/67/PV.41

role of the United Nations and its Assistance Mission in
support of Afghanistan will continue to be pivotal in all
the key areas I have outlined.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): It is an honour to be here
today to discuss the situation in Afghanistan. Today we
will adopt a draft resolution (A/67/L.16) that reaffirms
the Assembly’s commitment to Afghanistan’s peace,
stability and prosperity.
I wish to take this opportunity to express my
appreciation to all representatives who contributed to
the draft resolution, especially the German delegation,
headed by His Excellency Ambassador Peter Wittig, for
their dedication and leadership throughout the process.
We extend a special thanks to Daniel Schemske for his
role in facilitating the negotiations.
In 2001, following the overthrow of the Taliban
regime, Afghanistan was a broken State with an
economy in shambles, a shattered infrastructure and
a society wearied by years of conflict. Virtually no
aspect of life in our country had been untouched by
war. Afghanistan has come a long way since then, and
yet we still have far to go. Our path to lasting peace
and sustainable development has not been without its
challenges. On the way forward, the supporting role of
the international community will be important, and it
will have a considerable effect on how successful the
Afghan Government’s efforts can be.
Afghanistan is approaching the end of a chapter,
with the conclusion of the existing framework of
international military engagement. All focus is now on
the transition to Afghan-led security, governance and
development.
Transition in Afghanistan did not start in a vacuum.
It took us 11 years to reach this point. International
involvement began over a decade ago and sought
to eliminate the threat posed by Al-Qaida and its
regional terrorist allies to global and regional peace
and security. After long years of conflict and war, a
broad international coalition became engaged, with a
commitment to see Afghanistan through on its path to
peace and stability.
However, it was not only a military effort. The
most important thing for Afghans was to rebuild an
effective State. Afghanistan started its journey a decade
ago to regain a legitimate and peaceful internal and
international role in the region and worldwide. Since
2001, significant achievements have been made, from
the building of schools and roads to the advancement
12-60766

of women, continuing economic growth and the
strengthening of our security forces. Today, women are
playing a vital role across all sectors of Afghan society
and are being offered more economic opportunities.
Millions of Afghan boys and girls are enrolled in
schools, and increasing numbers of Afghan people now
have access to basic health services.
Afghanistan is in a fundamentally different place
from where we were in 2001, a time when the control
of provinces changed hands constantly, human rights
were routinely violated, violence prevailed and the
central authority had lost its relevance and power under
the pressure of internal confrontations. Eleven years
later, Afghanistan is looking to the future with hope
and is aiming to stand on its feet and move towards
normalization.
In April 2014, Afghanistan will hold its third
presidential elections to choose its new leadership,
and by the end of 2014 the last foreign combat forces
will have left the country. With the election and the
end of the military phase of international support,
a new chapter in Afghanistan is unfolding that is
characterized by consolidated national sovereignty,
self-reliance and stabilization of the situation. Those
simultaneous developments represent the beginning
of a decade of sustainability that involves a number
of vital, interconnected elements in both the short and
long terms. Those include the withdrawal of tens of
thousands of combat forces, the full transfer of security
responsibility to the Afghan national army and police, a
new arrangement of the post-2014 international military
engagement, the organization of free and fair elections,
reconciliation aimed at ending the violence and
bringing the armed opposition into the peace process,
and capacity-building for a sustainable and functioning
State that is able to maintain peace, stability and
democracy in the country for years to come.
The transition framework is therefore the only
path to long-term stability in Afghanistan. It puts the
Afghan people at the centre of managing the country’s
security, governance and development. For the success
of that transition, we need strong long-term support and
delivery from the international community.
Over the past two years, the transition process
has been buttressed by the establishment of new
partnerships with the international community and
by attempts to turn negative potential into positive by
seeking new forms of cooperation in our neighbourhood
and the wider region. Afghanistan has worked
3

A/67/PV.41

with international partners in that period to forge
agreements on strategies to face the evolving situation
in the country and to address all the necessary elements
of a successful transition. From Lisbon to Chicago, we
worked to map out the security transition. It is about
enabling Afghan forces until and after 2014, sustaining
logistical and financial support, and providing
Afghanistan the necessary assistance for forces to work
under the pressure of circumstances. Those plans are
now in motion. The security transition is on track in its
third tranche, during which 75 per cent of the country
will be under the control of Afghan security forces.
Afghan forces are ready to take full control, as planned,
before the withdrawal of international forces in 2014.
We see the decision at the Chicago NATO
summit — concerning shifting the role of the
international military to a training, advising and
assisting mission — as an important indication of
enduring support for the Afghan people. Although
more details are yet to be determined, it is important
for Afghanistan to have the necessary guarantee
of continuing military support as it assumes full
responsibility for security in the country.
The post-2014 international military engagement in
Afghanistan is part of the security agreement that we
recently began to discuss with the United States in the
light of our strategic partnership. Based on our national
interests, we would like to see those negotiations lead
us to an agreement that ensures long-term peace and
stability in the country. The importance of national
sovereignty remains at the heart of the Afghan
perspective on any talks about future engagement
between Afghanistan and its international partners.
A successful transition is about successful
elections. The Government of Afghanistan is committed
to organizing fair, free and democratic elections that
can generate renewed energy for consolidating peace
and stability. We would like to see the international
community continue to support the upcoming election
process. We are certain that the election process will
help to bring about more certainty for the Afghan people
with regard to the political transition. Furthermore,
broader participation by the Afghan people — including
women and men from all walks of life — and the
engagement of civil society will contribute to making
the next elections a new occasion for national consensus
and unity that reflects our shared vision for building a
better future.

4

The elections should be seen in connection with the
ongoing major effort to bring about stability and end
violence — the search for a political solution. We have
witnessed visible progress in the peace process with
the Taliban and other armed opposition groups. Serious
steps are being taken to prepare the ground responsibly
for peace talks and a possible breakthrough in the
reconciliation process. Let there be no doubt: our peace
process will not continue at the expense of the hardwon progress of the past decade, including on human
rights and, in particular, the rights of women.
It is important to note that there is now consensus
about the necessity for an Afghan-led and Afghanowned peaceful solution and about the fact that the
peace process is increasingly seen as a cross-cutting
issue required for the success of the transition. We are
encouraged by the increasing positive thinking among
a growing number of the armed opposition actors
and by the support of other main actors for the peace
process. The recent visit of the delegation of the High
Peace Council to Islamabad and the release of a number
of Taliban prisoners by the Government of Pakistan are
important developments for creating an atmosphere
conducive to a political solution.
Mr. Beck (Palau), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The efforts here at the United Nations have also
been essential steps towards building the necessary
trust and confidence in the peace and reconciliation
process. We are happy to see the continuing focus of the
Security Council and the greater role that the Afghan
Government now plays in the listing and delisting
efforts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). The Security
Council’s commitment was clearly displayed this
week when the Chairman of the High Peace Council,
Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, was asked to brief that
Committee and the members of the Security Council
on the progress made in the reconciliation process. That
was an opportunity to illustrate Afghanistan’s intention
to have a greater role with regard to the Committee’s
work.
A successful transition will allay concerns about
the possible vacuum created by the end of the military
phase. In that connection, what is essential in the long
term is the economic sustainability of the Afghan State.
Assisted by its international partners, Afghanistan is
working to ensure that the Afghan State can function
effectively and that it moves from a primarily aid-based

12-60766

A/67/PV.41

economy to a self-sustaining one during the transition
and transformation period.
At the Tokyo Conference in July, significant steps
were taken towards addressing that issue, including a
clear expression of long-term financial commitment
and the presentation of a shared vision in the form of
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, which
addresses the need of our Government for core funding
and the need of our development partners to know that
the money will be spent well. In Tokyo, the international
community committed to continued engagement in
Afghanistan, while the Afghan Government committed
to being financially responsible and and to focus on
good governance.
Ending corruption and ensuring a transparent
and efficient Administration that enjoys the full trust
of the Afghan people remains a high priority. In that
connection, the Afghan Government has redoubled its
commitment to the rule of law and good governance.
His Excellency President Karzai’s decree of 21 July
represents a comprehensive approach and instructs
all ministries, agencies and independent departments
to implement measures and reforms to eliminate
corruption and improve transparency.
Global engagement in the past decade has
brought about an unprecedented level of regional and
international interaction in Afghanistan. Afghanistan
has become a meeting place for dozens of global and
regional Powers and organizations. The international
community has been linked to the stabilization and
reconstruction efforts in the country — a fact that is
reflected in the level of troop contributions, financial
support and institution-building. As we complete
the transition, the current form of involvement will
be replaced a multitude of bilateral and multilateral
cooperation arrangements between the Afghan State
and its global and regional partners. With that in
mind, we have begun developing various mechanisms
for bringing the greater region together for political,
economic and security cooperation.
At the centre of that effort is the Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure
and Stable Afghanistan. Over the course of this year,
we have seen the Istanbul Process gain noteworthy
momentum in its efforts to unite the Heart of Asia
countries around the shared goal of peace and prosperity
in Afghanistan, the region and beyond. The Istanbul
Process is turning into a central forum for regional
cooperation that will enhance and bring coherence to
12-60766

regional initiatives through the confidence-building
measures and various mechanisms for cooperation
to which we have committed. With effective regional
cooperation, Afghanistan is reclaiming its historic role
in the region, with the potential to serve as a trade and
transport hub and a catalyst for broader collaboration.
Afghanistan’s future is about sustainability. It is
about consolidating our successes and not losing what
we have worked to achieve over the past decade. For the
remainder of the transition, we must not fall behind in
our efforts for even a moment. The next two years are
vital for the country. The Government of Afghanistan
is committed to working each day to help the Afghan
people by developing infrastructure, protecting human
rights, enhancing good governance and improving the
delivery of services, as outlined in the draft resolution
we are considering here today (A/67/L.16).
However, the continuation of a violent campaign by
the enemies of peace, stability and prosperity remains
the greatest challenge to Afghanistan’s progress.
The irresponsible, vicious attacks on innocent
Afghans — women and men — by the Taliban and
other extremist armed groups are aiming to undermine
our hard-earned achievements. But the Afghan people
will not be deterred from their struggle to bring peace
and security to the country and to eliminate sources
of destabilization. It is important that this struggle be
supported by all who want to see an end to terrorism and
extremism. That is why close cooperation in the region,
including with Pakistan, is essential. As President
Karzai emphasized in his letter to Pakistani leaders on
13 October, there is a need for both countries to take
coordinated, collaborative and serious action with
strong determination against terrorism and extremism.
The Past decade in Afghanistan has seen historic
strides. There are some who talk about a coming disaster
as the international forces leave. We do not subscribe to
such negative interpretations, but of course the future
of Afghanistan hangs on many “ifs”. We are realistic
in recognizing the variables in the coming years, but
it is our responsibility, together with the international
community, to reduce uncertainties. We do not see the
transition as a cliff that could be fallen off with just
one false step. The transition is more than an idea. It is
a concrete concept with real resources and deliberate
plans — plans that can shape realities. Afghanistan looks
forward to working with the international community
in the coming years to achieve the noble objective of

5

A/67/PV.41

bringing lasting peace, stability and prosperity to the
country.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
Like others, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/67/354) and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement. I
also thank all delegations that participated in the
consultations on the draft resolution (A/67/L.16),
introduced today by the representative of Germany. We
look forward to its adoption once again by consensus.
The international conferences held in Bonn last
year and in Kabul and Tokyo earlier this year, as
well as the summit in Chicago, have reaffirmed the
partnership between the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community for Afghanistan’s
long-term security, economic growth and development.
Those conferences have set out the way forward for
Afghanistan to progressively assume responsibility
for all aspects of policy and to achieve its security,
development and governance goals.
In the EU statement at the Security Council
debate on Afghanistan in September (see S/PV.6840),
we briefly highlighted the important outcome of the
Tokyo Conference, in particular the principle of mutual
accountability encapsulated in the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, and addressed the strategic
issue of regional cooperation. The implementation of
the Tokyo Framework remains paramount in achieving
a successful transition in Afghanistan.
For this statement, we want to focus on two topics,
namely, progress on national reconciliation, and
preparations for the upcoming election.
We welcome the recent visit of the High Peace
Council to Pakistan, and we call on all regional
Governments to use their influence to encourage all

6

groups to support an Afghan-led peace and reconciliation
process. Progress will be sustainable only if the process
is truly inclusive, not only engaging armed groups
but fully involving civil society, including balanced
regional and gender representation from all sections of
Afghan society. Both the process and its outcome must
respect the Afghan Constitution, including its human
rights provisions, in particular those on the rights of
women and girls.
We also encourage particular attention to
the progressive implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women. In that vein,
we wish to reiterate our firm commitment to Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security. We
welcome the commitment of the Afghan Government
to its full implementation through the establishment
of the interministerial steering committee on
resolution 1325 (2000).
We welcome the announcement of the date for the
presidential election. It will be critical for Afghanistan’s
future that elections be as inclusive and transparent
as possible and leading to an outcome that is widely
accepted as legitimate.
We call on the Afghan authorities to engage
all political parties and civil society in agreeing an
electoral reform process that will put in place a legal
framework for elections that is consistent with the
Constitution, has credible measures to prevent fraud
and is overseen by independent bodies. Early decisions
by the relevant Afghan authorities on the system and
registration process to be used for elections will be
welcome, both to enable international support for the
process and to allow for clear communication and voter
education.
Allow me to reiterate our full support for the
essential role of the United Nations as we move beyond
transition. Its work will be of key importance in
supporting the preparations for the upcoming elections
and for monitoring the human rights and humanitarian
situation and making coordination bodies such as the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board work more
effectively.
It is important that the international community
remain strongly committed to progress in Afghanistan.
That will require sustained support beyond 2014.
The EU commitment to Afghanistan is long-term.
The EU is currently providing more than €1 billion
12-60766

A/67/PV.41

in development assistance to Afghanistan annually.
We will continue to prioritize and enhance support to
Afghanistan in the decade of transformation agreed at
Bonn.
The aim of our overall strategy in Afghanistan
remains clear, namely, supporting a successful transition
process in Afghanistan, partnering with Afghanistan
beyond transition on its path towards becoming fully
self-reliant, and building a more peaceful, democratic
and prosperous society for the benefit of all Afghans.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): It gives me great
pleasure to speak today as a Chair of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) on behalf of the
People’s Republic of China, the Republic of Kazakhstan,
the Russian Federation, the Republic of Tajikistan and
my own country, the Kyrgyz Republic.
The situation in Afghanistan affects global and
regional peace and stability, as the matter of counterterrorism is one of the important issues on which the
international community and countries of the region are
focusing their attention. Thanks to the strong support of
the international community, the situation concerning
political reconciliation and economic reconstruction
in Afghanistan is changing. The country’s economy
is showing progress. Infrastructure development,
including the construction of roads, bridges and power
transmission lines, has made headway, and health and
education have improved.
Yet, we must not overlook the difficulties and
challenges that Afghanistan still faces in the course
of reconstruction. There is no marked improvement
in the security situation. Terrorist activities continue
unabated, as seen in the terrorist activity by the
Taliban, Al-Qaida forces and other extremists. Illicit
drug production and trafficking are still rampant.
Tension and internal conflicts in Afghanistan remain
primary sources of threats to regional security and
stability. We urge the Government of Afghanistan and
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
to combat the Afghanistan narcotics threat more
vigorously, especially in view of the undeniable fact
that drug trafficking has become a major source of
funding for terrorist activities in Afghanistan.
As SCO member States are all neighbours of
Afghanistan, we closely follow the developments in
that country and support the development of bilateral
cooperation between Afghanistan and countries of the
region. The SCO member States support the efforts to

12-60766

make Afghanistan an independent, neutral, peaceful
and prosperous country that is free of terrorism and
drug-related crime. Our countries are of the view that
the national reconciliation process in Afghanistan
should be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. That process
is an important component of any Afghan settlement.
We also support the Afghan Government-led peace
process, which aims at promoting dialogue with those
elements in opposition to the Government that have
renounced violence, broken ties with Al-Qaida and
other terrorist organizations, denounced terrorism and
accepted the Afghan Constitution, in full respect of the
implementation of measures and procedures introduced
by the Security Council in its resolutions 1267 (1999),
1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011) and other relevant Council
resolutions.
We have consistently supported the peaceful
reconstruction of the country and have over the years
provided all feasible support and assistance to the
Afghan people. The SCO member States are ready to
assist with the reconstruction of Afghanistan, including
through the implementation of infrastructure, energy
and transport projects, with a view to promoting
sustainable economic growth and the creation of jobs
in Afghanistan.
It gives me pleasure to inform the Assembly that the
SCO member States have decided to grant Afghanistan
observer status in the SCO. While emphasizing the
futility of attempting to resolve the Afghan conflict
by military means, SCO member States call upon the
international community to continue to scale up its
support and assistance to Afghanistan, as part of the
comprehensive measures to tackle both the symptoms
and root causes of the problems connected with the
reconstruction of that country, which include enhancing
capacities, improving the people’s well-being and
strengthening ownership and self-development
capacities.
In the security field, the international community
should continue to foster conditions that could
enable the Afghan Government to shoulder security
responsibilities. In the economic field, the international
community should honour its commitment to assist
Afghanistan’s economic and social development. In the
area of governance, the international community should
help to enhance human resource development, while
maintaining full respect for the right of the Afghan
people to independently choose their political model of
governance. The SCO member States will continue to
7

A/67/PV.41

strengthen and upgrade regional cooperation within the
SCO framework and other existing relevant regional
formats in order to build the SCO region into one of
lasting peace, friendship, prosperity and harmony.
The situation in Afghanistan is now at a crucial
stage. The SCO member States support the central role of
the United Nations in coordinating international efforts
on Afghanistan and will assist the Afghan people with
their national reconstruction. The SCO appreciates the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) aimed at fulfilling its mission
and supports UNAMA in providing further necessary
assistance for peace and for the reconstruction of
the country within its mandate. It is the sincere hope
of the SCO member States that a peaceful, stable,
independent, sovereign and neutral Afghanistan that
enjoys development, progress and friendship with its
neighbours will emerge at an early date.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan) (spoke in
Russian): I have the honour to make this statement on
behalf of the States members of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), that is, Armenia, Belarus,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation and
Tajikistan. The CSTO member States have carefully
followed the situation in Afghanistan, which borders
the organization’s area of responsibility. We are
seriously concerned about the escalating tensions in the
country. We support Afghanistan’s efforts to become
a peaceful, independent and neutral State that is free
from terrorism and narcotic drugs.
CSTO member States will help to foster
Afghanistan’s sustainable and secure development with
a view to reducing the threats to international security
from that country, such as terrorism, drug trafficking
and religious extremism, among others. We note the
importance of CSTO capacities in countering such
threats from Afghanistan.
CSTO member States consider the illicit production,
trade and trafficking of drugs from Afghanistan to be a
threat to international peace and security. We intend to
step up efforts to combat the Afghan drugs threat in line
with the decisions of the third Ministerial Conference
of the Paris Pact, held in Vienna on 16 February,
while making use of the capacities of the Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre
(CARICC) in combating illicit trafficking in narcotic
drugs, psychotropic substances and their precursors, as
well as while working together through the CSTO-led
counter-narcotics Operation Kanal. We look forward to
8

consistent efforts on the part of the Afghan Government
and the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
aimed at addressing the challenges related to drug
production and trafficking. We stand ready to cooperate
closely with NATO on a broad range of issues, including
combating the drugs threat.
CSTO member States believe that the international
community, under the auspices of the United Nations,
should play an active and effective role in the political
settlement process and in the recovery of Afghanistan,
in close cooperation with the Afghan Government.
We support the Government’s efforts to strengthen
Afghan society and transform the country into a stable
democratic State. Member States support Afghanistan’s
active involvement in regional integration processes
and in efforts to strengthen mutual trade and economic
and humanitarian cooperation, as well as the swift
implementation of infrastructure projects aimed at
linking the region with Afghanistan, which will help to
restore peace, stability and socioeconomic development
in Afghanistan.
CSTO member States welcome the decisions adopted
at the Bonn and Istanbul Conferences on Afghanistan
in 2011, the fifth conference on regional economic
cooperation for Afghanistan, held in Dushanbe, the
Kabul Conference and this year’s economic conference
in Tokyo. We underscore the important role played by
CSTO member States in conveying air and land transit
cargo to meet the needs of ISAF forces in Afghanistan.
We support the process of national reconciliation in
the country. It is our view, however, that intra-Afghan
dialogue can have a positive effect only if a leading
role in the process belongs to the Afghan Government
and if there is strict compliance by the insurgents with
three basic principles, namely, they must lay down
their weapons, recognize the Afghan Constitution and
definitively break their ties with Al-Qaida and other
extremist organizations. We believe that following the
completion of the stabilization efforts in Afghanistan,
ISAF’s withdrawal should take place pursuant to a
decision of the Security Council based on a report on
the implementation of its mandate.
We note the role of other regional organizations,
primarily the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), in addressing the challenges with regard to
military and political stabilization and economic
recovery in Afghanistan, as well as the efforts of
CARICC to combat illicit drug trafficking based

12-60766

A/67/PV.41

on Afghan production. We welcome Afghanistan’s
receiving observer status in the CSO and CARICC.
Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): Allow me
to express my gratitude to the President for convening
this meeting of the General Assembly.
Tajikistan aligns itself with the statements made by
the representatives of Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan on
behalf of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO) and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), respectively.
Tajikistan was pleased, once again, to join the
sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.16, entitled “The
situation in Afghanistan”. We hope that, as in previous
years, the draft resolution will be adopted by consensus.
Allow me to take this opportunity to sincerely thank the
German delegation for its work in achieving agreement
on the text of the draft resolution.
Today, Afghanistan is at a critical juncture in its
modern history. By the end of 2014, the transition
process should be completed. Following the withdrawal
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
Afghan law-enforcement bodies should be able to
shoulder full responsibility for security in the country.
Indeed, at this important and complex stage, the
international community should provide Afghanistan
with its full support.
Tajikistan is connected to Afghanistan by many
historic and cultural links. Along those lines, our
country is seeking to further strengthen goodneighbourly relations with Afghanistan and to
develop and step up our bilateral, mutually beneficial
cooperation. We support the international strategy for a
comprehensive settlement and the post-confl ict recovery
of Afghanistan. In that context, we wholeheartedly
support the Afghan Government’s efforts to achieve the
goals of national reconciliation. We welcome the efforts
of the international community, particularly the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the
International Security Assistance Force, to establish
lasting peace and stability in that long-suffering land.
An important factor in ensuring sustainable
socioeconomic development in Afghanistan is to
get the country involved in the process of regional
integration through economic and trade cooperation
with neighbouring States. In that connection, I should
like to note the role of the Dushanbe quartet, composed
of Afghanistan, Pakistan, Russia and Tajikistan, within
whose framework efforts are being made to improve
12-60766

regional trade and economic cooperation and to counter
the threats of terrorism, drugs and organized crime, as
well as to develop human resources for Afghanistan’s
military and civilian needs. Tajikistan is actively
involved in the process of establishing sustainable peace
and stability in Afghanistan. Given Afghanistan’s need
to develop human resources for law-enforcement and
military bodies and to train professional specialists, my
country has provided opportunities for training border
officers and law-enforcement and security personnel in
centres in Tajikistan, particularly the regional college
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe.
More than 500 Afghan students are currently
enrolled in higher-education institutions in Tajikistan.
In accordance with a decision of the Government of
Tajikistan, grants will be awarded to approximately
1,000 Afghan citizens through 2025. Moreover,
in recognition of the fundamental importance of
developing education and training specialists for the
needs of the economy in Afghanistan and the region,
Tajikistan has launched the establishment on its own
territory of a multidisciplinary professional and
technical educational training centre.
Thanks to its favourable geographic location,
Afghanistan can play a highly important role in
developing regional integration processes. In the context
of globalization, the significance of Afghanistan’s
geographic position at the crossroads between the various
regions of the Asian continent can only expand. In that
connection, Tajikistan fully supports the development
and implementation of infrastructure projects in the
areas of communications and transportation, both in
Afghanistan and in the region in general. Tajikistan
and Afghanistan are currently linked by five bridges
spanning the border along the Panj River. That enables
the delivery of humanitarian assistance and other cargo
to remote areas of Afghanistan. It also helps to promote
the growing trade between our two countries, as well
as to expand transit capacity. A projected railroad
between Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Afghanistan,
which would also link to an existing UzbekistanAfghanistan branch and to two prospective IranAfghanistan and Turkmenistan-Afghanistan branches,
has undergone international evaluation and is awaiting
implementation. The route is destined to become a
transit artery of regional significance that will promote
the development of regional trade and economic
recovery for Afghanistan.

9

A/67/PV.41

In the current circumstances, energy is of key
importance for rebuilding Afghanistan’s devastated
economy. The hydroelectric plants currently operating
in Tajikistan, as well as those under construction, are
capable not only of meeting Afghanistan’s needs for
ecologically clean and affordable electric power but
also of broadening its agricultural development by
restoring and improving its irrigation systems. In that
context, I should like to note the special importance
of building power-transmission-line projects through
Afghanistan. Last year a 220-kilovolt transmission
line began operating from Tajikistan’s Sangtuda-1
hydroelectric power station to the Afghan city of
Puli Khumri. The CASA-1000 trade and transmission
project has been launched to help solve the problem
of the shortage of power in Afghanistan and Pakistan
by using the hydroelectric potential of Central Asian
countries. We support the projected gas pipeline to
be laid from Turkmenistan across Afghanistan to
Tajikistan and Pakistan, which, besides supplying the
natural-gas needs of the countries of the region, would
also create a reliable source of income for Afghanistan.
The issue of Afghanistan’s socioeconomic recovery
was covered in depth at the fifth Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, held in
Dushanbe in the spring. The Conference recommended
the implementation of about 20 projects in the areas of
transportation, communications, energy, investment,
education, building human capacity, border control and
other areas, which could contribute to Afghanistan’s
restoration
and
socioeconomic
development.
Establishing significant levels of peace and security
in Afghanistan will depend on broad and effective
international and regional cooperation and sincere,
consistent efforts on the part of the international
community to achieve goals that meet the aspirations
and expectations of the Afghan people. We hope that
the adoption of today’s draft resolution by the General
Assembly will serve that noble purpose.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I would
like to express my delegation’s appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his latest report on the situation
in Afghanistan, contained in document A/67/354.
The year 2014 will see two significant events
that will shape the next stage of Afghanistan’s future.
One is the complete withdrawal of the International
Stabilization Assistance Force (ISAF); the second is
the presidential elections. They are equally important
and should be looked at as two sides of the same coin.

10

On the one side, security in Afghanistan is a
prerequisite for the success of political and economic
reconstruction and transformation processes across the
board. In that regard, Malaysia is encouraged that there
have been fewer security incidents and insurgent attacks
this year as compared with 2011. However, the figures
are certainly not encouraging enough. The killing of
civilians and the targeting of prominent individuals
remain a concern. The international community must
look at ways to counter such incidents. In doing so, it
must take special care not to give further reasons for
people to turn away from the transition process and join
the insurgents. Civilian deaths resulting from military
operations by international forces must be avoided at
all costs. In fact, any civilian casualties will create
resentment and fuel anger among the people, making
efforts to ensure peace and security that much harder.
On the flip side, fair elections that are inclusive and
free from external interference will ensure a competent
Government that enjoys the support of the people. The
Government can then concentrate on efforts to establish
good governance, promote justice, human rights and
respect for the rule of law, and foster equitable social
and economic development in the country. That in turn
will plant the seeds for lasting peace and stability from
within Afghanistan itself.
Malaysia appreciates the continued support that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
has given to the work of the High Peace Council and
the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme.
We welcome the appointment of Salahuddin Rabbani,
who has emphasized the need to improve inclusiveness
in the High Peace Council. Malaysia is heartened to
note that the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan
to engage with insurgents in order to rehabilitate
and reintegrate them into society have borne fruit.
We believe that rehabilitated insurgents can help the
Government in its efforts to restore peace through their
active participation as local community leaders.
Malaysia is of the view that inclusiveness also
needs to be extended to women. By getting the support
of women, the Government would, in effect, further
marginalize those who are out to create instability in
the country. Furthermore, women would contribute
immensely to development efforts. To neglect such a
huge percentage of the population would only mean
underutilizing the potential human capital available in
the country. Afghanistan certainly cannot afford to do
that.

12-60766

A/67/PV.41

Malaysia understands the need to take into account
the cultural and traditional sensitivities in Afghanistan,
which are based on religious beliefs. It is the same for
Malaysia. We continue to take various measures towards
achieving gender equality and women’s development
through various policy frameworks, legislation,
capacity-building and entrepreneurial programmes.
Malaysia wishes to emphasize the importance of
women’s education and health care and the need to
change the widely accepted stereotypical roles of
men and women in society, all the while taking into
consideration the need to protect the sanctity of Islam.
In that regard, we believe that Malaysia has much to
offer, and we are willing to share our experience.
Many impediments remain in the run-up to 2014.
It is obvious that the Afghan Government will need
the assistance of the international community in its
efforts to forge a better future for its people. We are
pleased to note the success of the Tokyo Conference
on Afghanistan last July, which saw the international
community pledge $16 billion in development aid
over the next four years. The number of high-level
representatives and the financial commitments made at
the Conference send a clear message to those who intend
to derail the transition and transformation process that
Afghanistan will not be abandoned and will enjoy the
support of the international community.
For our part, Malaysia will identify the specific
areas of assistance and cooperation that we are able to
extend to Afghanistan and its people under the Malaysia
Technical Assistance Programme, with particular focus
on capacity-building and human resource development.
In addition, 40 members of the Malaysian Armed
Forces medical contingent for the International Security
Assistance Force, which includes women doctors and
nurses, were deployed in July 2010 to provide medical,
dentistry and other health-care services and capacitybuilding programmes to the Afghan people in Bamyan
province. The team has managed to take local social
and religious sensitivities into consideration while
providing health-care services.
Malaysia has also been providing assistance in
the reconstruction of Afghanistan over the past 10
years through various bilateral technical training and
capacity-building programmes in a broad range of
areas. We are pleased to note that a number of Afghan
officials have benefited from the many technical
courses that Malaysia has offered. In 2011 and 2012,
Malaysia has contributed a total of nearly $14 million

12-60766

in humanitarian assistance and capacity-building
programmes to Afghanistan.
Malaysia is cautiously optimistic about the situation
in Afghanistan. We recognize that the next few years
will be crucial for the future of the country. While
we support full Afghan leadership and ownership, the
international community must take steps to ensure
that when ISAF leaves, the foundations have been
put in place to allow Afghanistan to move forward.
The international community must also ensure that
the transition of power to the next President is done
smoothly.
Progress has been made and we should capitalize
on it. Afghanistan cannot afford to fall back into the
despair of war. Malaysia will do its utmost to support
Afghanistan’s reconciliation and reconstruction
process. We look forward to continuing to play a
meaningful role in Afghanistan’s development towards
lasting peace, stability and prosperity.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): The United Arab Emirates supports the draft
resolution before the General Assembly on the situation
in Afghanistan (A/67/L.16). We reiterate our support
for all Afghan national efforts to expand the process
of constructive and inclusive Afghan-led dialogue and
reconciliation, including all segments of the populations
and all political parties in the process, in order to achieve
national unity, stability and long-term development. We
also support the good offices conducted in that regard
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the Mission of Norway and the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Joint Commission for Reconciliation and Peace.
In that context, we emphasize the need for the
international community to adopt an innovative
approach in providing more inclusive development
support to Afghanistan in the economic, logistical
and technical fields. Such inclusive support should
be under the supervision of the United Nations and
done in cooperation with international organizations,
donor countries and other concerned parties to promote
stability, strengthen national capacities and sreolve the
internal problems of Afghanistan, as well as to organize,
reform and develop its national institutions. That will
enable Afghanistan, through its institutions, to carry
out its full responsibilities, meet the needs of its people,
consolidate security and enhance law enforcement.
In that regard, we welcome the gradual transition of
security tasks to the Afghan National Security Forces,

11

A/67/PV.41

in accordance with the Kabul process, especially in the
matter of extending their control over all regions of the
country, preserving national security and achieving
economic and social development by the time of the
withdrawal of most foreign troops in 2014.
We would also like to stress the importance of
the region’s role in achieving security and stability
in Afghanistan. The region should seek to put in
place an inclusive package of security cooperation,
confidence-building measures and multilateral support
in several areas, such as reconstruction, health and
education and in combating terrorism, extremism and
the production and trafficking of drugs. We also look
forward to further initiatives of cooperation between
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries in the areas
of security, the economy and trade. In that context, we
welcome the ongoing, constructive bilateral cooperation
between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
The United Arab Emirates has stood by the
Afghan people from the very onset of their crisis.
Over the past 10 years, we have continued to provide
political and economic support through direct bilateral
cooperation and as part of the international community.
Our assistance aims to support the implementation
of infrastructure projects in Afghanistan, including
economic recovery projects and reconstruction,
rehabilitation and development programmes in the
health, agricultural, social and security sectors. We
also support other multipurpose charitable projects
aimed at restoring security and stability in all parts of
the country, reducing the suffering of its people and
improving all aspects of their lives.
The total contributions by the Government of
the United Arab Emirates to Afghanistan since the
year 2000 to advance its national economy amount to
approximately $272 million dollars. That is in addition
to private assistance from United Arab Emirates
humanitarian foundations, including the Sheikh
Khalifa Foundation, which, in collaboration with the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, made an estimated
contribution of $100 million, earmarked for the mass
immunization programme for Afghan children.
Also, in July, the United Arab Emirates announced a
grant of $250 million dollars, 80 per cent of which is
earmarked for building houses for Afghans, including
widows, orphans and the disabled, as well as for other
development projects and the rehabilitation of a number
of institutions in Kabul and other provinces.

12

The United Arab Emirates also participated in
the implementation of several governmental and
non-governmental projects in Afghanistan. They
include the construction of training centres, road
projects and infrastructure rebuilding, particularly
in the areas of education and rural development. We
participate as well in a demining project in Kandahar,
which is expected to be completed within four years at
a cost of $28 million. The United Arab Emirates also
contributed to the international military efforts through
the International Security Assistance Force of NATO
for the purpose of reconstructing Afghanistan and
providing support and assistance to its people.
We highly appreciate the considerable efforts
made by the International Security Assistance Force
in Afghanistan, under the command of NATO and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as
well as by other partners of the international community,
to restore security and stability in Afghanistan and
improve the quality of life of its people. However, we
call for focusing international action on accelerating
the work of the implementation mechanisms of the
country’s national comprehensive development strategy
in order to develop the capacities of the key sectors in
Afghanistan so as to enable them to meet the needs
of the people and to consolidate peace, growth and
stability in all provinces. That should include restoring
Afghanistan’s traditional place both in the region and in
the international community.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union and would like to make a few remarks in its
national capacity.
We welcome the draft resolution on the situation
in Afghanistan (A/67/L.16) and support its adoption by
consensus. In doing so, we confirm our appreciation
of the substantial contribution the United Nations is
making to the stabilization of Afghanistan. Italy values
the continued efforts that the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative are promoting to that end
and reiterates its full and convinced support for their
work. We also commend the role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in leading and
coordinating the civilian efforts of the international
community, the importance of which will grow as the
military commitment gradually diminishes.
Over the past year, a series of important
conferences has allowed the international community
and Afghanistan to better define the terms of their
12-60766

A/67/PV.41

relationship, which will go well beyond the transition
process throughout what is known as the transformation
decade. Afghanistan has made remarkable progress over
the past 10 years in such fields as institutional capacity,
economic growth, the enhancement of human rights
and the development of its security forces. However,
much remains to be done, and international support is
still needed. That is why Italy fully supports the strong,
credible, unequivocal message that has emerged from
the meetings held in Bonn, Chicago, Kabul and Tokyo,
that is, the international community will not abandon
Afghanistan after 2014.
As for our national contribution, through a
decade-long presence, Italy has shown its steadfast
commitment to the stabilization and reconstruction
of Afghanistan. Over the past months, we have stated
our intention to stand by Afghanistan in a long-term
perspective beyond 2014. The bilateral partnership
agreement signed last January is the cornerstone of a
relationship that will be based less on assistance and
more on mutual commitments and cooperation on an
equal footing.
I would like to make three comments.
First, while our Afghan friends must feel reassured
in this perspective, it is equally important to highlight
that a new, more mature and more demanding partnership
is being forged. At the Tokyo Conference all parties
undertook substantial commitments: on the one hand,
the international community will continue to assure
its financial and political support of Afghanistan; on
the other, the Afghan Government is expected to make
further progress in such areas as democratic reforms,
transparency, good governance, and the protection
and promotion of human rights, in particular women’s
rights.
As expressed on several occasions, Italy considers
the issue of women’s conditions a top priority. We
recognize the tangible progress that the Afghan
Government has made in that domain, enhancing the
status of women in such important areas as education
and political participation. Those hard-won gains
now need to be preserved and further consolidated.
We also believe that the full inclusion of women in
Afghan society, on the basis of opportunities and rights
equal to those of men, as stated in article 22 of the
Afghan Constitution, will help Afghanistan achieve its
development and security goals.

12-60766

Secondly, the time has come for Afghanistan
to turn over a new leaf in its history and overcome
decades of conflict and turbulence. The success of
the reconciliation process among the many ethnic and
political components of Afghan society is a prerequisite
for building long-term stabilization and lasting peace.
We therefore encourage the efforts of the Afghan
Government to advance this process. We believe that
sustainable reconciliation can be achieved only through
an inclusive, nationwide, collective commitment to
peace, with the full participation of women and civil
society, particularly in light of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000).
Thirdly, the success of the reconciliation process
is key not only to the stabilization and prosperity of
Afghanistan, but also to the stability of the region as
a whole. While fully respecting Afghan ownership
of the peace process, we believe that the regional
environment could help create the conditions for its
positive advancement. In that regard, we appreciate the
recent visit of a delegation of the High Peace Council
to Pakistan, as it represents an important step forward
in regional dialogue and is a sign of a common will to
re-energize the process.
In the same spirit, we prize the initiatives aimed
at enhancing regional cooperation with Afghanistan. In
particular, we are encouraged by the progress achieved
so far within the Istanbul Process on Regional Security
and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan,
under the commendable leadership of the Afghan
Government. We expect the action plans for the first
set of confidence-building measures to be finalized
soon so that their implementation can begin, and
we reaffirm Italy’s readiness to contribute to those
measures concerning counter-narcotics and regional
infrastructure. Meanwhile, a structured and genuine
political dialogue among the countries of the Heart of
Asia initiative remains a key component of the process,
as it can strengthen mutual trust.
The upcoming elections represent a crucial test for
the fledgling Afghan democracy. We are encouraged
by the commitment shown by the Afghan Government,
and we welcome the recent announcement of the date
of the elections as an important step forward. It is of
the utmost importance to guarantee the credibility,
inclusiveness and transparency of the whole electoral
process, so as to lead up to a legitimate and broadly
accepted outcome.

13

A/67/PV.41

Let me conclude by recalling the importance of
today’s draft resolution. The international community
is speaking with one voice and the message it
is delivering is clear, that is, the stabilization of
Afghanistan remains a priority and the Afghan people
can count on international support for the years to
come. The year 2014 is not the end date of international
commitment, but a turning point towards a future that
is more and more in the hands of the Afghan people and
Government.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): Japan is pleased to sponsor
the draft resolution (A/67/L.16) before us. The unity of
the international community in supporting Afghanistan
is of particular importance for the long-term stability of
the country. Adopting the draft resolution by consensus
would send a strong message reaffirming that point.
Sincere appreciation is due to our colleagues from the
German delegation, who ably led the consultations
throughout the entire process.
Over the past year we have indeed witnessed a series
of important international conferences with decisive
outcomes based on both the Afghan Government’s
determination to secure long-term stability and the
long-term commitments of its international partners
beyond 2014. Building on the outcomes from the Bonn
Conference, the NATO Chicago Summit, the Kabul
Ministerial Conference and the Tokyo Conference,
Afghanistan now has a road map before it leading
towards a stable future with economic growth.
Given that political and development momentum,
I would like to stress the following three points, which
are critical to the lasting peace and stability of the
country.
First, in the belief that the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework serves as the driving
force for allowing Afghanistan to achieve its political
and development goals, Japan strongly urges the
Government to continue making the utmost efforts
to realize its commitments for a stronger and more
accountable Government, as stated in the Tokyo
Framework. In that connection, we welcome the Afghan
Government’s follow-up initiatives led by the Ministry
of Finance and look forward to seeing concrete actions
and tangible outcomes on the ground to follow.
Secondly, the road map before us will not bear
fruit as planned unless it is reinforced by the sustained
political will of the Afghan Government to proceed
with the peace and reconciliation process.

14

Needless to say, this entire course is inseparably
related to the improvement of the security situation
through the building up of the Afghan National Security
Forces and the advancement of the reintegration process.
They must therefore be addressed in a simultaneous
and effective manner in order to achieve irreversible
progress. Given the final timeline for the security
transition, there is no more time to lose.
The peace and reconciliation process is an Afghanled process. Japan supports the High Peace Council’s
active efforts in leading dialogues with the relevant
parties and especially welcomes the developments and
outcome of the recent visit of Mr. Rabbani, Chairman of
High Peace Council, to Pakistan. It is also encouraging
to see other actors, including non-governmental and
civilian institutions, being engaged in the process as
well, as we believe that such initiatives, when well
coordinated, could effectively complement the High
Peace Council’s activities.
Last but not least, we cannot stress enough the
importance of the upcoming presidential elections in
April 2014. The elections will be a testimony to all
the efforts and achievements of the Government of
Afghanistan and its people in all spheres. A wide range
of interlinked challenges persist, including concerning
security control, electoral law reforms, the elimination
of fraud, an efficient voter registration system,
inclusiveness, and others that should be addressed by
the Afghan leadership with the continued support of
the international community, headed by the United
Nations. We strongly hope that the election results
will lend much stronger legitimacy to the Government
of Afghanistan and allow the desired advancement
towards prosperity.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
determination to exert our fullest efforts for the peace
and stability of Afghanistan as a Member of the United
Nations and the unified international community. Let
us adopt this draft resolution by consensus, without
hesitation.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join other Member States
in sponsoring the draft resolution on the situation in
Afghanistan (A/67/L.16). The draft resolution reflects
the fact that the international community remains
committed to supporting the Afghan people in building
a secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan through
the 2014 security and political transition and beyond.

12-60766

A/67/PV.41

We recognize the continued service of the United
Nations in Afghanistan. We also commend the brave
and dedicated work of the Afghan National Security
Forces, the International Security Assistance Force and
United Nations personnel who are helping to build a
more secure Afghanistan.
Since we met last year, the Afghan people and
the international community have continued on the
path towards a responsible security transition and an
enduring commitment to Afghanistan. The meetings
in Bonn, Chicago, Kabul and Tokyo clarified the path
ahead. The transition is on track and the international
community’s long-term commitment to Afghanistan is
resolute.
Afghanistan and international partners have charted
a responsible road for the transfer of full responsibility
for security back to the Afghans. The Afghan National
Security Forces continue to grow in size and capability
and should reach their goal of being 352,000-strong
this year. The Afghan army is fighting in over 90 per
cent of all operations and is leading nearly half of them.
Through the third tranche of the security transition,
75 per cent of the Afghan population, including every
provincial capital, will be part of the transition process.
The NATO Summit in May confirmed that the progress
will be supported by the international community
beyond 2014. NATO and its potential operational
partners will continue to provide training, assistance
and advisory capacity as Afghanistan moves into the
transformation decade.
Afghanistan’s future will be realized not only
by a strong, capable security force but also by the
Afghan people’s access to economic opportunity and
a Government that meets their needs. The international
community’s total pledges in Tokyo of $16 billion in
economic assistance through 2015 meet the World
Bank’s estimate of Afghanistan’s requirements, just as
the Chicago Summit met its security requirements. That
assistance will help Afghanistan attract private-sector
investment and help usher in a transformation decade
marked less by aid and more by trade — all in a
framework of mutual accountability, regional economic
integration and shared responsibility.
The security and economic progress will further
be bolstered by a region that sees value in peace.
Afghanistan’s neighbours and near neighbours have
spoken in one voice to assure Afghanistan of their
support for an Afghan-led reconciliation process. They
endorsed the principles that need to guide peace and
12-60766

reconciliation at the Kabul Conference that was held
over the summer in support of the Istanbul Process on
Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan.
Accompanying the security transition in 2014 will
be a political transition. We welcome President Karzai’s
recent decision that elections will be held in April of
2014, and we also note the strong commitments made
by the Afghan Government to strengthen and improve
its electoral processes. That constitutional transfer of
power through a credible and inclusive presidential
election will be critical to maintaining stability and
preserving support from international donors.
Afghanistan today shows the tangible effects
of the efforts we all have made over the past decade.
Kabul is now a commercial centre of over 5 million
people. Schooling and primary health care have been
transformed. According to UNICEF, 10 years ago fewer
than 1 million Afghan children attended school and
today more than 8.2 million children will receive an
education, 3 million of whom are girls. Child mortality
rates have fallen by half, and the number of health
facilities has tripled.
The United Nations role in that process remains
indispensable. In supporting regional diplomacy and
through its development and humanitarian assistance
role in Afghanistan, the United Nations continues to
make a difference in the lives of the Afghan people.
Countries of the region, together with the broader
international community, have come together with the
Afghan people in support of Afghanistan’s future. In
Bonn, Chicago, Kabul and Tokyo we made the necessary
commitment to realize that future. We applaud those
efforts and support the Afghan people in that process.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I wish
to thank the German delegation for the excellent work
it has done in steering the negotiations on today’s draft
resolution (A/67/L.16). I also thank the Government
of Afghanistan for its constructive engagement in the
process throughout.
Today, I will focus on what the United Kingdom
considers to be the key issues ahead in Afghanistan: first,
the security transition from NATO to Afghan forces;
secondly, the Afghan-led peace and reconciliation
process; thirdly, the 2014 Afghan elections; and,
fourthly, the long-term international commitment to
Afghanistan.

15

A/67/PV.41

First, with regard to transition, 2014 is drawing
near. NATO continues the important work of handing
over security to the Afghan National Security Forces.
The United Kingdom remains confident in the ability of
all parties to get that done within the agreed timescale.
We are confident because transition is working well
and is on track. The Afghan National Security Forces
are growing in strength and capability. They are taking
responsibility for their own security and doing so with
enthusiasm and professionalism. But we have always
recognized that there is no purely military solution to
the situation in Afghanistan, which is why peace and
reconciliation remain key.
The objective remains the same: we support the
Afghan Government in its attempts to secure a peaceful
political settlement and agree that that should be done
in unity with key partners in the region. The Security
Council’s renewal of the sanctions regime established
under resolution 1988 (2011) next month will be an
opportunity to contribute further to this process. We
must ensure that designated individuals can travel
to participate in reconciliation talks and that the
designation criteria focus specifically on those who
pose a threat to Afghanistan’s security.
Secondly, it is imperative that we continue to
build on the momentum and achievements to date.
The United Kingdom therefore welcomes the visit of
the Afghan High Peace Council to Pakistan earlier
this month. We understand that the talks they held
were very productive, and we are encouraged by the
clear commitment of both parties to the peace and
reconciliation process. We welcome in particular
the call to the Taliban and other armed opposition
groups to participate in the peace process and to sever
links with Al-Qaida and other international terrorist
networks. The United Kingdom will continue to do all
it can to support efforts by Pakistan and Afghanistan
to strengthen their cooperation on this important issue.
Thirdly, the elections planned for 5 April 2014 will
bring many challenges, but we cannot underestimate
their importance. The United Kingdom looks forward to
credible and inclusive elections that deliver a peaceful
transition of power to a Government decided by the
people of Afghanistan. They will demand nothing
less, and the international community should strongly
support that objective. To achieve those aspirations,
transparency is key. We encourage the Government of
Afghanistan to tackle the issues that have overshadowed

16

previous elections and ensure that the prospects for
voter fraud and violent incidents are reduced.
Finally, let me reiterate the long-term commitment
of the United Kingdom to Afghanistan. The United
Kingdom will continue to build on our excellent
security partnership, to further social and economic
ties and to form closer cultural links with Afghanistan.
The Enduring Strategic Partnership document, agreed
by the United Kingdom and Afghanistan earlier this
year, provides the basis for those ambitions.
The international community as a whole has
made clear its enduring commitment to Afghanistan.
We are pleased that the draft resolution before the
General Assembly today (A/67/L.16) is another signal
of that. The NATO Chicago Summit, followed by the
Tokyo Conference, provided clear evidence of that
commitment. The pledges made on both occasions
demonstrated the seriousness with which we are
approaching post-2014 Afghanistan. The United
Kingdom will continue to meet the obligations into
which we have entered, and we are committed to
ensuring that all parties do likewise. In particular,
we strongly support the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework as an invaluable mechanism to manage
the commitments of the international community and
Afghanistan to each other.
Finally, the United Nations has a crucial and
enduring role to play in Afghanistan. We will continue
to ensure that it has the right people, the right objectives
and appropriate resources to carry out its important
work.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I would like to thank the
President for having convened this important debate,
which provides the General Assembly an annual
opportunity to review the progress made towards peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan needs the continued and active
engagement of the United Nations and its Member
States. We hope that today’s meeting and this year’s
draft resolution (A/67/L.16), which Pakistan is pleased
to be a sponsor of, will strengthen our collective
commitment to Afghanistan.
After the decade-long endeavours of the international
community for State-building in Afghanistan, the
country is poised to assume full responsibility for
its security and governance. The transition process
initiated after the 2010 Kabul Conference generated
the optimism of having a destination in sight. Since
12-60766

A/67/PV.41

then, Afghanistan’s progress in assuming greater
responsibilities is discernible. Further progress on
transition will require sustained engagement by the
international community. This year’s Chicago Summit
and Tokyo Conference outlined the framework for
such engagement. It is important for all pledges to be
honoured and translated into action. There should be
no repeat of a situation whereby Afghanistan is left to
fend for itself.
This year, the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) was
reviewed with a view to aligning it with the transition
process. We hope that will allow UNAMA to play a
more productive role.
The Afghan Government’s greater control of
territory is encouraging. It can enhance public
perception of greater security and confidence in
institutional structures, which is critical for long-term
stability.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (A/67/354)
includes an assessment of post-2014 Afghanistan. We
agree that security and humanitarian risks associated
with the withdrawal of the International Security
Assistance Force must be addressed in a forthright
manner. Four decades of war have made it clear that
the vexing question of Afghan security does not lend
itself to military solutions. Only a comprehensive
approach can change the underlying dynamics of a
deep-seated cycle of conflict. The Afghan-led peace
and reconciliation process is a manifestation of that
realization. It rightly seeks to address the root causes
of insecurity and tackles the fundamental nature of
conflict in Afghanistan.
We believe that the sustainability of the peace
process will be ensured if all stakeholders share the
goal of reconciliation. Afghanistan’s international
partners should facilitate such a convergence.
Externally
imposed,
impracticable
caveats
complicate the peace process. Similarly, the idea of
coerced reconciliation runs counter to a fundamental
lesson of Afghan history.
Pakistan supports an Afghan-led peace process.
We fully support the efforts of the Afghan High Peace
Council under the able leadership of Mr. Salahuddin
Rabbani.
Pakistan has always emphasized the importance of
regional unity to deal with challenges of security and

12-60766

development in Afghanistan. Immediate neighbours
have a special role in the stability of Afghanistan.
Pakistan is engaged in a number of important regional
initiatives on Afghanistan that aim to foster greater
regional connectivity in order to promote economic and
commercial cooperation as well as root out narcotics,
terrorism and extremism.
Pakistan organized this month’s regional ministerial
conference on counter-narcotics, in which 13 countries
participated. The conference declaration seeks to
establish a regional contact group on counter-narcotics
as part of a comprehensive regional approach. It charts
a concrete road map based on agreed timelines.
Pakistan’s bilateral relations with Afghanistan are
driven by a sense of shared destiny. Our cooperation
spans the entire spectrum of political, economic,
education and cultural relations. There are regular
exchanges of visits and continuous dialogue, including
at the highest levels.
Pakistan is engaged in several reconstruction
and development projects in Afghanistan, including
the construction of hospitals, roads and educational
institutions. In 2010 Pakistan doubled the number of
scholarships offered to Afghan students for higher
education. Our official bilateral trade with Afghanistan
stands at approximately $2 billion annually. The target
to enhance it to $5 billion by 2015 is well within reach.
In the area of security, Pakistan has sought closer
engagement with Afghanistan and its international
partners on real issues that lie beyond polemics. We need
further consolidation of our security and intelligence
cooperation through the Tripartite Commission, which
also includes the United States and the International
Security Assistance Force.
The interdiction of illegal cross-border movements
is vital to countering the menaces of terrorism, drug
trafficking and commercial smuggling. It is a joint
responsibility that needs to be discharged more
vigorously. Recently, Pakistan further enhanced its
security presence on its side of the international border
with Afghanistan, through new check-posts and regular
patrolling. Our deployments along the international
border far exceed the number of international and
Afghan forces present on the other side. The presence
of security forces on the Afghan side of the border
needs to be enhanced. Effective measures should be
in place to prevent cross-border attacks on our border
posts, security patrols and border villages. The leaders

17

A/67/PV.41

of the two countries have resolved to address such
matters using appropriate forums and channels. We
hope that recent bilateral commitments in that regard
will be upheld.
The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is often
eclipsed by the glare of security and political challenges.
That is unfortunate, as the country continues to suffer
from natural calamities, food insecurity and the impact
of conflict. We hope that shortfalls in the humanitarian
aid provided by the United Nations consolidated appeal
for Afghanistan will be rectified as much as possible, so
as to limit the negative impact on the most vulnerable
segments of the population.
In hosting more than 3 million Afghan refugees,
Pakistan is easing the humanitarian burden on
Afghanistan at considerable economic and social
cost to itself. During the past 10 years, Pakistan’s
average annual budget for Afghan refugees has nearly
doubled. After 10 years of internationally assisted
State-building efforts in Afghanistan, more refugees
should be repatriated to the country. Creating pullfactors in Afghanistan is part of the Solutions Strategy
for Afghan Refugees agreed to in Geneva this year. We
look forward to its smooth implementation.
I will conclude by emphasizing Pakistan’s abiding
commitment to a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
No country has suffered more than Pakistan from the
conflict and instability in Afghanistan. No country
stands to gain more than Pakistan from normalcy in
Afghanistan. We are confident that, through unity
and genuine reconciliation, the valiant people of
Afghanistan will surmount all pressing challenges to
usher in a brighter and prosperous future. Pakistan will
remain their committed and steadfast partner.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation
aligns itself with the statement made by the Head of the
Delegation of the European Union, and I would like to
add a number of comments in my national capacity.
This year we are celebrating the eleventh
anniversary of the international community’s
commitment to Afghanistan. Spain has shared in that
commitment since its inception, contributing a sizable
military and civilian force in an unequivocal desire to
help stabilize and reconstruct the country. The human
cost to Spain’s military contingent up to now has been
high — 98 killed, 13 in action.

18

Spain is currently the ninth-largest contributor
to NATO’s International Security Assistance Force,
mandated by the Security Council. Right now, there are
1,500 Spanish military personnel, spread out among
Herat province, where Spain operates the airport,
Badghis province, which is one of the most inaccessible
and disadvantaged provinces in the country and where
the headquarters for Spain’s provincial reconstruction
team is situated in Qala-i-Naw, and Kabul.
Spain firmly supports the Afghan Government’s
military and civilian initiatives in the complex
transitional process. We are now entering the final
phase of that process. In order for the transition to
be irreversible and sustainable, the international
community must redouble its efforts in the coming
months, especially in the fields of governance,
institution-building and economic development.
In Badghis the transfer of security responsibilities
to the Afghan authorities is either complete or nearly so
in five of the province’s six districts, leaving only the
Murghab district, where most of the insurgent activity
is concentrated. We are pleased with the progress of
the transition. Spain remains firmly committed to
advising, training and supporting the Afghan security
forces during the transition and beyond.
As for civilian aspects of the transition, in
our areas of operation we are poised to transfer to
Afghans the projects we have developed in the areas
of sanitation, professional training, agriculture, female
empowerment and water treatment, among others.
That transfer in the social sphere will be carried out
in tandem with the transfer in the security sphere. The
overwhelming majority of those projects are already
in the hands of Afghan personnel, and their transfer
will be formalized in agreements to be signed with the
respective Afghan ministries that will take them over.
The end of the first quarter of 2013 will mark the end of
the Spanish presence in Afghanistan, after seven years
of fruitful collaboration. I underline, though, that Spain
will continue to collaborate on projects in a multilateral
way, through contributions to various international
agencies.
Despite the difficulties of reconciliation, the recent
visit by the High Peace Council to Pakistan gives reason
to hope that dialogue will soon begin to move towards
a sustainable, inclusive reconciliation process that
bringings together not only armed groups but all sectors
of Afghan society. Such a process would, and must, be

12-60766

A/67/PV.41

in the spirit of the Afghan Constitution, especially in
matters of human rights, particularly those of women
and children.
The year 2012 has been one of significant
international milestones with regard to Afghanistan.
The Chicago NATO Summit in May saw agreement
on the strategic plan for Afghanistan, which sketched
a new allied mission after 2014 focused exclusively on
training. The Summit also generated the general outline
of how the international community could support
the sustainability of the Afghan National Security
Forces post-2014. The Kabul ministerial conference in
June pledged that the Istanbul Process — the goal of
which is to promote regional cooperation and security
and to achieve peace and stability in Afghanistan in
a regional environment conducive to security and
prosperity — would be steadfastly urged forward.
Finally, at the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan in
July, the groundwork was laid for supporting financial
security, which is clearly necessary in order to sustain
the current democratic regime. For its part, the
Government of Afghanistan renewed its commitments
in the areas of governance, development, the rule of
law, human rights and the fight against corruption.
The presidential elections scheduled for April 2014
will be a rigorous test of logistical organization, as we
all know. The international community should provide
all possible support to Afghanistan, which, in turn,
must ensure the holding of inclusive, transparent and
democratic elections with whose outcome the Afghan
people can fully identify. The work and assistance of
the United Nations will be of paramount importance in
those elections.
In conclusion, allow me to underscore the great
importance that Spain attaches to the role that the
European Union can play in providing assistance to the
Afghan authorities in capacity-building in areas such
as governance, transparency, the rule of law and the
training of Government, police and judicial officials and
those related to the country’s general socioeconomic
development.
For all those reasons, Spain fully supports the
ongoing negotiation of an ambitious partnership and
development cooperation agreement between the
European Union and the Afghan Government. That
agreement will undoubtedly guide relations between
the two parties in the coming years.

12-60766

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
endorses the statement made earlier this morning
by the representative of Tajikistan on behalf of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. China welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Afghanistan (A/67/354). China also hopes that the
relevant draft resolution (A/67/L.16) will once again be
adopted by consensus.
In recent years, with the help of the international
community and thanks to the tireless efforts of
the Afghan people, the peaceful reconstruction of
Afghanistan has seen progress. The achievements in
the political, economic, social and development areas
of the country are recognized by all. With the effective
strengthening of the Afghan National Security Forces,
a good basis has been established for the full handover
of security responsibilities.
China firmly supports the efforts of Afghanistan
to maintain its national sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity and to achieve lasting peace and
stability. We welcome the achievements of the people
and Government of Afghanistan in all areas. The
Afghan peace process is now at a crucial juncture. The
establishment of a peaceful, stable, independent and
developed Afghanistan in the future requires the joint
efforts of that country and the international community.
China supports the leading role of the United
Nations in coordinating international efforts to resolve
the situation in Afghanistan. We hope that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan will
continue to strengthen its cooperation and coordination
with the Government of Afghanistan. In that connection,
I would like to underscore the following four points.
First, efforts to achieve peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan must be fully owned and
led by the Afghan people. We support steps by the
Afghan Government to strengthen its capacity-building.
While observing full respect for Afghanistan’s national
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
the international community must support the efforts
of that country to increase its capacity-building and
improve its governance in order to meet the objective
of an Afghanistan governed by Afghans as soon as
possible.
Secondly, the reconstruction of Afghanistan
must continue and progress in its political process,
and economic development, security, stability and
national reconciliation must be ensured. It is crucial

19

A/67/PV.41

that the upcoming general election go ahead smoothly.
China welcomes the preparations in that regard by
the Government of Afghanistan. We support the
leading role of the Afghan Government in the peace
and reconciliation process. The transfer of security
responsibilities to the Afghan security forces must take
place in a gradual and orderly manner and with the goal
of ensuring peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Thirdly, the reconstruction of Afghanistan requires
the international community’s ongoing support and
assistance. The international community must meet its
commitments to assist the socioeconomic development
of that country by turning the $16 billion pledged into
concrete actions. That assistance must fully respect the
priority areas identified by the Afghan Government
and must support full implementation of the national
development strategy.
Fourthly, the Chinese Government fully supports
the establishment of friendly relations with countries in
the region on the basis of the principles of mutual respect,
equality and mutual benefit. At the June summit of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) in Beijing,
the Afghan issue was discussed and Afghanistan was
granted SCO observer status.
China is carefully following the developing situation
in Afghanistan. We have always actively participated
in the development process of the country. We support
Afghanistan’s efforts to achieve its development, to
improve the well-being of its people and to ensure its
peaceful reconstruction in line with the Kabul process.
China will continue to support the Government of
Afghanistan as far as possible.
China and Afghanistan are friendly neighbours.
The Chinese people have strong friendly sentiments
towards the people of Afghanistan. China sincerely
hopes that Afghanistan will soon achieve peace,
stability, independence and development. China is
ready to work with the international community and
to make its own contribution in order to achieve those
goals.
Mr. Abdrabbo (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to extend our thanks to Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his efforts, as well as those of his
team, in the past years to achieve greater stability in
Afghanistan.
Egypt stresses that stability in Afghanistan has a
direct and positive impact on international peace and
20

security in its immediate geographic surroundings,
as well as regionally and internationally. From
that perspective, Egypt supports the efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan to exercise full control
over its entire territory by 2014 — the deadline for the
departure from Afghanistan of the international forces.
Egypt is certain that the active and ongoing bilateral
cooperation between the two countries to enhance the
civilian capacities of the Government of Afghanistan
will help accomplish that goal.
Egypt underscores the importance of national
Afghan ownership of all programmes established to
enhance its capacities, with particular emphasis on
those that affect the daily lives of Afghan citizens, given
that such programmes will enable the Government
of Afghanistan to undertake all tasks entrusted to it
by the end of 2014. Increasing national ownership by
the Government of Afghanistan of those programmes
will enable the Afghan people to reap the dividends of
peace, security and stability after decades of conflict
and suffering. Taking a long-term approach will help
achieve sustainable development in Afghanistan, which
is the best means for achieving social stability in the
country.
Egypt supports the efforts of the international
community to help the Government of Afghanistan,
especially the international conferences held during
the past year aimed at intensifying cooperation and
communication among Afghanistan and its neighbours
and to raise the necessary international support and
funding for building the capabilities of the Afghan
National Security Forces so that they can extend their
control over the whole of the country’s territory. Egypt
reiterates that it is crucial that Afghanistan’s national
reconciliation process be inclusive of all tribes and
factions. As such, the Afghan experience in reconciling
disparate social elements could be held up as a role
model of the ability of different factions and tribes
to live together, putting the national interests of their
country above other considerations.
In conclusion, the problems that face Afghanistan
are deeply rooted. The experience of past years proves
that finding solutions to those problems will require a
collective international effort enlisting the participation
of all countries. We look forward to a prosperous future
for Afghanistan, based on democracy, pluralism and
safeguarded human rights for the Afghan citizens,
who have struggled to achieve stability, security and
improved living conditions.

12-60766

A/67/PV.41

Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to start by expressing our appreciation for the
convening of this discussion on a subject of great
significance to us, our region and the world. Let me also
convey a warm welcome to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš. We thank him for his
work as Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report detailing the work
of UNAMA and offering his analysis of the situation in
Afghanistan (A/67/354). I also express my thanks to the
German delegation for coordinating and facilitating the
intergovernmental negotiations that have led us to the
annual draft resolution on the situation in Afghanistan
(A/66/L.16).
There were significant political developments
in Afghanistan during the past year. One important
political development is the gradual drawdown of
foreign forces. As foreign forces prepare to withdraw
from Afghanistan by the end of 2014, our efforts should
focus on providing assistance and helping Afghanistan
in its Afghan-led transition to a stable country. We
need concerted international and regional support
aimed at laying the foundations for sustainable peace
and stability in Afghanistan. Progress on security
and development is the key for peace, progress and
stability in Afghanistan. Economic cooperation should
be speeded up, along with political, security and other
confidence-building measures, in order to ensure peace
and stability for Afghanistan, and thereby for the entire
region.
The withdrawal of foreign military forces from
Afghanistan should be genuine. Obviously, the
experience of the recent decades of foreign military
presence in Afghanistan has taught the lesson that the
conflict in Afghanistan cannot be resolved by military
means. The continued presence of military forces,
under any excuse or pretext, would only add to the
instability and violence. The violence in Afghanistan
has had a drastic effect on the security and wellbeing of its citizens. The violence is not caused just
by armed extremists, inasmuch as a growing number
of civilian casualties in Afghanistan have been
caused by NATO operations. All sides should strictly
abide by international humanitarian law and relevant
international law, so as to effectively protect civilians.
Afghanistan is passing through an important phase
in its history. The Afghan people are inspired by the
prospect of a future free from violence and war. The

12-60766

nation deserves our help as it seeks to take full charge
of its destiny.
Another challenge for Afghanistan is the increase
in the cultivation of narcotic drugs. According to the
Afghanistan Opium Survey 2012, released in early
November by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), total opium poppy cultivation
has increased by 18 per cent and now covers 154,000
hectares, up from 131,000 hectares in 2011. UNODC
warns that the rise in cultivation has occurred despite
the Afghan Government’s latest increase in efforts
to destroy poppy fields and to help farmers find
alternative sources of income. At the same time, the
report indicates that prices for opium have remained
relatively high throughout 2012, at $196 per kilogram.
That provides a strong incentive for farmers to expand
their poppy cultivation.
The Survey sends a strong message that the
international community cannot afford to remain
complacent in the face of the problem. A strong
commitment is needed from both Afghan and
international partners to curb the menace of drug
cultivation and drug trafficking, which breed extremism.
In that regard, we commend initiatives to fight drugs
and the help in that fight offered by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. We welcomed the triangular
initiative among Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of
Iran and Pakistan within the framework of the region’s
counter-narcotics efforts. We also welcomed the
regional ministerial conference on counter-narcotics
held in Islamabad on 12 and 13 November, which aimed
at enhancing regional cooperation to counter narcotics.
Taking those efforts into account, what remains is to
implement measures to alleviate the serious concerns
of neighbouring countries, transit countries of the drug
traffic and countries of destination.
The issue of refugees is also a challenge, not only
for Afghanistan but also for neighbouring States and
the international community. Additional efforts must
be undertaken in order to repatriate refugees and ensure
that they are reintegrated into Afghan society. In that
regard, we welcomed the International Conference on
the Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees held in
Geneva in May and the joint communiqué it issued,
aimed at the increased sustainability of returns and
continued support for host countries.
At present, more than 1 million Afghan refugees
are registered in Iran, while an even greater number

21

A/67/PV.41

of unregistered Afghans are also living in our country.
Afghan nationals have continued to enjoy Iran’s
educational and welfare facilities, among others,
and to benefit from the same subsidies that our own
people receive. We once again urge the international
community to continue to strengthen and expedite its
efforts to create conditions conducive to the sustainable
repatriation of refugees and their full rehabilitation and
reintegration in their homeland.
The Istanbul Conference and the recent series
of high-level meetings have strengthened the longterm partnership between Afghanistan and its
neighbours, as well as with its international partners.
The process was further crystallized at the Heart of
Asia Ministerial Conference in Kabul in June, which
set confidence-building measures as a priority. The
meetings provided an opportunity to exchange views
on how to move forward with regard to establishing
a stable and prosperous Afghanistan. We hope that
the confidence-building mechanism devised at the
Conference and its follow-up meetings will promote
results-oriented cooperation among all the countries
of the region, aimed at developing Afghanistan’s
infrastructure in line with the wishes of its people,
and paving the way for their long-cherished goal of
achieving self-reliance and greater economic prosperity
for Afghanistan. The United Nations has a key role in
coordinating international and regional efforts in that
regard and enjoys our full support.
We believe that capacity-building for Afghan
institutions must remain at the heart of international
efforts aimed at enabling the Government of Afghanistan
to exercise its sovereign authority in all its functions.
We are confident that more coherent and coordinated
regional efforts, and the fulfilment of their obligations
by international stakeholders, will contribute to
ensuring Afghanistan’s sustainable development and
its people’s prosperity. Building a sustainable, stable
nation is crucial, not only for the future of the Afghan
people but also for peace and stability in the region,
Asia and the world.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has always firmly
supported Afghanistan in its efforts to maintain its
national sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity and to realize enduring peace and stability.
We hope that the international community will adhere
to the principle of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
process and continue to support the Government and the
people of Afghanistan in their efforts to achieve peace

22

and reconstruction and to realize, at an early date, the
objective of an Afghanistan governed by Afghans.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Slovakia is pleased
to be one of the sponsors of the draft resolution on
the situation in Afghanistan (A/67/L.16). We thank
Germany for steering the negotiations and facilitating
a consensus on the draft resolution, which we hope we
will adopt shortly. In our view, it represents a renewed
message of encouragement for the Afghan authorities
and people, as well as a commitment on the part of the
international community. The text covers every aspect
of the country’s achievements, while acknowledging
the challenges that still remain.
Slovakia aligns itself with the statement made
earlier on behalf of the European Union. I would also
like to highlight some aspects of the issue that are
particularly important to my country.
Afghanistan remains a top operational priority
for the Slovak Republic. Our troops will continue to
be deployed there for as long as the situation requires.
In order to help build up Afghan security forces, the
National Council of the Slovak Republic has enacted
a new mandate extending our contribution to the
International Security Assistance Force until 2014. We
are also changing the makeup of our forces to better
react to and reflect the evolving situation. We are
reducing our engineering and guard capabilities and
deploying a greater number of instructors, mentors
and special forces. The main focus of the changes is on
the building and deployment by May 2014 of a special
operations task group, which will advise the Afghan
army and police.
We also need to continue to build functional and
credible Afghan National Security Forces. Now that
the National Security Forces have almost reached the
anticipated numbers, it is crucial to focus on their
quality. As we see it, the main challenge is insider
attacks, which have multiple negative effects on the
overall situation. The Slovak Republic is ready to
consider the possibility of sending civilian experts
to the region if required. Our national legislation on
the subject, which would allow civilian experts to be
sent to participate in international crisis management
activities outside the territory of the Slovak Republic,
came into force this year.
Apart from our engagement in the area of peace
and security, we are expanding all the components of
our comprehensive assistance to Afghanistan, which

12-60766

A/67/PV.41

is among the top three priority country programmes
for Slovak official development assistance. For a more
objective picture, the amount of our aid should be
compared to the size of our country.
We are aware that Afghanistan will need help
from the international community even after 2014.
There has rightly been a focus on working on longerterm plans, and commitments are in place to help build
Afghanistan’s political, security and development
self-sufficiency. To mention some examples of Slovak
engagement, since 2004 we have approved 22 projects
for Afghanistan, aimed at building schools in rural
areas, providing education for girls and women, and
supporting small enterprises, local TV broadcasting,
capacity-building and civil society.
The Government of the Slovak Republic has already
approved full debt relief for Afghanistan, and is ready
to fulfil the pledge it made at the Tokyo Conference
earlier this year, which it has since reiterated on several
occasions through bilateral channels. We are ready to
maintain the levels and modalities of our assistance
in years to come while concentrating on the sectors
of health care, rural and socioeconomic development
and building civil society and security institutions.
We believe that through targeted projects that are well
coordinated and in line with the Afghan Government’s
priorities we can improve the daily lives of the Afghan
people. Step by step, we can help to reach our common
goal of a secure, stable and prosperous country.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to express our sincere gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative, Mr. Kubiš, for
the dedicated and outstanding work being carried out by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
We encourage the Afghan people and Government
to strengthen their relations with the United Nations
and to use the opportunity for cooperation with the
Organization to its full potential. We believe that
the central role of the United Nations remains one of
the key factors in promoting peace and stability in
Afghanistan.
Mr. Husain (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada is
pleased to be a sponsor of the draft resolution introduced
today on the situation in Afghanistan (A/67/L.16), and
we thank the German delegation for coordinating the
process.
The past year was particularly important for
Afghanistan’s transition. The conferences that have

12-60766

been held in Istanbul, Bonn, Kabul, Chicago and
Tokyo have enabled the international community to
demonstrate its commitment to ensuring the security,
stability and long-term development of a democratic
Afghanistan. For its part, the Afghan Government is
committed to enhancing transparency, responsibility
and respect for human rights and the rule of law. This
year’s draft resolution reiterates and further enhances
those mutual commitments. We are encouraged to
see that it is once again to be adopted by consensus.
That consensus is of particular importance during the
transitional phase, whose success depends upon the
cooperation and support of all partners in Afghanistan.
This year’s draft resolution recognizes the role
that the regional community plays in the transition and
calls upon Afghanistan’s neighbours to increase their
cooperation in order to combat the Taliban. Paragraph
83 refers in particular to the critical role that regional
cooperation plays in ensuring peace, security, stability
and socioeconomic development in Afghanistan,
while paragraph 85 recognizes the important need to
strengthen trust and cooperation between Afghanistan,
neighbouring countries and regional partners so that,
together, they can combat the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
other extremist groups, including the Islamic Emirate
of Afghanistan, the Taliban, Al-Qaida, the Quetta and
Peshawar Shuras and the Haqqani network.
(spoke in English)
That language makes clear the critical role that
Afghanistan’s neighbours play in the stability and
long-term prosperity of the country. Indeed, those who
do not support stability in Afghanistan are working
against the interests of peace and freedom, and may
also be in contravention of Security Council resolution
1368 (2001). Canada also emphasizes the importance
of holding free and fair elections in Afghanistan. We
recognize that the Government of Afghanistan has
already taken steps to reform its electoral system,
in the hope of ensuring that future elections will be
democratic, transparent, credible and inclusive. Yet
more must be done.
We urge the Government of Afghanistan to
take immediate action to continue to strengthen its
electoral laws and processes in order to ensure that the
irregularities and attempted fraud that took place in its
most recent presidential and parliamentary elections do
not recur. We also urge the international community
and donors in Afghanistan to work actively to prevent

23

A/67/PV.41

fraud before, during and after the elections. That will
help ensure that the people of Afghanistan have a voice
in the future of their country and that indecision does
not prevent the Afghan Government from meeting the
demands of civil society and of legitimate political
actors.
Transparency and accountability will be essential
as we move towards transition, so as to ensure that
international assistance is delivered responsibly,
efficiently and effectively. Canada reiterates its
expectation that the Government of Afghanistan
will demonstrate tangible results with the assistance
provided by the international community. Specifically,
Afghanistan must follow through on the commitments
it made during the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan to
combat corruption and increase transparency in order to
establish more effective and accountable administration
at the national, provincial and local levels.
Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his regular critical reporting
on the situation in Afghanistan. I also thank Germany
and the sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.16. We look
forward to its adoption by consensus.
Let me reiterate how much importance we attach
to the United Nations efforts in Afghanistan. Given
the reconfiguration of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and the decrease in resources, a
continued debate on the role and responsibilities of the
United Nations in Afghanistan is necessary.
We welcome the further consolidation of the
commitments to partnership and mutual accountability
made by the Afghan Government and the international
community at the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan.
In Tokyo, Lithuania reconfirmed its commitment
to continue political support for, and assistance to,
Afghanistan in the run-up to 2014 and beyond. Over the
past seven years, Lithuania has provided approximately
€4.5 million in funding for a wide range of projects. We
are determined to keep our development assistance at
the current level and to support civilian and military
capacity-building efforts after the transition has been
completed. Education, health care, good governance
and the rule of law are some of the areas in which
the Afghan Government has achieved considerable
progress and which remain critical for the future of
the country. We will continue to work with the Afghan
authorities to build administrative capacities, promote

24

rural development, support women’s empowerment and
strengthen civil society.
My country is also determined to maintain strong
support for the reform and further development of
a sustainable civilian police force and rule-of-law
institutions through the European Union Police Mission
in Afghanistan. Lithuania has been contributing to that
Mission and will continue to do so. The Mission, which
is fully integrated into the wider international efforts
to reform the Afghan national police, has been working
closely to that end with key partners, including the
United Nations. Our goal is make sure that its efforts
deliver substantial results in the country’s provinces.
We are convinced that the Afghan National Security
Forces are capable of maintaining security in their
country, as it is their responsibility and their right to do.
Since 2010, Lithuania has focused on training and
providing assistance to Afghan provincial security
forces. In line with the objective of handing over full
responsibility for security to Afghans by the end of
2014, my country will continue to support Afghanistan
on its path towards self-reliance and security. In
that regard, our Government has decided to allocate
$500,000 annually to supporting the Afghan National
Security Forces for a period of three years, from 2015
to 2017.
Afghanistan must maintain the pace of reforms.
The development and smooth implementation of
national priority programmes, improved transparency
and accountability, the fight against corruption, and
respect for human rights — in particular the rights and
empowerment of women — remain essential elements
if international assistance and domestic transformation
efforts are to succeed. Prosperity and security grow
when neighbours trust each other. Lithuania encourages
Afghan efforts to foster international cooperation
through the Afghan-led Istanbul Process. In September
2012, my country hosted an international conference
under the theme “Afghanistan and the region: practical
approaches for sustainable development,” which brought
together high-level participants from Afghanistan,
Central and South Asia and the Nordic/Baltic region.
The conference was an opportunity to share best
practices and successful examples of regional integration
and cooperation. One of the conclusions drawn by
participants in the conference was that free-trade
agreements were essential between Afghanistan and its
closest neighbours. Gains in education at the national
level could be further supported through a regional
12-60766

A/67/PV.41

network of universities. Regional projects in the areas
of energy, communications, border management, the
environment and other spheres would bind communities
and people together. Free media also remain essential
for fostering understanding and a sense of community.
Political dialogue must be driven by the future agenda
rather than past history.
In conclusion, our commitment to Afghanistan and
our support for that country’s stability, security and
development remains firm now and will continue to be
so after the transition period.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
I would like to express India’s appreciation to the
President for scheduling this discussion. I also avail
myself of this opportunity to commend the German
delegation for coordinating the intergovernmental
negotiations in an excellent manner, which has brought
us the annual draft resolution on the situation in
Afghanistan. As we have for the past several years, we
are happy to sponsor draft resolution A/67/L.16, which
has traditionally been adopted by consensus.
Major international and regional conferences on
Afghanistan were held during the past year against
the backdrop of the ongoing security transition. The
international community renewed its commitment to
peace, security and development in Afghanistan at
conferences in Bonn, Chicago and Tokyo, as well as at
the regional level in Istanbul and Kabul.
As the Afghan Government assumes responsibility
for security and governance, with the drawdown of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) by the
end of 2014, we welcome the pledges of $16 billion in
financial aid through 2015 that were made at the Tokyo
Conference on Afghanistan, as well as the commitment
to sustain support through 2017 at, or near, the levels
of the past decade. At the same time, we are conscious
that those figures represent the baseline, or minimum
requirement, for Afghanistan to sustain itself.
The Delhi Investment Summit of 28 June, hosted
by India, was an important endeavour in directing the
focus of regional and international attention towards
investing in Afghanistan and its potential to provide
economic development and stability to Afghanistan
during the transition period.
Amid the drawdown of ISAF and the accompanying
economic downturn, it is indeed worrisome that the
infrastructure of terror is still intact in the region. The
Secretary-General’s latest report notes:
12-60766

“Little has changed in the underlying dynamics
to mitigate a deep-seated cycle of confl ict.
Furthermore, a diminished international presence
will have a significant fi nancial impact in many areas
that, at least in the short term, may even exacerbate
predatory behaviour”. (A/67/354, para. 62)
Afghanistan continues to face an existential threat
from terrorism, which draws upon ideological, financial
and logistical support from beyond its borders. The
security situation remains fragile, and there has been
a sharp increase in the variety, spread and intensity of
attacks by the Taliban and their backers. Moreover, the
cross-border shelling of the past few months has caused
large-scale disruptions to normal life and has sparked
public outrage. The Afghan National Security Forces are
ill-equipped to repel that challenge without substantial
assistance from the international community. We need
concerted action to isolate and root out the syndicate
of terrorism, which includes elements of Al-Qaida,
the Taliban, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups.
As Afghanistan takes forward the task of national
reconciliation, in accordance with the criteria laid down
in the Kabul Communiqué, we fully support regional
confidence-building efforts as a critical component
of international efforts to support the country.
Regional cooperation and connectivity are critical for
Afghanistan’s political and economic progress. The
Istanbul Heart of Asia Process is an important step in
that direction. To strengthen that cooperation, India has
taken the lead in two commercial confidence-building
measures under the Istanbul Process.
We are fully cognizant that the economic viability
of Afghanistan depends on its fuller integration into
its neighbourhood so that it can regain its historical
role as a land bridge between South Asia, Central
Asia, the Middle East and Eurasia. The development
of transport infrastructure and transit arrangements
linking Afghanistan to the north, south, east and west,
including through the Chabahar port, would benefit
not only Afghanistan but also the entire Central
Asian region by creating trade, transit and investment
linkages.
Afghanistan and India have a long shared history
going back over millennia. The two countries are
natural strategic partners by virtue of geography and a
common vision of peace and cooperation in the region.
Our bilateral relationship is extensive, multifaceted
and characterized by high-level interaction. President
25

A/67/PV.41

Karzai visited India earlier this month. That visit
offered an opportunity to review the entire gamut of
the bilateral relationship and to discuss regional and
international issues of mutual interest. During the visit,
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh reiterated India’s
support for Afghanistan during the crucial period of
transition up to the end of 2014 and thereafter.
The implementation of the strategic partnership
agreement of October 2011 between the two countries
has already been set in motion with the convening of
the first meeting of the Partnership Council on 1 May.
During the past decade, India pledged up to $2 billion
in development and humanitarian assistance. We have
managed to carry out some of the most economical and
cost-effective projects in Afghanistan. The $500 million
assistance announced by the Prime Minister of India in
May 2011 is being spent from 2012 to 2015. The projects
under consideration will be in line with the projects
suggested under the national priority programmes of
the Government of Afghanistan. The pace and nature
of the utilization of present and future Indian assistance
will be determined by the preference, comfort level and
absorptive capacity of the Afghan Government.
India remains unwavering in its commitment to
assist the people of Afghanistan in their endeavour to
build a peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous
nation. We support the good work done by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
It is important that amid the cutback in United Nations
footprint in Afghanistan and the reconfiguration of
UNAMA due to budgetary constraints, all efforts
should be made to avoid an adverse impact on its
operational effectiveness.
Moving forward, we need to create an enabling
environment in which the Afghan people can live in
peace and security and decide their future themselves,
without outside interference, coercion or intimidation.
The international community must continue to work
with renewed vigour and unity of purpose to strengthen
the efforts of the Afghan Government in seeking
solutions that are inclusive and are led by the Afghan
people themselves.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, my delegation would like to pay tribute to the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, the
participating members of the International Security
Assistance Force and other international agencies, as
well as civil society, all of whom are playing vital roles
in building a peaceful and democratic Afghanistan.
26

Over the course of 2012, the partnership between
the international community and Afghanistan has
further strengthened, while the Afghan Government’s
ownership and its growing role in security and economic
planning have been steadily increasing.
The international community has demonstrated
its renewed commitment to the Afghan people beyond
2014. At the Chicago Summit in May and the Tokyo
Conference in July, the international community took
steps to provide long-term financial support to the
Afghan people in their efforts to establish sustainable
peace and security and to rebuild their country.
For its part, the Afghan Government committed
itself to achieving more efficiency and transparency in
its governance at the Tokyo Conference. Efforts have
also been made over the past months to enhance its
security capability and to formulate its development
strategy. In particular, the Government of the Republic
of Korea welcomes the Afghan presidential decree
issued on 27 July to implement Afghan commitments
under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework. It
is our hope that concrete actions will be followed and
positive changes made on the ground. We also welcome
the appointment of the new Chair of the High Peace
Council in April as an important step in the Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report
(A/67/354), the transfer of responsibility for security
arrangements to the Afghan authorities is progressing
as planned. As of now, 75 per cent of Afghanistan’s
population lives in areas where the Afghan Government
takes the lead for security. By mid-2013, the Afghan
forces will take the lead in ensuring security nationwide.
As we prepare for the mid-2013 milestone, closer
cooperation between the international community
and the Afghan Government will become all the more
important so that the transition process does not hinder
peace and stability in Afghanistan. In that regard, we are
deeply concerned about the increasing insider attacks,
as they could further affect the long-term prospect for
stability in the country. While the Afghan Government
should make serious efforts to prevent such attacks, the
unwavering support of the international community
will be needed more than ever.
At the same time, political reform and good
governance by the Afghan Government will continue
to remain vital to the successful transition. Building
regional cooperation will underpin the stability and the

12-60766

A/67/PV.41

livelihoods of the Afghan people. Furthermore, in the
light of the Afghan presidential election to be held in
2014, it is even more important to make headway in the
political process.

that establishes a broad framework for bilateral
cooperation beyond the transition. In July, Afghan and
Australian ministers also signed the Memorandum of
Understanding on Development Cooperation.

The Government of the Republic of Korea has been
actively supporting Afghanistan’s capacity-building,
especially since setting up a provincial reconstruction
team in Parwan province in 2010. To continue such
efforts, following last year’s contribution of $50 million
to the Afghan National Army Trust Fund, the Korean
Government will this year contribute an additional
$50 million to the Fund, as well as another $50 million
to the Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan.

Australia has increased its fi nancial and development
assistance beyond 2014. Our development assistance
will increase from $165 million to $250 million per year
by 2015, and we will provide $100 million per year to
sustain Afghan National Security Forces sustainment
from 2015 to 2017.

Against that backdrop, my delegation welcomes
today’s draft resolution on the situation in Afghanistan
(A/67/L.16), which embodies the political will of all
Member States that support the Afghan people in
their political and national reconstruction process.
It is in that vein that the Republic of Korea joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution as a way of underlining
our unwavering support. I would like to reiterate
that the Republic of Korea will remain committed to
working with the Afghan people and their Government,
as well as with the international community, to build a
more prosperous, secure and democratic Afghanistan.
Ms. King (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to sponsor the General Assembly’s draft
resolution on Afghanistan (A/67/L.16) again in 2012.
This was a crucial year for the partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community, during
which we made strong commitments to support
Afghanistan’s future. That partnership rests on
mutual assurances between the Afghan Government
and the international community — that the Afghan
Government will lead its people towards a stable, secure
and self-sufficient State, and that the international
community will continue to support Afghanistan
during the transition and beyond.
As Australian Prime Minister Gillard noted in her
speech to our Parliament last month, 2012 has seen
significant progress in planning beyond transition,
with a comprehensive international framework for
supporting Afghanistan beyond 2014 now in place.
Australia too has made significant commitments in
that regard. We have established important agreements
this year to underpin and strengthen bilateral relations.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Karzai signed
a comprehensive long-term partnership in May

12-60766

Throughout the transition period, Australia will
continue to provide support to Afghanistan, centred
on Uruzgan province, where we lead the provincial
reconstruction team and where, in October, we assumed
command of the combined team. In the latter framework,
Australian troops, diplomats and aid workers cooperate
and work in partnership with their Afghan counterparts
on a daily basis.
In 2012, the Afghan Government itself has made
significant commitments. The year ahead will see
Afghanistan implement reforms to improve governance,
prepare for the presidential and parliamentary elections
in 2014 and 2015, bolster anti-corruption efforts and
promote and protect human rights. We commend the
revitalization of the High Peace Council and its efforts
to work towards a political solution, including through
the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme.
The international community, particularly the United
Nations, has a key role to play in supporting those
efforts, and the peace process must include all sectors
of Afghan society and involve the active participation
of women.
Australia welcomes the agreement between
Afghanistan and the international community enshrined
in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
Implementing those principles and goals should guide
our partnership next year, in 2014 and throughout the
next decade.
Afghanistan has already shown demonstrable
progress. We welcome the Independent Election
Commission’s announcement, endorsed by President
Karzai, that the presidential election will be held on
5 April 2014. A credible, inclusive and transparent
presidential election will be essential to political
transition in Afghanistan and will mark the significant
progress made over the last decade.

27

A/67/PV.41

We are pleased to see that the General Assembly
draft resolution before us welcomes the recent progress.
But it also realistically highlights the challenges that
Afghanistan and the international community continue
to face. At the most fundamental level, we must continue
to ensure that Afghanistan will never again become a
safe haven for international terrorism. We all have a
stake in preventing the return of international terrorism
to Afghanistan.
We also need to continue the fight against narcotics
and drug trafficking. We must persist in efforts to
promote regional cooperation through bodies such as
the Heart of Asia group of countries. And we must
continue to encourage anti-corruption reforms.
Australia welcomes the emphasis placed in the draft
resolution on support for Afghanistan’s efforts to protect
human rights, particularly those of women and girls, to
organize elections and, of course, to provide security to
the Afghan people. All of those efforts will be Afghanled, and the draft resolution rightly emphasizes that.
But it also demonstrates the international community’s
ongoing support for Afghanistan’s own efforts.
The United Nations continues to play a critical role
in Afghanistan’s long-term development and stability.
We welcome the central role of the United Nations in
coordinating international efforts to support human
rights, governance and the rule of law, preparations for
elections, humanitarian assistance, reintegration and
counter-narcotics efforts.
We again welcome the Secretary-General’s
assurances in his quarterly report (A/67/354) that,
despite the reconfiguration of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), coupled
with a significant reduction in its resources, the United
Nations commitment to Afghanistan remains steadfast.
Australia continues to strongly support UNAMA’s
mandate.

28

My Government has made Afghanistan’s
development and stability a key priority. Australia’s
term on the Security Council will coincide with a
critical time of transition in Afghanistan and with
our continued efforts to implement a comprehensive
framework for Afghanistan’s future. Australia remains
committed to working with the Afghan Government,
the Afghan people and international partners to achieve
the common goal of a peaceful, secure and stable
Afghanistan.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 38. The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.16.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since draft resolution A/67/L.16 was submitted,
the following countries have also become sponsors:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
China, Eritrea, Greece, Haiti, Indonesia, Malta,
Micronesia, Morocco, New Zealand, Palau, Peru, the
Philippines, Serbia, Switzerland, Turkmenistan, the
United Kingdom, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Uzbekistan.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.16?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 67/16).

A/67/L.16

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 38?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

12-60766
