UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/4*
6 March 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3737th meeting of the Security Council, held on 31 January 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council.
"The Security Council has considered the letter of the SecretaryGeneral of 21 January 1997 (S/1997/62) concerning developments with respect
to the United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES), and welcomes his evaluation.
"The Security Council welcomes the letter of 13 January 1997
(S/1997/27, annex) from the Government of Croatia on the completion of the
peaceful reintegration of the region under the Transitional Administration,
which guarantees the local Serb community representation and a voice at
various levels of local, regional and national government, provides for a
limited deferment of military service, and affirms the intention of the
Government of Croatia to provide the local Serb population with the
protection of their legal and civil rights under Croatian law. The Council
calls upon the Government of Croatia to implement fully the commitments
contained in that letter and the oral guarantees made by Croatian officials
to UNTAES as specified in the letter of the Secretary-General of
21 January 1997 (S/1997/62).
"The Security Council also notes the letter of the local Serb
Executive Council and Regional Assembly on this matter of 16 January 1997
(S/1997/64, annex).
"The Security Council recalls the statement of its President of
15 August 1996 (S/PRST/1996/35) and again underlines the importance of the
holding of elections, the organization of which is the responsibility of
UNTAES, in accordance with the Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (S/1995/951, annex) signed on
12 November 1995 (the Basic Agreement). The Council shares the view of the

* Reissued for technical reasons.

97-06163 (E)

060397

/...

S/PRST/1997/4
English
Page 2

Transitional Administrator that the rights and guarantees outlined in the
letter from the Government of Croatia, if fully implemented, constitute a
solid basis for the holding of elections simultaneously with nationwide
elections in Croatia, and offer substantial progress towards the completion
of the process of peaceful reintegration of the region. In this context,
the Council emphasizes that the holding and certification of elections,
upon a decision by the Transitional Administration, within the envisaged
time-frame will only be possible if the Croatian authorities fulfil their
obligations with respect to the completion of the issuance of citizenship
and identity documents for all eligible voters and relevant technical
documents, and provide all information as required by UNTAES for
certification of the elections. The Council underlines the need for full
cooperation by the local Serbs.
"The Security Council reiterates the importance of confidence-building
measures which could benefit residents of the region beyond the expiration
of the mandate of UNTAES. In this regard, it encourages the Croatian
authorities to maintain the present demilitarized status of the region.
"The Security Council reaffirms the importance of effectively
implementing the rights of all residents in the region to equal treatment
with respect to housing, access to reconstruction grants and loans, and to
property compensation, as guaranteed by Croatian law. It reiterates the
right of all refugees and displaced persons to return to their places of
origin. It also reiterates the right of residents of a State to choose
freely where they wish to live. The upholding of these principles is of
vital importance for the stability of the region. In this connection, it
strongly encourages the Government of Croatia to reaffirm its obligations
under the provisions of the Croatian Constitution, Croatian law, and the
Basic Agreement, to treat all its citizens equally regardless of their
ethnicity.
"The Security Council stresses that the restoration of the
multi-ethnic character of Eastern Slavonia is important to international
efforts to maintain peace and stability in the region of former Yugoslavia
as a whole. The Council encourages the Croatian Government to take such
steps as are needed to promote goodwill, build confidence, and provide
assurances of a safe, secure and stable environment to all people in the
region. These steps should include full implementation of its Law on
Amnesty, full cooperation with the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, improved cooperation with respect to local Serbs who wish to
return to other areas of Croatia, full compliance with the Basic Agreement,
and full cooperation with UNTAES and other international organizations.
The Council welcomes the commitments by the Government of Croatia with
regard to the establishment of a Joint Council of Municipalities, Council
of the Serb ethnic community, and with respect to educational and cultural
autonomy of the Serb population and other minorities in the region. The
Council notes the reassurances of the Croatian authorities that
applications for a second period of deferment of military service for local
Serbs will be considered in a positive manner.

/...

S/PRST/1997/4
English
Page 3

"The Security Council condemns the incident that occurred at Vukovar
on 31 January 1997 and that resulted in the death of an UNTAES peacekeeper
and injuries to other UNTAES personnel.
"The Security Council calls upon both sides to cooperate in good faith
on the basis of the Basic Agreement. It also calls upon them to continue
to cooperate with the Transitional Administrator and with UNTAES in order
to ensure the success of the process of reintegration. It calls upon the
international community to support fully this endeavour.
"The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the Transitional
Administrator and his staff, and reaffirms its full support for them.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
