A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/44
31 December 1997

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 77
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/52/606)]
52/44.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832
(XXVI) of 16 December 1971, and recalling also its resolution 51/51 of 10 December 1996 and other relevant
resolutions,
Recalling also the report of the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean held
in July 1979,1
Recalling further paragraph 72 of the final document adopted by the Twelfth Ministerial Conference of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi on 7 and 8 April 1997,2 which underlined the
importance of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean continuing his informal
consultations on the future of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace and the Committee's work,
Emphasizing the need to foster consensual approaches, in particular given the prevailing international
climate, which is conducive to the pursuit of such endeavours,
Noting the initiatives taken by countries of the region to promote cooperation, in particular economic
cooperation, in the Indian Ocean area and the possible contribution of such initiatives to overall objectives
of a zone of peace,

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 45 and corrigendum
(A/34/45 and Corr.1).

2

A/51/912-S/1997/406, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-second Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1997, document S/1997/406.
97-77761

/...

A/RES/52/44
Page 2

Convinced that the participation of all the permanent members of the Security Council and the major
maritime users of the Indian Ocean in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee is important and would assist the
progress of mutually beneficial dialogue to develop conditions of peace, security and stability in the Indian
Ocean region,
Considering that greater efforts and more time are required to develop a focused discussion on practical
measures to ensure conditions of peace, security and stability in the Indian Ocean region,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean,3

1.

Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean;3

2. Reiterates its conviction that the participation of all the permanent members of the Security Council
and the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee is important and
would greatly facilitate the development of a mutually beneficial dialogue to advance peace, security and
stability in the Indian Ocean region;
3. Requests the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee to continue his dialogue on the work of the Ad
Hoc Committee with all of its members, the permanent members of the Security Council and the major
maritime users of the Indian Ocean and to report at an early date to the General Assembly, through the Ad
Hoc Committee, on his consultations and on other relevant developments;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoc
Committee, including the provision of summary records;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled
"Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace".
67th plenary meeting
9 December 1997

3

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/52/29).
