25

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Taking note also of the views expressed by the
petitioners before the Fourth Committee,
Being of the opinion that the reforms introduced by
Decree No. 56-847 and their application require further
study by the Trusteeship Council,
Taking note of the invitation by the Administering
Authority to send a commission to Togoland under
French administration to study on the spot the conditions under which the provisions of the Statute of 24
August 1956 are being applied,
Taking note also that the invitation by the Administenng Authority was initiated by the Government
of Togoland which was set up in consequence of the
Statute of 24 August 1956,
1. Considers with satisfaction that the extent of
powers transferred to the Territory of Togoland under
French administration by the Administering Authority
in consequence of the new political Statute of the
Territory represents a very significant step in the
achievement of the objectives of Article 76 of the Charter and of the Trusteeship Agreement;
2. Congratulates the population of Togoland under
French administration on the progress it has made
in the political, economic, social and cultural fields;
3. Resolves to dispatch to Togoland under French
administration a Commission of six members, to be
appointed on the basis of equitable geographical distribution by the President of the General Assembly,
in order to examine in the Jight of the discussions in
the Fourth Committee, the entire situation in the Territory resulting from the practical application of the
new Statute and tht1 conditions under which the Statute
is being applied, and to submit a report thereon, with
its observations and suggestions, to the T rusteeship
Council for its consideration;
4. Recommends that, in addition to such further
reforms as the authorities concerned may deem appropriate, the Legislative Assembly of the Territory should
be constituted, as soon as possible, by election on the
basis of universal adult suffrage ;
5. Requests the Trusteeship Council to study the
question, taking into account the report of the Commission, and to transmit the results of its study to the
General Assembly at its twelfth session.
643rd plenary meeting,
23 ]anuary 1957.

*

*

*

At the 657th p/enary meeting on 20 February 1957, the
President of the General Assembly appointed the Members of
the Commission established under the terms of the above resolution. The Commission is composed as follows: CANADA,
DENMARK, GUATEMALA, LIBERIA, PHILIPPINES, and YuGOSLAVIA.

1047 (XI). Admissihility of hearings of petitioners hy the Committee on South West Africa:
Advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice

The General Assembly,
Ha:uing requested, in its resolution 942 (X) of 3
December 1955, an advisory opinion from the International ~ourt of Justice re_garding the admissibility of
oral heanngs by the Comm1ttee on South West Africa,

Having noted that, in its advisory opinion 7 of 1 June
1956, the Court was of the opinion that the grant of
oral hearings to petitioners by the Committee on South
West Africa would be consistent with the advisory
opinion 8 of the Court of 11 July 1950,
1. Accepts and endorses the advisory opinion of 1
June 1956 of the International Court of Justice on the
question of the admissibility of hearings by the Committee on South West Africa ;
2. Therefore authorizes the Committee on South
West Africa to grant hearings to petitioners.
643rd plenary meeting,
23 January 1956.
l 048 (XI). Educational conditions in Non-SelfGoverning Territories

The General Assembly,
Considering that, by resolution 445 (V) of 12 December 1950, it approved the special report 9 drawn up
in 1950 as a brief but considered indication of the
importance of educational advancement and of the problems of education still to be faced in the Non-SelfGoverning Territories,
Considering that, by resolution 743 (VIII) of 27
No_vember 1953, it approved a further report on educat1on10 as a supplement to the report approved in 1950,
_Noting the repor_t 11 prepared in 1956 by the Comm1ttee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories on educational conditions in these Territories,
1. Approves this new report on education in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories and considers that it
should be studied in conjunction with the reports approved in 1950 and 1953;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to communicate the
1956 report on education in Non-Self-GoverninO'0 Territ?ries to the Memb_er:s of _the United Nations respons1ble. fo~ the adm1mstratlon of N on-Self-Governing
Terntones, to the Economie and Social Council to
the Trusteeship Council and to the specialized agedcies
concerned for their consideration ;
_3._ Re9uests the Members responsible for the adm1_mstrat10n of Non-Self-Governing Territories to
brmg the report to the attention of the authorities
responsible for education in those Territories.
657th plenary meeting,
20 February 1957.
1049 (XI), Educational development plans in
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 743 (VIII) of 27 November
1_953,_ by which it emphasized the objectives of education m Non-Self-Governing Territories,
'Adniissibility of hcarings of pctitioncrs by the Committee
on South West Africa, Advisory Opinion of June 1st, 1956:
I.C.J. Reports 1956, p. 23.
• International status of South-West Africa Advisory
Opinion: I.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 128.
'
• Official Records of the Gcneral · Assembly, Fifth Session
Supplement No. 17 (A/1303/Rev.l), part two.
'
10
Ibid., Eighth Session, Supplcment No. 15 (A/2465), part
two.
11
Ibid., Eleventh Session, St1ppleme11t No. 15 (A/3127), part
two.

General Auembly-Eleventh Seaion

26

Considering that, for the attainment of these objectives, it is necessary to establish systems of primary,
secondary and higher education which will meet the
needs of all, regardless of sex, race, religion, social
or economic status, and provide adequate preparation
for citizenship,
C onsidering also that vocational and technical education should be extended in order to supply the skills
necessary for the development of the Territories according to their needs and potentialities,

N oting that in some Territories programmes of educational advancement are being implemented according
to prearranged targets and dates, which are subject to
periodic reviews in the light of the progress made,
Believing that this method of development could
be usefully extended in all Non-Self-Governing Territories,

1. Recommends to the Administering Members that
according to the requirements of the population of each
Non-Self-Governing Territory, in co-operation with
the United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural
Organization if necessary, they consider the formulation of plans, with targets and dates, for various
aspects of educational development, including the establishment or extension of universal, free and compulsory primary education and general literacy ;
0

2. lmnies the Administering Members to include
in their annual reports to the Secretary-General information on such plans, targets and dates and the
success achieved in their implementation.
657th plenary meeting,
20 February 1957.

1050 (XI). Educational advancement in NonSelf-Governing Territories
The Ccner<i/ .i.\sc11:!Ay,
Recalling its resolution 743 (VIII) of 27 November
1953 which sets forth, inter alia, the objectives of education in Non-Self-Governing Territories and recommends that the Administering Members make the greatest possible use of offers that may be made to them by
other States Members of the United Nations through
the Secretary-General or through the specialized agencies concerned or in other appropriate ways by such
means as making available fellowships, scholarships
etc.
C onsidering that the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories, in its 1956 report,11
suggests, as one of the means of attaining those objectives, the creation, where it does not already exist,
of effective local machinery by which educational policy
can be settled and educational programmes put into
effect,
Convinced that, if such local machinery is to elicit
the interest and support of organs of public opinion
in the Territories, it must include appropriately qualified indigenous inhabitants of the area as soon as there
are available in the Territories a sufficient number of
suitably qualified persans,
Considering that the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories also states in its report that the representatives attending its meetings

from many countries have much to contribute from
their own experience,
C onsidering further that it would be desirable, in
order that that experience may make a more effective
contribution to the advancement of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, to enlist the co-operation of qualified
experts from Member States-preferably States in the
same geographical region as the Non-Self-Governing
Territories concerned-and to use their knowledge in
solving local educational problems,
N oting that, in line with the provisions of Article
73 d of the Charter of the United Nations, Members
administering Non-Self-Governing Territories in the
same geographical region have established inter-governmental agencies of regional co-operation of the type
referred to in part two, chapter XIII, of the report
of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Reaffirms the view expressed in resolution 743
(VIII) of 27 November 1953 and reproduced in paragraph 17 of part two of the 1956 report of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories that, in accordance with the objectives laid down
in that resolution, the process of education should be
designed to familiarize the inhabitants with and train
them in the use of the tools of economic, social and
political progress, with a view to the attainment of a
full measure of self-government;
2. Recommends to the Administering Members that
they should intensify their efforts to establish, in
Territories where it does not already exist, local machinery provided with sufficient financial resources to
perform its fonctions and staffed by duly qualified
indigenous personnel responsible for the formulation
of educational policy and the implementation of educational programmes;
3. Suggests to the Administering Members the desirability of studying the method best calculated to
enab~e l~cal educat~o~al bo_dies in Non-Se!f-Governing
Terntones to partlc1pate m the formulat10n and implementation of technical assistance programmes of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies relating
to these Territories;
4. Urges all Members of the United Nations to offer
increased facilities and to simplify conditions for the
granting of scholarships and any other form of assistance to further the educational advancement of the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, and
reiterates its invitation to the Administering Members
to permit the greatest possible advantage to be taken
of such facilities and benefits;
5. Expresses the hope that the Administering Members will study the possibility of inviting the Governments of the Member States in the same region as the
Non-Self-Gover_ning Terri~ories concerned to appoint
exp~rts to contnbute by the1r knowledge to the meetings
of mter-governmental agencies of regional co-operation of the type referred to in part two, chapter XIII,
of the report of the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories;
6. Requests the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to report to the General Assembly on the steps taken to give effect to the
recommendations contained in the present resolution.
657th plenary meeting,
20 February 1957.
