166

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September I 975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Reaffirming its resolutions 32/ 197 of 20 December
1977 and 33/202 of 29 January 1979 on the restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United
Nations system, in particular section VIII of the annex
to resolution 32/ 197 and section IV of resolution 33 /202
regarding the United Nations Secretariat,
Recalling also its resolution 34/215 of 19 December
1979,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "Restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system: implementation of
section VIII of the annex to General Assembly resolution 32/197 and section IV of Assembly resolution
33/202"; 247
2. Welcomes the consultative arrangements at the
secretariat level envisaged by the Secretary-General on
policy issues pertaining to economic and social activities248 and on planning, programming, budgeting and
evaluation; 249
3. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for all
concerned United Nations entities at the secretariat
level to extend the necessary co-operation and assistance to the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation in the effective
functioning of these consultative arrangements;
4. Reaffirms the need for further measures, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 34/215, for t.he
effective implementation of the provisions of section IV
of Assembly resolution 33 /202;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to effect the adjustments required in the existing reporting arrangements, as indicated in paragraph 25 of his report, in
order to reflect fully the authority and responsibilities
envisaged for the Director-General for Development and
International Economic Co-operation with respect to all
services and organs of the United Nations and set forth
in General Assembly resolutions 32/ I 97 and 33 /202,
particularly section IV, paragraph 5 (c), of the latter,
and to submit to the Assembly at its thirty-sixth session
a report including a revised chart incorporating these
adjustments;
6. Takes note with interest of the efforts made by the
Secretary-General, as outlined in section II 8 of his report on the restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system, to ensure that the
Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation exercises effective leadership
and over-all co-ordination within the United Nations
system, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure, in
accordance with the recommendations outlined in his
report, that the provisions of paragraph 64 (a) of the annex to resolution 32/ I 97 are fully complied with:
7. Reaffirms the responsibilities of the DirectorGeneral for Development and International Economic
Co-operation under the direction of the SecretaryGeneral for establishing policy-related guidelines for all
activities undertaken by United Nations services and
organs in the economic and social fields, in order to
ensure their coherence, co-ordination and efficient
247
A/35/527 and Corr. I.
"'Ibid., paras. 9-15.
249
Ibid., paras. 16-20.

management, and for exercising in that context a general oversight of proposals and actions at the secretariat
level in the economic and social fields, particularly from
the point of view of their policy and institutional implications for the Organization as a whole;
8. Decides to consider at its thirty-sixth session, in
the light of the information provided in the report of the
Secretary-General. the issues involved in the effective
exercise by the Director-General for Development and
International Economic Co-operation of his functions,
as defined in paragraph 64 (a) of the annex to resolution 32/ 197, on the basis of the principles pertaining to
interagency co-ordination contained in resolutions
32 1 197 and 33 /202:
9. Takes note of the considerations, outlined in
paragraphs 34 to 39 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral. regarding the resources required for the effective discharge by the Director-General for Development
and International Co-operation of his responsibilities;
I0. Invites the Secretary-General to include in his report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.
requested in paragraph 5 above, information on
measures envisaged by him in respect of the issues dealt
with in section 111 of his report to the Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session.

97th plenary meeting
16 December 1980
35/204.

United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974. containing the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September
1975 on development and international economic cooperation,
Recalling also its resolutions 33/148 of 20 December
I978 and 34 / I 90 of I 8 December 1979 and Economic
and Social Council resolutions 2119 (LXIII) of4 August
1977, 1978/61 or 3 August 1978 and 1979/66 of
3 August 1979 regarding the convening of and preparation for the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy,
Noting Economic and Social Council decision 1980/
187 of 25 July 1980,
Mindful of the importance or developing new and
renewable sources of energy in order to contribute to
meeting requirements for continued economic and social development, particularly in the developing countries, through, inter a!ia, the transition to the increased
use of new and renewable sources of energy,
Stressing the importance of intensive international cooperation in the field of new and renewable sources of
energy,
Taking note of the report of the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy on its first and second
sessions, '' 11
'"' Official Records o/ the General Assembil'. Thirtr-fijih Session.
Supplement No 43 (i\ .15 43)
·

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking note also of the report of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nationsrn and the report of the
Secretary-General of the Conference 2 ' 2 on the progress
made in the preparations for the Conference,
Bearing in mind paragraph 1 of its resolution 34 / 190,
in which it decided that the Conference should be held at
Nairobi in August 1981, as well as decision I (II) of
I August 1980 of the Preparatory Committee 2 ' 1 concerning the dates of the Conference,
Concerned at the slow pace in the preparations for the
Conference in light of the time constraints,
I. Strongly urges the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on New and Renewable
Sources of Energy to take all the necessary measures to
intensify and to accelerate the preparations for the Conference;
2. Urges all Member States to promote heightened
awareness of the importance of the Conference and to
intensify its preparation at the national, subregional and
regional levels in order to ensure its success;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
adopted by the Preparatory Committee for the Conference at its second session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
such additional personnel and technical expertise be
drawn from the United Nations Secretariat as may be
required and that it be made available to the SecretaryGeneral of the Conference to facilitate the completion
on time of the preparations for the Conference;
5. Urges all concerned organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system, including the
regional commissions, to strengthen their participation
and to continue to extend their fullest contribution to
the preparatory process for the Conference as well as cooperation and support to the Secretary-General of the
Conference in this process;
6. Welcomes the co-operation provided by Member
States and others to facilitate the preparations for the
Conference and calls upon them to contribute further to
the strengthening of the preparations for the Conference;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take all steps
necessary, consistent with the rules and regulations of
the United Nations, to ensure the utilization of cooperation offered, taking fully into account the interests
of all groups of countries;
8. Decides that the Conference shall be held at
Nairobi from I O to 21 August 1981 and be preceded by
interregional meetings and pre-conference consultations at Nairobi, beginning on l August 1981;
9. Decides that the third session of the Preparatory
Committee, scheduled to be held from 30 March to
10 April, shall be extended by one week and that the
fourth session of the Committee shall be held from 8 to
26 June 1981;
I 0. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the necessary arrangements, including the requisite
financial provisions, are made for the continuation of
regional preparations for the Conference;
11. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
provide, in co-operation with the organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system, technical assistance to developing countries, using, inter alia, existing
'" A/35/321 and Add.I.
''' A/35/531.
"' See Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 43 (/\/]5/43). part two. annex I, sect. B.

167

resources to the greatest extent possible, at the request
of those countries and in accordance with established
procedures in the preparations for the Conference, including the preparation of national papers;
12. Calls upon all States wishing to do so to submit national papers and brief summaries thereof by
31 December 1980, in conformity with decision 4 (II) of
I August 1980 of the Preparatory Committee,rn and requests that the summaries of the national papers should
be distributed in all the working languages of the Conference;
13. Requests the Preparatory Committee, at its third
session, to consider and finalize the draft agenda for the
Conference and to submit it to the Conference;
14. Requests the Preparatory Committee to consider
and finalize the draft rules of procedure of the Conference during its third session and to submit them to the
Conference;
15. Requests the Secretary-General of the Conference to prepare, for consideration by the Preparatory Committee at its third session, a preliminary draft
outline of a programme of action reflecting the consolidated conclusions and recommendations submitted
by the technical panels, ad hoe expert groups, the synthesis group and organizations of the United Nations
system;
16. Invites the Preparatory Committee at its third
session to provide guidance on the elaboration of the
preliminary draft programme of action;
17. Requests the Secretary-General of the Conference to provide, hy 15 May 1981, the following documents for consideration by the Preparatory Committee
at its fourth session:
(a) A synoptic table classifying conclusions and recommendations into those of common concern to all
regions, those of concern to some regions and those
specific to one region, with an indication of their origin;
(b) A report containing, in a format similar to that
suggested as reference for the preparation of national
papers, additional information that may be relevant for
the preparation of the draft programme of action, including proposals and recommendations arising in
national papers and regional reports:
18. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) All States to participate in the Conference;
(b) Representatives of organizations that have
received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the sessions and the work of all international conferences convened under its auspices in
the capacity of observers to participate in the Conference in that capacity, in accordance with Assembly resolutions 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and 31 / I 52
of 20 Decemher 1976:
(c) Representatives of the national liberation movements recognized in its region by the Organization of
African Unity to participate in the Conference in the capacity of observers, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(d) The United Nations Council for Namibia to participate in the Conference, in accordance with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 32/9 E of
4 November 1977:
(e) The specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, as well as interested organs of
the United Nations. to be represented at the Conference:

168

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

(j) Interested intergovernmental organizations to be
represented by observers at the Conference:
(g) Interested non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council to be represented by observers at the Conference:
(h) Other interested non-governmental organizations that may have a specific contribution to make to
the work of the Conference to be represented by observers at the Conference:
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the necessary arrangements are made for the effective
participation in the Conference of representatives of the
organizations referred to in paragraph 18 (b) and (c)
above, including the requisite financial provisions for
their travel expenses and daily subsistence allowances;
20. Invites the co-ordinating committee, to which
reference is made in decision 8 (II) of I August 1980 of
the Preparatory Committee, 2 ' ' to play an active role in
ensuring the effective implementation of the preparatory work programme of the Conference:
21. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize
further the assistance of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat and other relevant services
of the United Nations system in the implementation of
the programme of information for the Conference to ensure world-wide awareness of the Conference and its objectives, particularly in the developing countries;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to ascertain immediately the views of Member States concerning plans
which have been drawn up for the organization of
exhibitions-cum-demonstrations in the area of new
and renewable sources of energy at Nairobi during the
Conference and to keep in close touch with the Government of Kenya to ensure the best possible conditions for
the exhibitions-cum-demonstrations:
23. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the entire documentation for the Conference and its Preparatory Committee in all the working languages of the
Conference is made available well in advance for consideration by Member States:
24. Decides that the languages of the Conference
shall be those of the General Assembly and its Main
Committees:
25. Decides to consider the results of the Conference
at its thirty-sixth session.
97th plenary meeting
16 December 1980

35/205.

tember 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also resolution 122 (V) of 3 June 1979 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,254 by which it endorsed, as one of its major
priorities, a Comprehensive New Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries in two phases: an Immediate Action Programme ( 1979-1981) and a Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s,
Recognizing that the primary responsibility for their
development rests with the least developed countries
themselves,
Recalling its resolution 34/2 JO of I 9 December I 979,
by which it endorsed the Comprehensive New Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries,
Recalling also its resolution 34 /203 of 19 December
1979, by which it decided to convene the United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
in 1981,
Recalling further its resolution S-11 /4 of 15 September 1980 on measures to meet the critical situation in the
least developed countries,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries on its first and second sessions, 2 ' '
Reaffirming that there is an immediate need for a
greatly expanded increase in the transfer of resources to
meet the critical needs of the least developed countries
and to help promote their rapid and self-sustained
socio-economic development,
Emphasizing the particular importance of the contribution that economic co-operation among developing countries can make, inter a/ia, to the development of
the least developed among them,
Noting with appreciation that some developed countries have taken positive steps towards the implementation of resolution 122 (V) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Deeply concerned that, even more than one year after
the adoption of the Immediate Action Programme
( 1979-1981 ), contained in resolution 122 (V) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
very limited progress has been made towards its implementation,
Recognizing the need for extensive public awareness
throughout the world of the desperate plight of the least
developed countries and the importance and objectives
of the forthcoming United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries,

United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the gravity of the deteriorating
economic and social situation of the least developed
countries and their dismal development during the past
two decades, as well as at their bleak development
prospects for the l 980s.
Also deeply concerned at the continued critical lack of
basic infrastructure in the least developed countries,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States. and 3362 (S-V II) of 16 Sep-

I. Urges all developed countries, developing countries in a position to do so, multilateral development
institutions and other sources to take urgent steps to implement without any further delay, and in any case before the end of 1981, the commitments undertaken in the
Immediate Action Programme ( 1979-1981 ), contained
in resolution 122 (V) of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development:
2. Urges donor countries which have not yet done so
to provide substantive information on the steps they
'" See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development. Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D. 14), part one, sect. A.
'" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Supplement No. 45 (A/JS/45).
