S/PRST/2018/7

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 April 2018
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8223rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 5 April 2018, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Burundi”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council remains deeply concerned over the political
situation in Burundi, the slow progress of the inter Burundian dialogue led by
the East African Community (EAC), and the lack of engagement by the
Government of Burundi in that regard. It recalls its statement S/PRST/2017/13.
“The Security Council welcomes and supports the renewed commitment
by the African Union (AU) and the EAC, expressed at the 30th AU summit and
the 19th EAC summit, to a peaceful resolution of the political situation in
Burundi through an inclusive dialogue on the basis of the Arusha Agreement of
28 August 2000 and the Constitution of Burundi, and reiterates its support to the
facilitation led by former President B. Mkapa under the mediation of President
Museveni. The Security Council remains deeply concerned over the slow
progress of this dialogue and calls for all the Burundian stakeholders to
participate actively and unconditionally in this process. It is crucial that all
parties, most especially the Government, commit to the EAC led process and
reach an agreement ahead of the 2020 elections. The Security Council further
stresses that the dialogue is the only viable process for a sustainable political
settlement in Burundi.
“The Security Council underlines the utmost importance of respecting the
letter and the spirit of the Arusha Agreement, which has helped to sustain a
decade of peace in Burundi and expresses concern that the situation prevailing
in Burundi has seriously undermined the significant gains achieved through the
Arusha Agreement, with devastating consequences for Burundi and the region.
It urges the Guarantors of the Agreement to meet their obligations in this regard,
to ensure that the entirety of the Agreement is adhered to.
“The Security Council calls upon the United Nations, the AU, the EAC,
ICGLR and the Guarantors of the Arusha agreement to coordinate their efforts
of assisting Burundian stakeholder settle outstanding issues in the
implementation of the Arusha Agreement. The Security Council notes with
appreciation the readiness of the AU to deploy the High Level Committee of
Heads of State on Burundi.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity and unity of Burundi. The Security

18-05395 (E)

060418

*1805395*

S/PRST/2018/7

Council stresses the importance of implementation of the Arusha Agreement,
calls upon the Burundian authorities to initiate all political initiatives through a
broad consensus of all stakeholders, which requires a political an d security
environment that induces the confidence of all political actors and, in this
regard, expresses its strong support for the AU Decision at its 30th Summit. The
Security Council expresses the need that these conditions be fully implemented
in advance of planned political initiatives.
“The Security Council calls on States in the region to contribute to finding
a political solution for the situation in Burundi, refrain from any interference,
including through supporting the activities of armed moveme nts in any way, and
to respect their obligations under international law, and recalls in this regard
commitments of the States in the region under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region and the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.
“The Security Council notes its expectation that elections scheduled for
2020 in Burundi will be free, fair, transparent, peaceful, fully inclusive, with the
participation of all political parties, and will ensure the full and equal
participation of women throughout the process. It also underlines that
considerable improvements to the political and human rights situation, in
particular regarding fundamental freedoms, including for freedom of the press
and of civil society actors such as human rights defender, and progress on
reconciliation are necessary to enable credible elections.
“The Security Council underscores its deep concern regarding the
continued worsening of the humanitarian situation, marked by nearly 180,000
internally displaced persons, 3.6 million people in need and more than 429,000
Burundians seeking refuge in neighbouring countries, and commends the host
countries for their efforts, and calls upon governments in the region to ensure
that their return is voluntary, based on informed decisions and in safety and
dignity.
“The security Council notes that a number of bilateral and multilateral
partners have suspended their financial and technical assistance to the
Government of Burundi, in view of the situation in Burundi, and encourages
bilateral and multilateral partners and the Government of Burundi to continue
their dialogue with a view to the Government of Burundi creating conducive
conditions for resumption of the assistance. The Security Council commends
the assistance provided by bilateral and multilateral partners to alleviate the
humanitarian situation and calls on member States to continue to provide
support to respond to the humanitarian needs in the country.
“The Security Council strongly condemns all violations and abuses of
human rights in Burundi, whoever perpetrates them, including those involving
extra-judicial killings, sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and detentions;
including those concerning children, forced disappeara nces, acts of torture and
other cruel, inhuman and/or degrading treatment, harassment and intimidation
of civil society, including human rights defenders, women’s organizations, and
journalists, restriction of fundamental freedoms, as well as indiscriminat e use
of grenade attacks, including against civilians.
“The Security Council reaffirms the primary responsibility of the
Government of Burundi for ensuring security in its territory and protecting its
population, with respect for the rule of law, human rights and international
humanitarian law, as applicable. It urges the Government of Burundi to respect,
protect and guarantee human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, in line
with the country’s constitution and its international obligations, to adhere to the
2/4

18-05395

S/PRST/2018/7

rule of law, to bring to justice and hold accountable all those responsible,
including members of the security forces and violent actors affiliated to political
parties, for crimes involving violations of international humanitarian law or
violations and abuses of human rights, as applicable, including those involving
sexual violence and all violations and abuses against children.
“The Security Council notes the steps taken by the Government to
withdraw the bans of some civil society organizations, cancel some arrest
warrants and release a number of detainees following the presidential pardon on
31 December 2017. The Security Council urges the Government of Burundi to
take further steps to respect, protect and guarantee human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, in line with the country’s constitution and its
international obligations.
“The Security Council reiterates its regret at the decision by the
Government of Burundi to suspend all cooperation and collaboration with the
Office of the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights (OHCHR),
which has been present in the country since 1995 to strengthen Burundi ’s rule
of law institutions, and calls for a swift solution through dialogue between
OHCHR and the Government in order to enable OHCHR to fully resume its
activities, including its monitoring and reporting functions, and fulfil its
mandate. The Security Council recalls the commitments the Government of
Burundi undertook during the 36th Session of the Human Rights Council to re establish full mutual cooperation with the Human Rights Council and OHCHR,
including full cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner in
Bujumbura, and to accept the visit of a team of three experts from the Office of
the High Commissioner to collect information on the human rights situation in
Burundi. It notes that discussions regarding revisions to the draft memorandum
of understanding between the Republic of Burundi and the United Nations
concerning the updated terms for the Office of the High Commission for Human
Rights in Burundi have been ongoing for over a year and urges the Government
of Burundi to take steps to swiftly finalize the agreement with OHCHR without
further delay.
“The Security Council reiterates its concern over the significant delays in
the deployment of the AU human rights observers and military experts. It
supports the AU call for the rapid signing of the Memorandum of Understanding
relating to the activities of the human rights observers and the military experts
of the AU, which will allow the AU human rights observers and military experts
to fully operate in the country in fulfilment of their mandated responsibilities.
“The Security Council acknowledges the contribution of Burundian
peacekeepers serving in UN and African Union-led peacekeeping operations and
reiterates the importance of upholding the standards of the United Nations.
“The Security Council urges the Government of Burundi to reengage with
international partners, especially the United Nations, in a constructive manner
based on mutual trust. It reiterates its full support to the Secretary -General and
his Special Envoy in their efforts to engage and work with the Government of
Burundi to help overcome the current political impasse and foster an inclusive
reconciliation process. It further calls on the Secretary General and the
Government of Burundi to expeditiously finalize and implement the status of
the Mission Agreement for the Office of the Special Envoy, in order to work
with the Government of Burundi and other concerned stakeholders to support
the EAC-led inter-Burundian dialogue and in the areas of security and rule of
law, to engage with all stakeholders to the crisis, and work with all Burundian
parties to develop confidence-building measures, to improve the human rights
18-05395

3/4

S/PRST/2018/7

and security situation, and foster an environment conducive to political
dialogue. The Security Council welcomes the active engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission Burundi Configuration as a viable platform for
dialogue between Burundi and its partners, using a holistic approach to address
the political and socio-economic situation.
“The Security Council is determined to continue to closely follow the
situation in Burundi.”

4/4

18-05395
