S/PRST/2016/11

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 July 2016
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7749th meeting of the Security Council, held on 28 July 2016, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace
consolidation in West Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council takes note of the report (S/2016/566) of the
Secretary General on the United Nations Office in West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) and welcomes the briefing on 11 July 2016 by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mohamed ibn Chambas.
“The Security Council welcomes the merger of the Office of the Special
Envoy for the Sahel (OSES) and United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA) and encourages the Special Representative to take neces sary steps
for further progress in the merger and to maximize synergies by ensuring a
unified management and structure of the new United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).In this regards, the Security Council
welcomes the establishment by UNOWAS of a liaison cell in Nouakchott,
Mauritania, and a coordination and regional partnerships section in Dakar,
Senegal, in order to strengthen United Nations engagement with subregional
and regional organization, including the Permanent Secretariat of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel).
“The Security Council expresses full support to the Special
Representative and looks forward to enhance ongoing activities undertaken by
UNOWAS in the areas of good offices, subregional and regional cooperat ion
to address cross-border and cross-cutting threats to peace and security, as well
as the promotion of good governance, respect for the rule of law and human
rights, and gender mainstreaming.
“The Security Council welcomes the recent positive political
developments in West Africa, in particular the holding of free and peaceful
elections in Niger, Benin and Cabo Verde. The Security Council stresses the
importance of the upcoming elections in Ghana and The Gambia to be free,
fair, peaceful, inclusive and credible, and further stresses the need to closely
follow these processes with great attention. The security council takes note of
the Communique adopted by ECOWAS Summit in June 2016 which
commended Gambia’s political stakeholders for the signing, on 20 April 2016,
of an agreement to hold free elections and encouraged the Gambian
16-13112 (E)

280716

*1613112*

S/PRST/2016/11

Government and Parliament to initiate the requisite reforms for the conduct of
inclusive, free and credible elections while urging the security forces to refrain
from the use of excessive force against the citizens and adopt a responsible
approach. The Security Council takes note of the statements by relevant organs
of African Union and United Nations on the events of 14 and 16 April 2016 in
The Gambia. In this regard, the Security Council welcomes the continued
engagement of UNOWAS, ECOWAS and the African Union.
“The Security Council expresses concern over the latest political
development in Guinea-Bissau and encourages national actors to abide by the
Constitution and the rule of law, while striving to find a peaceful resolution to
the crisis.
“The Security Council welcomes the leadership demonstrated by
countries in West Africa and the Sahel in spearheading initiatives to address
security challenges in the region. They encourage further collaboration
between Member States, regional and subregional organizations and relevant
United Nations entities to enhance social cohesion and to address challenges to
good governance.
“The Security Council commends the engagement of UNOWAS wi th
subregional and regional organizations, in particular the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the G -5 Sahel, the
Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Mano River Union, in order to promote
peace and stability in West Africa and the Sahel.
“The Security Council notes the collaboration undertaken between
UNOWAS and the Peacebuilding Commission and encourages continued close
and effective cooperation in in support of sustainable peace in the region.
“The Security Council strongly condemns all terrorist attacks carried out
in the region, in particular in the Lake Chad Basin region, notably by Boko
Haram, as well as in Mali, Cote d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso and the Sahel region.
The Security Council stresses the need to combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including by addressing the conditions conducive to the spread
of terrorism. The Security Council expresses particular concern about attacks
on civilians, who are the main victims of these attacks.
“The Security Council welcomes the subregional and regional and
international efforts to mitigate the security, humanitarian and development
consequences of these attacks. The Security Council takes note of the progress
made in the operationalization of the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF).
The Security Council urges the Members States participating in the MNJTF to
further enhance regional military cooperation and coordination, deny safe
haven to Boko Haram, allow humanitarian access and facilitate the restorati on
of the rule of law in liberated areas. The Security Council reaffirms that
Member States must ensure that any measures taken to counter terrorism
comply with all their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law.
“The Security Council encourages Member States, multilateral and
bilateral partners to lend their support to the MNJTF to ensure its full and
prompt operationalization, including the provision of modalities to increase

2/4

16-13112

S/PRST/2016/11

the timely and effective exchange of intelligence to further the region’s
collective efforts to combat Boko Haram. The Security Council underscores
the importance of a holistic approach to degrade and defeat Boko Haram that
includes coordinated security operations, conducted in accordance with
applicable international law, as well as enhanced civilian efforts to improve
governance and promote economic growth in the affected areas.
“The Security Council expresses concern about piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea, as well as the trafficking of drugs and other illicit goods, as well as
the smuggling of migrants and human trafficking and stresses the need to
strengthen the fight against criminal activities in the subregion.
“The Security Council expresses strong support to the States in the
region affected by the smuggling of migrants and human trafficking,
emphasizes the need to step up coordination of efforts in order to strengthen an
effective multidimensional response to these common challenges and stresses
that addressing both smuggling of migrants and human trafficking requires a
coordinated, multidimensional approach with States of origin, of transit, and
of destination.
“The Security Council commends the efforts of the African Union and
ECOWAS, as well as of Member States in West Africa and the Sahel to
strengthen border security and regional cooperation, including through the G5
Sahel and the Nouakchott process on the enhancement of the security
cooperation and the operationalization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture in the Sahel and Sahara region and in this regard welcomes the
decision taken by the Defense Ministers of the Sahel-Saharan community to
establish a new counter-terrorism center with its headquarters in Cairo, Egypt,
and called on them to further enhance their cooperation in this regard.
“The Security Council remains committed to working closely with the
African Union, ECOWAS, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the G5 Sahel to strengthen
subregional and regional cooperation to address cross-border security threats
and prevent the spread of terrorism. In that respect, they welcome the
assistance of UNOWAS to the efforts of ECOWAS Commission to implement
its Regional Framework for Security Sector Reform (SSR) and Governanc e
and to promote a coordinated SSR approach in the region.
“The Security Council takes note of the ongoing strengthening of the
cooperation between the United Nations presences in West Africa. In this
regard, they welcome the biannual meetings of West Africa-based United
Nations peacekeeping and special political missions, the most recent of which
was held in Dakar on 20 May 2016 where the Heads of Mission agreed to
continue to cooperate closely and share information on key issues affecting
West Africa and the Sahel.
“The Security Council reiterates deep concern over the dire humanitarian
situation caused by the activities of Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin
region. In this regard, the Security Council calls international community to
immediately support the provision of urgent humanitarian assistance for the
people most affected by the crisis in Cameroun, Chad, Niger and Nigeria,

16-13112

3/4

S/PRST/2016/11

including by fulfilling the United Nations appeal for the Lake Chad Basin
region.
“The Security Council commends the Special Representative for its
participation in the briefing on “Peace and Security in Africa: Challenges of
the Sahel Region” that was held on May 26th, encourages further progress by
the United Nations system and its partners towards the implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (UNISS), including through
support to the Group of 5 for the Sahel (G5), in order to assist in addressing
the security and political challenges to the stability and development of the
Sahel region and reaffirms its continued commitment to address such
challenges, which are interrelated with humanitarian and development issues
as well as the adverse effects of climate and ecological changes.
“The Security Council looks forward to the conclusion of the evalua tion
of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, requests UNOWAS to
coordinate with States in the Sahel and all other stakeholders to present
concrete recommendations and lessons learned from the evaluation process
and emphasized the need for the outcome of such evaluation lead to a
refocused strategy and better coordination to ensure its effective
implementation across the three pillars, namely governance, security and
resilience. The Security Council expresses its intention to periodically mo nitor
progress made in this regard.
“The Security Council welcomes the success achieved by countries of
the region in the fight against Ebola and reiterates its concern about the
humanitarian, social and economic consequences of this disease.
“The Security Council expresses support and solidarity to the affected
countries and calls them to strengthen the early warning mechanisms and
resilience of their national health systems in this regard. ”

4/4

16-13112
