S/2017/653

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 July 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 25 July 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I wish to refer to paragraph 24 of Security Council resolution 2297 (2016),
requesting me to conduct a joint assessment mission of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), with the African Union (AU), after the 2016 electoral
process, and to present recommendations to the Security Council to ensure that
AMISOM is properly configured to support the next phase of State-building in
Somalia under a new political dispensation.
On this basis, the United Nations and the African Union conducted a joint
review mission between 10 and 29 May 2017. The mission, which was co -led by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat and the Peace and
Security Department of the African Union Commission, included military, police,
political, human rights and logistics experts from the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Field Support, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), AMISOM, the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS), the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) and the United Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU).
Representatives of a number of Member States and of the European Union also
participated in the review.
The joint review should be seen as one element of a comprehensive strategic
planning process in Somalia that started in 2016, including the United Nations
strategic assessment, which was completed in March 2017 (S/2017/404), the
10-year lessons learned review conference on AMISOM conducted on 9 and
10 March 2017 (see annex III), which informed the joint review, and the electoral
needs assessment mission, which took place from 22 March to 4 April 2017 (see
S/2017/408). The joint review builds, in particular, on the findings of the United
Nations strategic assessment, during which considerations about the United Nations
role with regard to security in Somalia were deliberately deferred to the joint review
to ensure that they could be reflected upon in conjunction with the assessment of the
future role and configuration of AMISOM.
The members of the joint review team held consultations with relevant
national and international partners in Mogadishu and Addis Ababa. While in
Mogadishu, the members organized a three-day workshop with senior security
officials and experts from the Federal Government of Somalia and the interim
Federal Member States to ensure adequate consultation and Somali ownership. The
findings of the joint review were considered by the African Union Peace and
Security Council on 12 July 2017 (see annex II) and were adopted by the Council at
its 700th meeting in a communiqué (see annex I).

17-13092 (E)

240817

*1713092*

S/2017/653

Developments since the last joint review and the adoption of resolution 2182 (2015)
During the past two years, Somalia has made important strides on the political
front. A federal State is emerging. In the security sector, significant progress has
been achieved, in particular over the last months. The 16 April 2017 agreement on
the main principles of a national security architecture revived hope for accelerating
security sector reform and, with it, advancing the prospects for sustainable peace
and security in Somalia. In the agreed-upon national security architecture the new
federal policing model, agreed upon in May 2016, was confirmed. The new
architecture and the new policing model constitute key building blocks in
establishing effective and accountable governance structures in the security sector.
President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo has established the National
Security Council, which includes the Federal Government of Somalia and all
Federal Member States. On 11 May 2017, at the London conference on Somalia, a
new partnership agreement and a security pact were signed by Somalia a nd its
international partners, including the African Union and the United Nations.
AMISOM continued to make a fundamental contribution to peace, security and
stability in Somalia. Since its inception, AMISOM interventions have prevented
Al-Shabaab and other armed opposition groups from taking over the country and
have provided the space and the foundation for State-building and peacebuilding
throughout Somalia. This has included important reconciliation and other political
processes, resulting, inter alia, in the establishment of a federal map and interim
administrations in five Federal Member States. AMISOM has also played a
particularly important role in securing the 2016 -2017 electoral process, bringing
about a Federal Government that enjoys wide legiti macy throughout Somalia.
Where possible, AMISOM has also facilitated security for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, especially during the drought. The active presence of
AMISOM has allowed for increased accessibility of a number of main supply
routes, in spite of the challenges that continue to be encountered, and has provided
communities in need with the option of avoiding long and hazardous travel by
seeking aid in nearby areas controlled by AMISOM and the Government. However,
I wish to stress that the humanitarian crisis remains dire, and the need for continued
assistance is acute.
The police sector has seen considerable progress. The diligent efforts of
AMISOM in supporting the Somali police through vetting, recruitment, training and
mentoring assistance are showing impressive results in Mogadishu and in two
Federal Member States. UNSOM continues to provide critical assistance for the
implementation of the new policing model through policy advice on establishing
institutional policing structures.
Notwithstanding these achievements, the 22,126 strong AMISOM uniformed
personnel presence continues to be confronted with ever changing challenges,
against the backdrop of a fragile political and security situation. Those challenges
are compounded by the fact that AMISOM remains without sufficient critical
enablers.
Continued funding for AMISOM troop reimbursements remains a critical
challenge. I commend the European Union for its valuable contribution through its
continuing funding of AMISOM personnel stipends for over a decade. As of January
2016, the European Union implemented a 20 per cent reduction in its funding of
AMISOM troop stipends. Efforts to raise voluntary contributions to address the
20 per cent gap have been unsuccessful thus far, as have efforts to identify alternate
resources to complement European Union funding.

2/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

Al-Shabaab remains a potent threat for stability in the country. The group
maintains a force that allowed it to attack several AMISOM forward operating bases
in the last years, and controls swathes of territory, in particular in the Juba Valley
corridor and the Hiraan region, in which it administers basic services for the
population. It also has the capability to launch large -scale complex terrorist attacks.
Yet, what ultimately undermines long-term progress on security in Somalia is
not the presence of Al-Shabaab itself, but rather the lack of adequate Somali
security institutions, underpinned by the requisite political agreements and financial
resources, including to ensure regular payment of salaries, with appropriate
governance, oversight and accountability mechanisms. This also undermines the
Somali capacity to degrade Al-Shabaab in a meaningful way. The national security
architecture is an important first step to address this deficit.
The primary responsibility for security lies with the Somali people and
institutions. Accordingly, the joint review placed Somali ownership of the security
sector at the centre of its planning, building on the tenets of the 16 April agreement.
Unlike previous reviews that placed emphasis on degrading Al -Shabaab, this one
focused on developing a transition plan for AMISOM to gradually hand over
security tasks to Somali institutions, while also reviewing options for strengthening
accountability measures and AMISOM effectiveness.
The joint review found that the Somalis have a genuine willingness to assume
this responsibility. During the visit of the review team to Mogadishu, Somali
officials and security experts presented a vision for progressively taking ove r
security tasks in the period 2017-2021, based on the national security architecture
and the security pact.
Proposed transition plan
AMISOM remains essential to ensuring security in Somalia in the medium
term. This was also confirmed in the security pact adopted by 42 international
partners in London on 11 May 2017. I am convinced that the continued presence of
AMISOM, with progressively reduced troop levels, is necessary for the period
2017-2021 in order to consolidate the political and security gains achieved to date
and to prevent any reversal of strategic importance. Meanwhile, a deliberate shift is
required for the entire international security presence in Somalia towards adopting a
support role, with Somali institutions now progressively assuming the primary
responsibility for security.
In fact, elements of the transition have already begun. AMISOM has handed
over tasks to Somali forces in a number of regional locations and in Mogadishu,
including the protection of several federal ministries.
The members of the joint review team determined that no additional AMISOM
troops would be required to undertake offensive operations against Al -Shabaab and
other armed opposition groups. Alternative arrangements have been identified,
including additional elements of the national security architecture and other Somali
security capacities for joint operations, AMISOM troops freed up by handing over
tasks to Somali security forces, the adoption of a gradual approach to offensive
operations and enhanced bilateral support.
In its efforts to strengthen Somali ownership, AMISOM should focus on a
number of adjusted tasks (see below for details), which should be aligned with the
national security architecture, build on AMISOM strengths and focus on facilitating
a viable, orderly and responsible transition.
As part of this transition, a reorganization and gradual reduction of AMISOM
uniformed personnel should be initiated, consistent with the spirit of the national
17-13092

3/43

S/2017/653

security architecture, the security pact and the commitment of Somali leaders and
the AMISOM troop-contributing countries for the earliest possible transfer of
security responsibilities. In doing so, it is important that the substantial political and
security gains achieved over the past 10 years are not undermined. The significant
losses in lives, both of AMISOM and Somali military and civilian personnel, as well
as the considerable investments in resources, should not go to waste.
The joint review proposes an overall reduction of 1,500 uniformed personne l
by October 2018 as follows: in a first phase, and following the ongoing targeted
offensive operations against Al-Shabaab jointly undertaken with Somali forces
(including in the Juba River Valley), AMISOM military personnel would be reduced
by 1,000, no later than December 2017. Of those, 500 would be replaced by
AMISOM police personnel to enhance the capacity of the Somali police
countrywide, building on the excellent work done by the AMISOM police
component. This would serve the objective of enabling the Somali police to assume
expanded security tasks as part of the transition plan. Strengthening the primacy of
the Somali police in law enforcement, rule of law and public safety, as specified in
the national security architecture NSA, is critical. The 500 additional police would
consist of two additional formed police units of 160 personnel each, 120 individual
police officers and 60 formed police unit personnel, to bring the th ree existing
formed police units to the standard number of 160 personnel. Therefore, factoring in
the replacement of 500 troops with police, an overall reduction of 500 uniformed
personnel by December 2017 is recommended by the joint review.
In a second phase, AMISOM military strength would be reduced by an
additional 1,000 troops no later than October 2018. It is recommended that another
joint review be undertaken in mid-2018 to take stock of the implementation of the
transition strategy thus far and to plan the next stages of the transition. Further
reductions in uniformed personnel after October 2018 will be considered and would
take place in phases as security conditions and Somali capabilities allow.
Detailed technical transition planning will be determined following the
completion of a joint verification exercise of the Somali security forces. This
exercise, co-led by the Federal Government of Somalia and the Federal Member
States, together with AMISOM and the United Nations, will build on previous
initiatives conducted by AMISOM, United Nations entities and international
partners. The verification will focus on determining numbers, capabilities, locations
and compliance with human rights and other international standards (including
screening for child soldiers, the existence of accountability mechanisms and levels
of vetting and training), and include entities of the national security architecture and
the Somali police as well as other Somali security capacities. Priority will be given
to those forces slated for participation in joint operations. The verification exercise
will also determine the methodology and technical conditions for handing over
specific security tasks.
The resulting transition plan should be sufficiently flexible to allow for
accelerated progress in building Somali security capabilities and be responsive to
unforeseen negative security developments. It must also assure sufficient space and
support for necessary political and reconciliation processes. Opportunities to
accelerate the transition of security responsibility to the Somalis, for example as a
result of military operations or reconciliation of local conflicts, should be
encouraged and exploited.
Owing to the different speeds at which security sector reform and the
underlying political processes advance in various locations, the implementation of
the proposed transition plan will need to be undertaken in a differentiated and
synchronized manner in various parts of the country. The transition plan should also
4/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

consider how Somali logistical capacity can be strengthened, including the
assumption of tasks currently carried out by UNSOS.
Continued AMISOM mentoring and rapid reaction capacities are likely to be
required during and immediately following the 2021 elections. AMISOM troop
strength would be reduced considerably thereafter, no later than 2022. A re sidual
quick reaction force for a further 12-month period may have to be considered, if
absolutely necessary, to support Somali security forces in responding to emerging
challenges.
Within the context of the comprehensive approach to security, the broad s et of
circumstances for complementing the transition is of a political, security and
financial nature.
The political circumstances include the following: (a) the federal structure,
including the status of Federal Member States, is formalized; (b) outstand ing issues
pertaining to the national security architecture are addressed, in particular with
regard to numbers, roles and responsibilities of the security services of the Federal
Government of Somalia and the Federal Member States; (c) key legislation is
adopted and institutions are capacitated, consistent with the national security
architecture, in particular the formalization of the National Security Council;
(d) major inter-clan conflicts have been addressed to a level that can be managed by
Somali political and security structures; (e) elections are conducted successfully and
there is a peaceful transition of power; and (f) relations of Somalia with its
immediate neighbours are stable.
The security elements to be in place include: (a) Somali security capabilities
are developed, equipped and sustained to a level commensurate with local and
countrywide threats, pursuant to the national security architecture, with command
and control arrangements that are implemented and functional, and personnel
regularly receiving rations and salaries; and (b) Al-Shabaab is degraded and
contained to a level at which Somali forces can respond within their own
capabilities.
The financial aspects include the ability of the Federal Government of Somalia
and the Federal Member States to progressively generate the requisite resources to
pay salaries and establish transparent and accountable payment systems that will
ensure the regular disbursement of salaries for security personnel, consistent with
the national security architecture. In the interim, uniform, transparent and
accountable financial mechanisms must be established by Somali institutions and
partners for the payment of stipends. The work done by the United Nations Office
for Project Services (UNOPS) in this regard, with support from partners, is
commendable.
This transition plan can only be implemented if comprehensive funding is
mobilized for the Somali security sector and for AMISOM. Approximate costing for
building the Somali security sector must be established with a plan on how to share
the burden prior to the London follow-on conference, scheduled for the end of 2017,
at which resources for the Somali security sector will be mobilized to ensure
adequate financial and in-kind commitments, both from Somali and international
contributions.
Predictable and sustainable funding for AMISOM is imperative to avoid risks
pertaining to a precipitous or premature withdrawal, which, in all likelihood, would
reverse the considerable political and security gains achieved ove r the last decade.
Funding arrangements for AMISOM should be explored in earnest, bearing in mind
the full range of options available to the United Nations and to other partners,

17-13092

5/43

S/2017/653

including United Nations assessed contributions and considering the limitatio ns of
voluntary funding that have come to light.
Proposed revised tasks for AMISOM
In line with the above transition plan, I support the recommendation of the
joint review that AMISOM shift towards a more supportive role, with Somali forces
taking the lead in carrying out security tasks. AMISOM would build on its proven
strengths in the asymmetrical threat environment in which it operates.
The following core tasks geared towards facilitating the transition are
proposed for AMISOM: (a) protecting main population centres and the presence of
international actors, securing and enabling political processes, reconciliation,
maintenance of law and order, early recovery and public safety, while prudently
implementing a transfer of responsibilities to Somali fo rces; (b) contributing
effectively to securing the main supply routes, beginning with those that link
population centres; (c) conducting targeted operations against Al -Shabaab and other
armed opposition groups, jointly with Somali forces and with appropria te mitigation
measures in place, while continuing the mentoring role during combat operations, as
well as the provision of operational support to Somali forces; and (d) contributing to
capacity-building and training of the Somali police, in close collabora tion with
UNSOM and in line with the national security architecture .
The AMISOM civilian component should be fully operationalized so that it
may reach its projected strength and refocus its efforts on supporting the revised
tasks of the AMISOM military and police components, i.e. mission support, human
rights compliance and supporting enhanced coordination and coherence between the
United Nations and the African Union in Somalia. Particular emphasis should be
placed on enhancing the staffing of its human rights component, with a view to
increasing capacity to monitor and strengthen compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law and to address cases of violations.
Based on the above, a revision of the AMISOM concept of operations is
recommended, in close consultation with the relevant counterparts in the Federal
Government of Somalia and the Federal Member States, as well as UNSOS.
AMISOM should also review its operational equipment requirements in the light of
the proposed revised tasks and updated threat assessments.
The Somali police plays a critical part in AMISOM transition planning and the
wider security strategy for Somalia. Considering that under the national security
architecture it is foreseen that 32,000 Somali police will shou lder the main
responsibility for security in cities, towns and villages, support to the Somali police
should increase considerably and is likely to be required for the foreseeable future.
Unlike the military, the Somali police component, where deployed, is already in
charge of its responsibilities, and a transfer from AMISOM is therefore not required.
Moreover, the police component is expected to play the most important role in
securing political and reconciliation processes in the future.
On the one hand, the AMISOM police component has proven its comparative
advantage in assisting with the vetting, recruitment, training and mentoring of
police officers and in providing operational support. The successful AMISOM
programme should be expanded with the resources outlined above. On the other
hand, UNSOM has proven successful in providing policy advice for the roll -out of
the new policing model and the establishment of institutional police structures at the
level of the Federal Government of Somalia and the Federal Member States. This
political effort, underpinned with technical advice, is closely linked to other core
tasks of UNSOM, including supporting the federalism process, the constitutional
review, the development of a justice and corrections model for Soma lia and
6/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

addressing outstanding issues related to the national security architecture. It is
therefore my hope that the Security Council will fully endorse the recommendation
to replace 500 of the first 1,000 military personnel of AMISOM by the end of 2017
and consider strengthening the UNSOM policing mandate to enhance its capacity to
provide advice for the establishment of institutional structures under the new
policing model, which would require a modest increase in resources for the
UNSOM police component. The AMISOM and UNSOM police components should
continue to strengthen their collaboration.
A review of the current AMISOM and UNSOM strategic communications
capacity and direction is required to maximize the use of available resources,
including efforts to explain the transition process, to encourage support for the
transition and to counter any possible narrative of a gradual AMISOM withdrawal
being a victory for Al-Shabaab.
I recognize the progress made by AMISOM in complying with human rights
and international humanitarian law. The joint review determined that AMISOM and,
where relevant, the African Union and troop/police-contributing countries, should
accelerate efforts to enhance the effectiveness of measures and mechanisms
designed to prevent and address violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, including on the basis of specific recommendations made during
the joint review (and compiled in a table annexed to the present letter (see
annex IV)) aimed at strengthening selection and screening, training, accountability,
monitoring and reporting (including the civilian casualty tracking and analysis
response cell), planning mechanisms, as well as rules and regulations.
Strategic monitoring and accountability
The joint review recommends that the existing joint African Union-United
Nations working group on Somalia, with representation at Headquarters and in the
field (UNSOM, UNSOS and AMISOM), with the participation of partners, as
appropriate, should play a central role in monitoring the progress against the
trajectory outlined above at a strategic level. It should provide regular periodic
reports to the African Union-United Nations Joint Task Force. This will allow for a
timely response to developments, the mitigation of risks and a regular review of
numbers of authorized personnel as conditions for transferring tasks are met. The
Joint African Union-United Nations working group would closely cooperate with
the implementation structures under the comprehensive approach to secur ity, as
appropriate.
Through its respective leadership in Addis Ababa (the African Union Peace
and Security Department and UNOAU at the appropriate level), the working group
could provide informal briefings to troop/police-contributing countries, members of
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council, as appropriate. The African Union Commission may need enhanced
support to effectively engage in the monitoring and continuous planning processes
that this transition requires.
The joint review recommends that the senior leadership coordination forum in
Mogadishu be strengthened as part of efforts to ensure greater alignment of
priorities, strategic coherence and closer follow-up. In this respect, the joint review
proposes, from within existing resources, the establishment of a dedicated joint
secretariat to prepare the meetings of the coordination forum and follow up on the
implementation of its decisions. The joint review strongly supports the continuation
of the joint briefings of the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia and the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Somalia to the Security Council and to the African Union Peace and
17-13092

7/43

S/2017/653

Security Council. In line with the joint African Union-United Nations framework
for an enhanced partnership on peace and security, the Secretariat will work with the
African Union Commission on modalities for a strengthened interaction with the
respective policy organs to ensure greater strategic coherence.
AMISOM and UNSOS are implementing several measures to strengthen
accountability and efficiency in their management of resources and finances. A joint
mission support committee will provide the platform for improved transparen cy and
enable advanced planning. Commodity and personnel management, as well as
service delivery functions at each mission, are being co -located to the fullest extent
possible. This will improve monitoring, analysis and reporting on logistics support
performance and inform joint decision-making to better align funding and resources
with prioritized AMISOM activities. Specific details of the agreed measures are
annexed to the present letter (see annex IV.B).
The United Nations logistical support, as currently delivered by UNSOS, will
need to be reviewed in the light of the AMISOM transition planning, once approved,
as well as agreements among Somalis and international partners within the context
of the comprehensive approach to security.
The joint review recommends the creation of a joint United Nations/Federal
Government of Somalia human rights due diligence policy working group, with the
full participation of the African Union, in order to ensure that measures to mitigate
risks identified under the policy are reviewed regularly and that the implementation
of such measures are jointly monitored.
Observations
I wish to convey my deep gratitude to the African Union Commission for the
strong collaboration and partnership that characterized this major joint effort. I
would also like to thank the Federal Government of Somalia and the Federal
Member States, members of the Security Council, representatives of the European
Union and other international partners for their participation in the work of the joint
team. I commend the leadership of AMISOM, UNSOM and UNSOS for their
relentless efforts to enhance coherence and collaboration, in particular through joint
arrangements.
The courage and heroism of the Somali security forces and the AMISO M
military and police personnel deserve our collective tribute. Thanks to their
sacrifices, and the sustained commitment of its partners, Somalia is undoubtedly on
a path free from conflict.
I commend the decision of the joint review to place Somali owne rship at the
core of the review. The elections, the peaceful handover of power, the establishment
of the National Security Council with comprehensive membership and the
agreement on the national security architecture are milestone achievements. Only
sustained Somali commitment and increased compliance with human rights and the
rule of law can build on these accomplishments and considerably accelerate security
sector reform. With regard to the required equipment, infrastructure and sustainment
support for the Somali forces, I agree with the conclusion of the joint review that
this effort is best left to the consideration of the international partners.
I fully concur with the conclusion of the joint review that the presence of
AMISOM in Somalia is necessary at this delicate point in time, although it will be
reduced over time as part of a transition process anchored in the national security
architecture. I see no other viable alternative if we are to prevent a reversal of
strategic importance — an outcome that would be disastrous for the Somali people
who have gone through untold hardship over the past two decades, and also for the
8/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

international community that has invested so much in resources and lives.
Moreover, a hasty drawdown of AMISOM and an unorganized handover to Somali
security institutions is likely to affect the gains and result in a situation that may
necessitate yet another international security deployment in Somalia. The presence
of AMISOM in the years ahead will without doubt help to create the space required
for the Somali forces to increase their capabilities and their confidence and meet the
challenges at hand.
The presence of AMISOM and its sustained funding are intertwined. There
will be no AMISOM presence, absent a solution that ensures pr edictable and
sustainable funding. Irrespective of the tool, it is imperative that this objective be
achieved, either from voluntary or assessed contributions from the United Nations. I
am hopeful that following this review, an arrangement to this effect c an be agreed
upon, one that meets the legitimate expectations of the African Union and AMISOM
troop-contributing countries that have made enormous sacrifices in the pursuit of
peace and security in Somalia.
In this regard, I urge Member States and partners to review their funding
plans. It is my hope that the proposed transition planning, including the increased
transparency and accountability measures, will encourage predictable and
sustainable voluntary funding. I will consult with the African Union and all key
partners concerning the future funding of AMISOM and will report back to the
Security Council by November 2017.
I also wish to emphasize that, given the critical necessity that all security
operations be carried out in compliance with human rights and other international
standards, it is essential that AMISOM, with the support of the United Nations, give
priority to implementing the recommendations made by the joint review on the
human rights compliance framework. Compliance with the human rights due
diligence policy in the context of United Nations support to the transition of
responsibilities between AMISOM and Somali security forces will be the
cornerstone of the partnership between the United Nations, the African Union, the
Federal Government of Somalia and the Federal Member States.
I fully support the strategy proposed by the joint review with respect to the
transition. Close monitoring and improved overall efficiency is likely to generate
accelerated progress and elicit additional support. T he trajectory recommended by
the joint review for downsizing AMISOM was planned carefully and prudently,
taking into consideration that confidence in the Somali security institutions will
grow progressively. I wholeheartedly agree that the transition must be transparent,
viable, responsible and orderly, and that it requires sufficient flexibility and
patience.
I am delighted to see that AMISOM and UNSOM assistance to developing
Somali police institutions, supported by partners, has resulted in important s teps in
the right direction. Without adequate support to implementing the new policing
model, this remarkable political achievement may come to naught. I therefore
strongly urge members of the Security Council to seriously consider authorizing
enhanced support to both operational and policy advice to the Somali police, at the
federal and Federal Member State levels, bearing in mind the importance of
effective Somali police institutions for a successful transition.
I urge the Federal Government and Federal Member States to assume security
responsibilities throughout Somalia within the earliest possible time frame, without
jeopardizing the gains achieved. The national security architecture provides a legal
and organizational framework around which internatio nal support for security sector
development can be more coordinated and more coherent, and therefore impactful.
A strong and efficient Somali security sector is also subject to enhanced governance
17-13092

9/43

S/2017/653

and accountability mechanisms in line with basic internatio nal standards. I agree
with the joint review that immediate steps required to sustain the current momentum
include political discussions to address outstanding details in the national security
architecture, its operationalization, and Somali institutions actively co-leading the
joint verification exercise.
This is the time when all partners must commit to the implementation of the
national security architecture and align their support accordingly. In turn, the
Federal Government of Somalia and the Federal Member States have to ensure the
regular payments of salaries in a transparent and accountable manner.
With respect to the integration of security forces, I reiterate the
recommendation in my letter to the President of the Security Council dated 2 July
2015, encouraging the Federal Government to favourably consider the full and
formal integration of 3,000 Puntland forces into the Somalia National Army on a
priority basis. If adequately supported by partners, a comprehensive training and
equipment package, linked to the regular payment of salaries, may set a model to be
replicated elsewhere in the country. This support will also enhance Puntland ’s
response to terrorist attacks.
Successful stabilization and consolidation efforts, including the delivery of
basic services, are subject to establishing local governance structures, and they will
require improved collaboration among key actors. Those efforts should focus on
priority areas agreed by the Somali people, including main population centres where
the security environment allows international actors to operate, and from which
services should expand gradually to surrounding districts. Moreover, efforts should
focus on regions where conditions enable rapid progress.
The community recovery and extension of state authority and accountability
initiative, which represents the United Nations approach to supporting stabilization
and the extension of State authority in Somalia, aims at assisting in the
establishment of credible, representative and functional sub -federal administrations
that mitigate conflict, instil confidence among the population in State structures and
improve the lives of the Somali people. It is imperative that these efforts are
sequenced with targeted military operations.
It is my sincere hope that the friends of Somalia around the globe will sustain
their support for this final phase of AMISOM and for the creation of Somali security
institutions that can take over from AMISOM. This is not the time to relent. Much
has been achieved, but the political and security gains remain tenuous and
reversible. We must not allow the substantial investments in lives and resources for
over two decades to go to waste. I therefore urge the Security Council to endorse the
recommendations contained in the present letter.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annexes to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

10/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

Annex I
Communique of the African Union Peace and Security Council
Adopted at its 700th meeting, Addis Ababa, 12 July 2017
The Peace and Security Council (PSC) of the African Union (AU), at its
700th meeting held on 12 July 2017, adopted the following decision on the report of
the Chairperson of the AU Commission on AU-United Nations (UN) Joint Review
on the AU Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the renewal of the mandate of AMISOM
and on the report on the 10-Year Lessons Learned Review Conference on AMISOM:
Council,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Chairperson of the Commission on the
AU-UN Joint Review on AMISOM and the report on the 10 -Year Lessons Learned
Review Conference on AMISOM, as well as the statement made by Ambassador
Smaїl Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security, and the briefing by the
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the Commission in Somalia and Head
of AMISOM, Ambassador Francisco Madeira. Council also takes note of the
statements made by the representatives of Ethiopia, in its capacity as Chair of
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), Italy, as co-Chair of IGAD
Partner Forum, United Nations (UN), European Union (EU), as well as UN Security
Council (UNSC) Permanent Members, namely China, France, Russia, the United
Kingdom and the United States of America;
2.
Recalls its previous pronouncements on the situation in Somalia and
AMISOM, including Communique PSC/PR/COMM(DCLXXXIV) adopted at its
684th meeting held on 28 April 2017; Communique PSC/PR/COMM(DCXLIX)
adopted at its 649th meeting held on 16 January 2017; Communique
PSC/PR/COMM(DCXXII) adopted at its 622nd meeting held on 6 September 2016;
Communique PSC/PR/COMM(DCVIII) adopted at its 608th meeting held on
29 June 2016; and Communique PSC/PR/COMM.2(DXCV) adopted at its
595th meeting held on 28 April 2016;
3.
Further recalls paragraph 11 of the communique of its 622nd meeting
held on 6 September 2016, requesting the Commission to conduct a comprehensive
lessons learned exercise which will identify progress made, challenges encountered
and more importantly recommendations on the way forward in the future of
AMISOM, including the Mission exit strategy. Council also recalls paragraph 10 of
the communique of its 684th meeting held on 28 April 2017, underscoring the
Importance of the conduct of an AU-UN Joint Strategic Review on AMISOM, in
defining the future of AMISOM presence in Somalia, and noting that the review will
provide an opportunity to review and define tasks, as well as options for the
reconfiguration of AMISOM;
4.
Commends the Commission for the successful conduct of the 10-Year
Lessons Learned study on AMISOM, as well as the AU -UN Joint Review on
AMISOM. Council further commends the Federal Government of Somalia, the UN,
Troop and Police Contributing Countries (T/PCCs) and bilateral partners for their
commitments and cooperation extended to the AU-UN Joint Review Team prior to,
and during the conduct of both exercises;
5.
Reiterates the main outcomes of the meeting of AMISOM’s T/PCCs, in
the margins of the 29th Ordinary Session of AU Assembly, held on 3 July 2017,
which, inter alia, requested the Commission, to establish a Committee of Experts to
develop a Joint AU/T/PCCs Exit Strategy, Council underscores that the
development of such an exit strategy, is complementary and should build on the
17-13092

11/43

S/2017/653

outcomes of the Ten Year Lessons Learned Exercise and the AU -UN Joint Review.
In this respect, Council stresses the importance of an AMISOM transition plan that
is based on a realistic timeframe and the attainment of the key security conditions
suggested by the AU-UN Joint review, in order to ensure a sustained progress in the
political and economic developments in Somalia;
6.
Endorses the report of the AMISOM 10-Year Lessons Learned, in
particular its main conclusion that AMISOM has been successful in the
implementation of its mandate including through the facilitation of an enabling
environment for two political transitions in Somalia. In this regard, Council further
recognizes that AMISOM remains an indispensable partner for peace in Somalia but
needs to be property reconfigured to support the next phase of state building in
5omalia during the course of the implementation of the transitional plan;
7.
Pays tribute to the heavy sacrifices made by AMISOM T/PCCs,
especially those that have paid the ultimate price for the promotion of peace,
security, stability and reconciliation in Somalia. Council renews AMISOM’s
commitment to support the Federal Government of Somalia and interim member
states in accordance with the highest professional standards mindful of AU’s Zero’s
Tolerance Policy against all forms of misconduct and abuse;
8.
Reiterates its gratitude to the UN, the EU and other bilateral partners in
supporting AMISOM operations against Al-Shabaab, as well as their financial and
material support to AMISOM and the Federal Government of Somalia;
9.
Commends the Federal Government of Somalia for its commitment to
fostering sustainable peace in Somalia. In this respect, Council welcomes the
leadership of President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo in promoting an
inclusive political dialogue between the federal government and the interim federal
states through the rapid formation of the National Security Council, as well as in the
commencement of the implementation of the 17 April 2017 agreement on the
National Security Architecture as reflected in the Communique of the National
Security Council following its meeting in Mogadishu, from 5 to 10 July 2017.
Council, reiterates its commitment to continue supporting the Federal Government
of Somalia in achieving its security and political milestones and urges the Federal
Government of Somalia to spare no effort in the protection of civilians, the
promotion of respect for human rights and the advancement of sustainable peace
and economic growth in Somalia;
10. Takes note with serious concern that that Al-Shabaab terrorist group
continues to represent a threat to peace, security and stability in Somalia, to the
region and, to the wider international community;
11. Welcomes the findings of the AU-UN Joint Review especially the
political determination of the Federal Government of Somalia to assume primarily
security responsibilities from AMISOM, based on a responsible, viable and realistic
transition plan;
12. Endorses the recommendations made by the AU-UN Joint Review on a
gradual and phased reduction and reorganization of AMISOM ’s uniformed
personnel aimed at providing a greater support role, with Somali National Security
Forces progressively taking the lead in undertaking security tasks in the country. In
this respect, Council underlines the need to avoid any security vacuum that could
undermine the hard won gains made so far in Somalia;
13. Decides to renew the mandate of AMISOM for 12 months, until 31 July
2018, based on the following revised core tasks:

12/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

a.
Continue to support political dialogue and reconciliation in
Somalia;
b.
Protect main population centers and the presence of international
actors, securing and enabling political processes, reconciliation, maintenance
of law and order, early recovery and public safety, while prudently mentoring
Somali security entities in implementing a transfer of responsibilities to
Somali National Security Force (SNSF);
c.
Contribute to securing the main supply routes beginning with those
linking main population centers through joint operations with Somali forces;
d.
Conduct targeted operations against Al-Shabaab and other armed
opposition groups, jointly with Somali forces, continue mentoring durin g
combat operations and provide operational support to Somali forces;
e.
Support capacity building at various levels of SNSF, in line with
the National Security Architecture and in full coordination with UN and other
relevant partners;
f.
Facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance, and support to
early recovery and extension of state authority, within ava ilable resources of
the Mission;
14. Requests the Commission to work closely with the Federal Government
of Somalia, the T/PCCs, the UN and other relevant international partners, to revise
the AMISOM’s Concept of Operations, in light of the proposed revised mandate, an
updated threat assessment, a review of the Mission’s operational requirements and a
revised transition plan based on the time period from 2017 to 2021, in line with the
request by the Federal Government of Somalia and the recommendations made by
the AU-UN Joint Review. In this regard, Council underscores the imperative of
addressing current AMISOM capabilities gaps through the ge neration of additional
enablers and force multiplier, in order to enhance the Mission’s operational
effectiveness;
15. Further requests the Commission and AMISOM to work closely with
the Federal Government of Somalia and the UN to ensure the urgent comple tion of
the ongoing joint physical verification, to be submitted to Council, of Somalia
National Army and Somalia Police Force, across all sectors of operations, to allow
for the identification of critical capabilities gaps that should be addressed in orde r to
ensure effective joint operations as part of the overall capacity building of the
Somali national security institutions;
16. Expresses concern at the lack of coordination and coherence in the
support to the building of a capable and inclusive Somalia security sector, which
could delay the progress required in facilitating effective assumption of full
responsibility by the Somalia national security institutions from AMISOM, Council
stresses the need for partners to work closely with the Somali authorities and
AMISOM in ensuring enhanced coordination of support including in the conduct of
bilateral capacity building initiatives and offensive operations. Council welcomes
the establishment of the Somalia-African Union Taskforce as a credible
coordination mechanism for support to the enhancement of the Somali security
sector;
17. Further stresses the need for a responsive, effective, efficient and
responsible field support platform as a strategic enabler to AMISOM operations. In
this regard, Council requests the United Nations Support Office to Somalia
(UNSOS) to continue to enhance its delivery of support package to AMISOM,
taking into account the need to reinforce the role of the AU Special Representative
17-13092

13/43

S/2017/653

and Head of AMISOM to this effect, in line with the 2016 Memorandum of
Understanding between the AU and UN on the provision of support to AMISOM;
18. Emphasizes that the continued presence of AMISOM in Somalia and the
implementation of a viable transition necessitates the securing of predictable and
sustainable funding for AMISOM and Somali security institutions. Council takes
note of steps taken by the Commission in addressing current resource gaps and
requests the Commission to enhance engagements with the UN Secretary General
and other partners, at the required level, in securing predictable and sustainable
funding for AMISOM, including through the utilization of UN Assessed
contributions for the payment of stipends for AMISOM uniformed personnel, and
bearing in mind the successes made by the Mission, the transition time-frame
proposed by the AU-UN Joint Review and, the reality that AMISOM represents an
exemplary AU-UN strategic and operational partnership in the implementation of
Chapter VIM of the UN Charter and in the spirit of the UN -AU Joint Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed on 19 April 2017;
19. Urges the UNSC to consider, at the earliest possible timeframe, the
report of the AU-UN Joint Review and to endorse its recommendations, in order to
pave the way for its speedy and effective implementation, taking into consideration
the need to avoid a security vacuum in Somalia and the region, enhance
coordination efforts and ensure predictable funding for AMISOM;
20. Requests the Commission to transmit this Communique, the report of the
Chairperson of the Commission on the AU-UN Joint Review of AMISOM and the
report on the 10-Year Lessons Learned on AMISOM to the UN Secretary-General
for onward transmission to the UNSC for its action, as appropriate;
21.

14/43

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

17-13092

S/2017/653

Annex II
Report of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
the African Union-United Nations joint review of the African
Union Mission in Somalia
I.

Introduction
1.
On 7 July 2016, the United Nations Security Council, by its resolution 2297
(2016), requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with the African Union
(AU) Commission, to conduct a joint assessment mission of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), after the 2016 electoral process in Somalia. The
purpose of the joint assessment was to ensure that AMISOM is properly configured
to support the next phase of State-building in Somalia, and to present options and
recommendations to the Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council. At its 684th meeting, held on 28 April 2017, the Peace and
Security Council “underscored the importance of the upcoming AU -United Nations
joint strategic review on Somalia in defining the future of AMISOM presence in
Somalia”. The Council furthermore “noted that the review will provide an
opportunity to review and redefine tasks, as well as options for the reconfiguration
of AMISOM”.
2.
The present report provides an update on the key findings and
recommendations of the AU-United Nations joint review of AMISOM, which was
conducted in Mogadishu, Somalia and Addis Ababa from 15 to 29 May 2017. It also
provides concluding observations on the way forward.

II.

Context of the African Union-United Nations joint review
3.
In 2013 and 2015, two AU-UN joint benchmarking assessments were
conducted to determine whether the security conditions were conducive for a
transition of AMISOM to a United Nations peacekeeping mission. Both assessments
concluded that the security conditions were not met for a transition of AMISOM to
a United Nations peacekeeping mission. Accordingly, AMISOM ’s continued
presence has remained central for providing an enabling security environ ment and
facilitating political processes in Somalia. In this respect, AMISOM has
significantly degraded the threats posed by Al -Shabaab, especially the ability of the
terrorist group to maintain territorial control in Somalia. Yet, the security situation
remains fluid and often characterized by asymmetrical attacks by Al -Shabaab
against civilian populations, Somali National Security Forces (SNSF) and AMISOM
personnel.
4.
Politically, the outcome of the Parliamentary and Presidential elections in
2016-2017 is an indication of the continued relevance of AMISOM in facilitating
political processes and inclusive dialogue in Somalia. The establishment of a
bicameral assembly and the election of President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
Farmajo in February 2017 marked the completion of the unique electoral process in
Somalia. Despite the successes registered by AMISOM in contributing to the
foundation for security and political gains, the mission continues to face significant
operational challenges, including, notably, the decision of the European Union to
reduce the troop allowance by 20 per cent in January 2016. Efforts to raise
voluntary contributions to bridge this gap have not been successful, which has led to
the significant under-resourcing and reduced the morale of AMISOM troops.

17-13092

15/43

S/2017/653

5.
It is against this background that the Peace and Security Council, at its 608th
meeting, held on 29 June 2016, took note of the indicative timelines of the
AMISOM exit strategy presented by the AU Commission. The strategy prioritized
territorial recovery and consolidation by AMISOM and the Somali National
Security Forces until October 2018, and a subsequent drawdown and transfer of
security responsibilities to the Security Forces from 2018 to December 2020. The
importance of an AMISOM exit strategy based on the indicative timelines was
reiterated during the Council’s 622rd meeting, held on 6 September 2016, and the
Council also requested the AU Commission to conduct a comprehensive lessons
learned exercise, which would identify progress made, challenges encountered and
recommend options on the way forward in the future of AMISOM, including the
mission exit strategy.
6.
In this regard, at a number of consultations that took place over the course of
early 2017 various critical issues were discussed, including the approaching timebound withdrawal of AMISOM. The AMISOM lessons learned review Conference
of 9 and 10 March 2017 emphasized that AMISOM should adopt a conditions -based
exit strategy based on clear set of criteria for effective drawdo wn and eventual exit.
Meanwhile, the AU-led high-level consultation on AMISOM and the support to
security institutions and reform in Somalia held on 23 March 2017 concluded that,
among other things, the role of AMISOM will continue to be relevant after 2018.
From these consultations, a consensus emerged that there should be a move from a
purely time-bound to a time- and condition- based withdrawal of AMISOM, with an
emphasis on the urgent need to develop capable Somali security institutions for a
successful transition of security responsibilities in Somalia.
7.
On 16 April 2017, a historical agreement was reached between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the interim Federal Member States on Somalia’s
national security architecture. It laid out a unified security structure, including the
size of the Somali National Army and combined Federal and State Police, as well as
their distribution, composition, command and control and financing. The national
security architecture, which was endorsed by Somalia’s National Security Council
on 8 May 2017, formed the basis of the security pact agreed upon between Somalia
and international partners at the London conference on Somalia, held on 11 May
2017. These reflect collective determination by the Somali leadership and
international partners to put Somali ownership at the forefront of all security
discussions, as the sustainable way to consolidate political and security gains made
thus far.
8.
The AU-United Nations joint review was conducted taking into account the
above context, in particular the agreement on the national security architecture and
the political position of the Federal Government of Somalia to assume security
responsibilities directly from AMISOM based on a responsible, viable and realistic
transition plan.

III.

Objectives of the African Union-United Nations joint review
9.
The AU-United Nations joint review was conducted from 15 to 29 May 2017,
co-led by the AU Commission and the United Nations Secretariat. The AU
Commission transmitted, in a note verbal dated 3 May 2017, the concept note and
terms of reference of the joint review to all member States of the AU Peace and
Security Council. In Addis Ababa, on 15 May 2017, the joint review team also
briefed AMISOM troop- and police- contributing countries on the objectives and
expected outcomes of the exercise. The European Union, France, Italy, the United
Kingdom and the United States of America also participated in the AU -United
Nations joint review process.

16/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

10. The AU-United Nations joint review had a three-fold objective to: (a) assist
Somali stakeholders from the Federal and sub-federal levels to elaborate an
implementation roadmap/ plan, likely in phases, based on the 17 April agreement;
(b) propose options for AMISOM, the United Nations and other international
partners to assist in implementing the road map, including options for AMISOM
reconfiguration, hence articulating the conditions upon which a transition plan for
AMISOM is to be agreed; and (c) lay out the elements for support to AMISOM
(including funding), tied to the implementation of the transition plan.

IV.

Methodology
11. Specifically, in order to achieve the above, the AU -United Nations joint
review:
(a) Assessed progress towards achieving the security strategy articulated in
Security Council resolution 2232 (2015), following the communique of the AU
Peace and Security Council adopted at its 521st meeting, held on 30 June 2015, and
subsequently elaborated in the 2016 AMISOM concept of operations, including
through the conduct of an assessment of AMISOM and the Somali security forces,
to the extent possible;
(b) Taking into consideration the AMISOM lessons learned Exercise and the
United Nations strategic assessment, devise a security strategy, specifically to:
(i)

Continue to contain and degrade the threat of Al-Shabaab;

(ii) Provide an enabling environment for the peace, extension of state
services and authority and state-building processes;
(iii) Explore available options for the provision of predictable and sustainable
financing to AMISOM to meet the critical conditions for a responsible
takeover by the Somali National Security Forces;
(iv) Develop parameters to adjust AMISOM and international security
support to the current developments, notably a condition-based takeover of
primary security responsibilities by the Somali National Security Forces,
including through the development of adequate and comprehensive strategies
to support the effective capacity-building of inclusive, capable Somali
National Security Forces aligned with the national security architecture;
(c) Also examined AU-United Nations structures to provide strategic
management and oversight of the mission, as well as ensure accountability and
necessary coordination.
12. In fulfilling these objectives, the AU-United Nations joint review undertook a
wide range of consultations in Addis Ababa and Mogadishu. It had the opportunity
to meet with the Prime Minister of the Federal Government of Somalia, Hassan Ali
Khayre, held a three-day dialogue with the National Security Adviser of the Federal
Government of Somalia, the national Police Commissioner and Deputy Police
Commissioner, the Director General of the Ministry of the Interior, representatives
of the Ministry of Defense, representatives of the National Intelligence Service
Agency and representatives of the interim Federal Member States, namely,
Galmudug, Hirshabelle, Jubaland and South West, it also met with representatives
of AMISOM, the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), the United
Nations Office of Project Services (UNOPS), the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS).

17-13092

17/43

S/2017/653

V.

Key findings of the joint review
13.

The AU-United Nations joint review submitted the following key findings:

(a) Somalia has made important progress on the political front in the last few
months. In particular, the 16 April 2017 agreement on the main principles of the
national security architecture, which provides a strong basis for the support of the
Somali security sector;
(b) There is strong declared resolve and agreement by the Federal
Government of Somalia and the interim Federal Member States on the need to
commence a structured and responsible transfer of AMISOM security
responsibilities to the Somali National Security Forces;
(c) AMISOM has succeeded in contributing to peace, security and stability
in Somalia over the last decade. AMISOM interventions have prevented Al -Shabaab
and other armed opposition groups from taking over the country and have recovered
significant territories, thereby providing secure space and the foundation for State building and peacebuilding. This has included reconciliation and other political
processes, resulting in, among other things, in the establishment of a federal map,
administrations in five interim Federal Member States and a federal Government
that enjoys legitimacy throughout Somalia;
(d) AMISOM has also facilitated humanitarian relief, particularly through
the securing of main supply routes, to enable the safe delivery of humanitarian
assistance;
(e) There is significant progress in compliance with human rights and
international humanitarian law by AMISOM, with the operationalization of the
Civilian Causalities Tracking and Analysis Cell and the setting up of the CEEBLA
crisis hotline as notable achievements;
(f) In view of the growing capabilities of the Somali National Security
Forces, no additional AMISOM troops will be required to undertake operations.
Nevertheless, AMISOM remains essential to ensure security in Somalia in the
medium term. AMISOM’s continued presence is necessary for the period 2017-2021
to consolidate the political and security gains so far achieved. A strategic shift is
required, however, towards adopting a support role, with Somalis assuming greater
leadership and responsibility for security. This necessitates that AMISOM perform a
number of modified tasks, which are aligned with the national security architecture
and focused on facilitating a viable, orderly and responsible transition. Indeed,
elements of a transition have already begun, with Somali forces taking over tasks in
a number of locations in the regions and in Mogadishu, such as the protection of
several Federal Ministries;
(g) As part of this transition, a reorganization and gradual reduction of
AMISOM uniformed personnel should be established in phases, consistent with the
implementation of the national security architecture and the commitment and
capability of Somalis and troop- and police-contributing countries, in order to
provide for the earliest possible transfer of security responsibilities. However, the
risks of reversing the substantial political and security gains achieved over the past
10 years must be avoided, especially considering the significant investment in lives
and resources;
(h) There is an urgent need for verification of the Somali National Security
Forces to assess their strength and capabilities at the national and state level;
There is a need to enhance the capabilities as well as financial and logistical support
for both AMISOM and the SNSF to allow for effective joint operations.
18/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

14. In order to ensure a smooth transition, detailed planning is required, based on
the completion of a joint physical verification exercise of the Somali security
forces, expected to be completed no later than 1 September 2017. This joint physical
verification will be co-led by the Federal Government of Somalia and the interim
Federal Member States, together with AMISOM and the United Nations. It will
build on previous initiatives conducted by AMISOM, United Nations entities and
international partners. It will determine the methodology and conditions for handing
over specific security tasks, differentiated by each of the interim Federal Member
States. The verification will focus on determining numbers, capabilities and
locations and include the Somali National Army, regional forces in favour of
integration and the police, prioritizing those forces participating in joint operations .
The more detailed transition plan should be sufficiently flexible to allow for
accelerated progress in building Somali security capabilities, but also to respond to
unforeseen negative security developments.

VI.

Key conditions for transition and drawdown of AMISOM
15. Political, security and funding conditions will be imperative for completing
the transition. The political conditions include, but are not limited to:
(a)

The formalization of the federal structure;

(b) Addressing of outstanding issues relating to the national security
architecture, in particular with regard to numbers, roles, and responsibilities of the
Federal Government of Somalia and its security forces;
(c) Legitimation and capacitation of key institutions, especially the Nation al
Security Council;
(d)
16.

The conduct of elections and peaceful transfer of power in 2021.

Key security conditions include:

(a) The development of Somali security capabilities to a level commensurate
with local and country wide threats;
(b) The degradation and containment of Al-Shabaab to a level at which
Somalis can respond from within their own capabilities.
17.

With regards to funding it was observed that:

(a) The establishment of transparent and accountable payment systems to
ensure the regular disbursement of salaries for security personnel consistent with the
national security architecture and a corresponding mechanism by Somali institutions
and partners for the payment stipends are key;
(b) Securing of predictable and sustainable funding for AMISOM, possibly
including United Nations assessed contributions, is imperative to avoid the risk of
premature withdrawal before the end of 2018, which could reverse gains made over
the past decade.

VII.

Recommendations of the African Union-United Nations joint review
18. The AU-United Nations joint review made key recommendations for
consideration regarding the AMISOM drawdown and revised AMISOM tasks and
other operational issues for the enhancement of the Mission’s effectiveness.
19. In respect to the AMISOM drawdown, the following recommendations were
made:

17-13092

19/43

S/2017/653

(a) The AU-United Nations joint review recommends a two -phased
approach. During the first phase, as a first step, military forces should be reduced by
1,000 personnel by December 2017, following the completion of targeted offensive
operations against Al-Shabaab and other armed opposition groups (including in the
Juba corridor and the north-east coastline) jointly undertaken with Somali forces.
AMISOM police personnel will be increased by 500, a to support the primacy of the
Somali Police Forces in law enforcement, the rule of law and public safety, as
specified in the national security architecture. In a second step, AMISOM military
strength should be reduced by an additional 1,000 personnel, no later than October
2018;
(b) As part of phase two, further reductions of military personnel after
October 2018 will be considered, following another AU -United Nations joint review
by mid-2018. During and immediately following the 2021 elections, contin ued
AMISOM mentoring and rapid reaction capacities are required. In this regard, the
joint review recommends consideration of a quick reaction force for a further
12-month period to support Somali security forces in responding to emerging
challenges.
20. On the proposed revised AMISOM tasks, the AU -United Nations joint review
recommends that AMISOM shift towards a support role, with Somalis progressively
taking the lead in undertaking security tasks. The review also proposes the
following core tasks as part of the transition:
(a) Protect main population centres and the presence of international actors,
securing and enabling political processes, reconciliation, maintenance of law and
order, early recovery and public safety, while prudently implementing a tr ansfer of
responsibilities to the Somali National Security Forces;
(b) Contribute to securing the main supply routes, beginning with those
linking the main population centres;
(c) Conduct targeted operations against Al-Shabaab and other armed
opposition groups, jointly with Somali forces; continue mentoring during combat
operations and provide operational support to Somali forces;
(d) Support capacity-building of the Somali National Security Forces, in line
with the national security architecture.
21. The AMISOM civilian component will focus its efforts on its revised tasks,
including supporting the revised tasks of the AMISOM military and police
components, with the objective of facilitating the transition and eventual drawdown.
22. In the light of the proposed revised tasks and an updated threat assessment, the
AU-United Nations joint review recommends a revision of the AMISOM concept of
operations and, more specifically, a review of AMISOM requirements for
operational equipment. These revised tasks will also necessitate a review of current
AMISOM capacity to enhance its strategic and operational management, as well as
operational effectiveness. A review of the current AMISOM communications
capacity and direction is also required to maximize the use of av ailable resources
and more effectively explain and encourage support for the transition.
23. Other operational recommendations made by the AU -United Nations joint
review team to enhance AMISOM’s effectiveness include:

__________________
a

20/43

Comprised of 2 additional Formed Police Units of 160 personnel each, 120 individual police
officers and 60 formed police units personnel to bring the existing 3 formed police units to the
standard number of 160 personnel.
17-13092

S/2017/653

(a) AMISOM should continue to strengthen the effectiveness of measures
and mechanisms to prevent and address violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law by its peacekeepers, with support from UNSOM, UNSOS, AU and
United Nations Headquarters;
(b) The existing joint AU/United Nations working group on Somalia,
inviting AU, the United Nations and national actors in Somalia, as appropriate,
should be tasked with monitoring progress on the transition and provide regular
periodic reports. This will allow for appropriate reaction to developments, the
mitigation of risks and the regular review of the number of authorized personnel as
conditions for transferring tasks are met;
(c) At mission level, the joint review proposes more frequent meetings of the
Senior Coordination Leadership Forum: regularly agreeing on joint deliverables will
have a considerable impact on AMISOM/UNSOM relations. AMISOM and UNSOS
should establish enhanced tracking and management systems to improve
accountability for resources. Appropriate AMISOM civilian supp ort units should be
co-located with UNSOS to the greatest extent possible so as to enable effective
accountability and improved efficiency, while continuing to observe respective
managerial reporting lines.

VIII.

Concluding observations
24. I am pleased with the role of AU in contributing to the political processes and
security achievements in Somalia. The last decade since the deployment of
AMISOM may have been characterized by challenges in operational capabilities of
the mission, under-resourcing and significant loss of lives of AMISOM troops. Yet
these challenges have not derailed Africa’s collective resolve and focus of AMISOM
to effectively implement its mandate. I therefore wish to commend all AU member
States, in particular the troop-and police- contributing countries, namely Burundi,
Chad, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Swaziland, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe, for the sacrifices made, and
support provided to the people and Government of Somalia in order to restore
peace, security, stability and development in the country. The AU Commission will
spare no effort in ensuring that international support to AMISOM is enhanced,
especially during this transition phase of the Mission.
25. I would like to underscore three main observations for the consideration of the
Peace and Security Council, in its deliberations and decisions on the recently
concluded AU-United Nations joint review.
26. First, the gradual drawdown and reconfiguration of AMISOM uniforme d
personnel is a manifestation of the mission’s operational successes rather than a risk
to security gains. The AU-United Nations joint review observed that AMISOM
forces have already commenced transferring security responsibilities for the
protection of Government installations to the Somali National Security Forces. In
addition, cooperation between AMISOM police and the Somalia Police Force has
yielded significant dividends in the areas of capacity-building, training and
mentoring. The AMISOM civilian component has also demonstrated its relevance in
facilitating the work of its uniformed counterpart, and also in the areas of early
recovery and extension of State authority. Overall, the recommendation for the
initial reduction of AMISOM’s strength by 2,000 military personnel and a
simultaneous deployment of an additional 500 police over the next 14 months is
based on analysis that it will not compromise security gains in Somalia. Any further
reduction will be dependent on the outcomes of a further joint AU -United Nations
review of the threat assessment and general security conditions in Somalia.

17-13092

21/43

S/2017/653

Therefore, the Peace and Security Council may wish to endorse the recommendation
on the phased reduction of AMISOM strength and consider revising the AMISOM
mandate in the light of the proposed revised tasks of the mission.
27. Second, there is a clear recognition that adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding for the Somali National Forces and AMISOM will be critical to the
successful implementation of the transition plan. AMISOM continues to suffer from
reduced and voluntary funding from partners notably the European Union. Indeed,
we remain grateful for the voluntary support received, but it has not been sufficient.
Given the progress made in the strategic partnership between the AU and the United
Nations in the promotion of peace and security in Africa, the natural trajectory for
support to AMISOM will be United Nations assessed contribution. This has been the
consistent position of the Peace and Security Council and the AU Commission.
António Guterres, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, also reflected this
position in recent statements: if political will by the United Nations Security
Council does not allow for the authorization of United Nations assess ed
contributions for AMISOM, and there is no alternative source of predictable and
sustainable funding, the Peace and Security Council may wish to consider the future
of AMISOM, including the possibility of an accelerated withdrawal from the
mission. Indeed, this will not be in the interests of the people and Government of
Somalia, but we also need to consider the safety, security and morale of our
personnel that are working in arduous conditions. In a similar vein, I am looking
forward to the security conference on Somalia, scheduled for October 2017 in Addis
Ababa, as an important platform to mobilize resources for Somalia security
institutions and for AMISOM.
28. Finally, coordination of support to the Somalia security sector is imperative.
The AU-United Nations joint review team expressed concern on the lack of
coordination by some bilateral partners in the support provided to the security
sector. Without effective coordination of support to the security sector, there will be
slow or, in fact, negative progress in enhancing the security sector, which will have
implications for the envisaged AMISOM transition plan. To address this concern, it
is important for the Peace and Security Council to endorse the recommendation on
the joint verification of capabilities of the Somali National Security Forces, with a
view to identifying existing gaps and ways to address them in order to allow for
more effective joint operations between AMISOM and the Security Forces. In
addition, during the visit of the President of So malia, Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo, to Addis Ababa in May 2017, we agreed to establish the
Somalia-African Union task force as a credible coordination mechanism for the
provision of international support to the Somalia security sector. This task forc e had
its inaugural meeting in Nairobi on 17 May 2017, and the Commission is working
on a terms of reference for this coordination mechanism.

22/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

Annex III
Report on the 10-year lessons learned review conference on AMISOM
Nairobi, 9 and 10 March 2017
Summary of recommendations
In the light of the approaching tenth anniversary of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), the Peace and Security Council (PSC) of the African Union
(AU) on 6 September 2016, authorized the AU Commission to begin the process of
producing “a comprehensive lessons learned exercise, which will identify progress
made, challenges encountered and more importantly recommend options on the way
forward in the future of AMISOM, including the Mission Exit Strategy. ” This
request was re-iterated during the 649th meeting of the AU PSC on Somalia, on
23 January 2017, where PSC members requested the finalization of the 10 -year
lessons learned study.
It is against this background that AMISOM and the Peace Support Operations
Division convened a lessons learned workshop on AMISOM, from 9 to 10 March
2017, in Nairobi, Kenya. The summary of recommendations that emanated from this
workshop is presented below across four levels namely: political, strategic, and
operational and exit strategy in accordance with the AU methodology on lessons
learned studies in peace support operations.
Political level
i.
Political consultations between the AU Peace and Security Council and
the UN Security Council have remained at an informal level and it is proposed that
the two Councils need to move a step further and undertake concerted, systematic
joint analysis to allow for greater harmonization of mandates for AMISOM between
the UNSC and AU PSC.
ii.
Develop a consensus on what roles the AU should play beyond peace
enforcement with regard to the policing and civilian components of international
engagement in Somalia.
iii. The AU should improve its strategy on how to transition AMISOM from
a more military-led intervention focused on degrading Al-Shabaab to a robust
multidimensional stabilization and post-conflict reconstruction and development
mechanism.
iv. There is a need to develop Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) to
ensure that UNSOS is involved and effectively delivers in the implementation of
AMISOM Concept of Operations (CONOPS) from the onset.
v.
AMISOM and its partners must strengthen their focus on empowering
the Somali National Security Forces and developing effective institutions of
governance to sustain results by delivering a “peace dividend” to populations in
areas recovered from Al-Shabaab.
vi. AMISOM must develop more effective strategic communications in
order to disseminate its narrative and key messages to the right audiences,
particularly to Somalis.
vii. Ensure greater coordination and cooperation, including the possibility of
co-location between UNSOM and, the civilian component of AMISOM.

17-13092

23/43

S/2017/653

Strategic level
viii. There is an urgent need to align mandated tasks and available resources,
including strengthening the role of the AU Commission to better manage peace
support operations by improving ongoing efforts to enhance human resources,
administrative and financial procedures.
ix. There remains a need to strengthen information-sharing and knowledge
management between the AU Commission and AMISOM, including the capabilities
to capture and disseminate lessons learned.
x.
There remains a need to continually adapt AU policies and guidelines to
fit the challenges posed by the realities on the ground in Somalia.
Operational level
xi. AMISOM should deploy civilian capacity at the Federal Member State
level, and act as liaisons on stabilization through daily interaction with
local/regional administrations and communities and linkage with development
actors in Mogadishu, as well as providing necessary guidance to sectors on QIPs.
xii. To improve current command and control structures for AMISOM ’s
military component, TCCs should give space to the Force Commander to control his
troops, including by strengthening communications.
xiii. AMISOM’s capabilities should be aligned with the nature of its
operations, including by placing greater emphasis on the key elements of
counterinsurgency doctrine to enable enhanced mobility, accurate and timely
intelligence-gathering, and adequate logistical support.
xiv. AMISOM should produce more data on the extent to which the Mission,
its partners, and the Somali National Security Forces have degraded Al -Shabaab
capabilities.
xv. AMISOM should receive an additional capability surge of troops,
enablers and intelligence enhancement in order to successfully execute renewed
offensive operations along the Juba valley.
xvi. AMISOM needs to strengthen the integration between its military, police
and civilian components in order to deliver the Mission ’s objectives.
xvii. AMISOM should strengthen its counter-IED capabilities.
Exit strategy
xviii. AMISOM should pursue a condition-based exit strategy anchored on an
inclusive politically agreed set of Somali security institutions and tied to the
minimum capacity of the Somali national security forces to take over, as well as
more broadly promoting a strong sense of Somali leadership and ownership for the
political, security, and economic direction of Somalia.
xix. There needs to be more effective training and leadership development of
the Somali national security forces, including through better coordination of
capacity building support amongst relevant partners.
xx. AMISOM and its partners should recalibrate the strategy for developing
an effective set of Somali National Security For ces and sketch an appropriate
roadmap. In the short-term, there should be increased co-location of the SNA and
AMISOM and more joint operations and mentoring, with the SNA increasingly
being given leading roles.

24/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

xxi. AMISOM continued presence in Somalia will be significantly influenced
by the availability of predictable and sustainable resources of the Mission.
Introduction
1.
In the light of the approaching tenth anniversary of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), the Peace and Security Council (PSC) of the African Union
(AU) on 6 September 2016, authorized the AU Commission to begin the process of
producing “a comprehensive lessons learned exercise, which will identify progress
made, challenges encountered and more importantly recommend opti ons on the way
forward in the future of AMISOM, including the Mission Exit Strategy. ” This
request was reemphasized during the 649th meeting of the AU PSC on Somalia, on
23 January 2017, where Council members requested the finalization of the 10 -year
lessons learned study.
2.
As part of that process, the AU Commission organized a lessons learned
conference in Nairobi, Kenya, on 9 to 10 March 2017, to identify AMISOM ’s
principal successes, challenges and the way forward. Drawing on the methodology
recently developed for evaluating lessons from AU Peace Support Operations
(PSOs), the conference proceeded to identify lessons from AMISOM ’s experiences
pertaining to:
i.
The political level of decision-making: to determine whether AMISOM’s
mandates and authorized resources are fit for purpose;
ii.
The strategic management of AMISOM: to determine how far the AU
Commission provides appropriate strategic guidance to AMISOM ’s decision-making
organs;
iii. The operational level: to determine the main challenges of com mand and
control facing AMISOM’s leadership as well as how effectively the Mission’s
military, police and civilian components are integrated; and
iv. AMISOM’s exit strategy: to determine how the Mission might transform
to facilitate a successful takeover by Somali security services.
3.
The conference discussions drew from and developed some of the conclusions
developed in a separate background paper, which identified lessons from
AMISOM’s ten years. These were organized according to the following thematic
areas of focus on AMISOM:
a.

Evolution of mandate.

b.

Major characteristics of its “model.”

c.

Operational successes and challenges.

d.

Multidimensional components as an integrated mission.

e.

Mission support regime.

f.

Experiences of building the Somali security forces.

g.

Relationships with its partners.

h.

Exit strategy.

4.
The background paper identified both challenges and opportunities,
highlighting what has worked for AMISOM thus far as well as what could have
worked better in the Mission. Participants emphasized that any assessment of
AMISOM’s achievements and challenges should start from the recognition that
Somalia is an extremely complex operating environment for a peace operation. This
is due to a variety of factors including the limite d effectiveness of state institutions,
17-13092

25/43

S/2017/653

the large number of armed groups {hostile and non-hostile) and their tendency to
shift alliances, the involvement of regional and other external actors, and the fact
that AMISOM was required to undertake a complex multifaceted mandate,
including urban warfare, stabilization and counterinsurgency.
5.
There was broad agreement that AMISOM had achieved its principal strategic
goals, notably protecting the successive Somali authorities (the Transitional Federal
Government and Federal Government of Somalia) and later the Interim Regional
Administrations, degrading Al-Shabaab, and securing two election processes that
produced federal governments in 2012 and 2016/17. Much of the credit for these
accomplishments was due to the perseverance and innovation of AMISOM
personnel at the strategic, operational and tactical levels who repeatedly overcame
unforeseen challenges.
6.
The lessons as identified by participants at the conference are structured along
four key areas: Political; Strategic; Operational; and Exit Strategy.
Political level
7.
Strengthening the mandating process and working level engagement has gone
a long way in ensuring alignments between the United Nations Security Council and
the AU PSC. Improvements in the harmonization process began in 2011, including
the role of the regular consultations between the memberships of the two councils;
principal-level discussions (including the Joint Task Force) and the authorization of
joint planning and management initiatives (including joint benchmarking and
assessment teams as well as working groups).
8.
Nevertheless, consultations between the two councils have remained at an
informal level and there was a suggestion that the two councils might move a step
further and undertake concerted, systematic joint analysis to allow for greater
coherence between individual decisions. It was also observed that despite the AU ’s
initial vision for AMISOM, there was no political agreement on transitioning
AMISOM into a UN peacekeeping operation despite the UN Security Council also
envisioning AMISOM as an interim stabilization measure. This issue is still a source
of confusion in the relations between UNSOM and AMISOM relations.
9.
The outstanding questions relate to more fundamental issues of subsidiarity
and complementarity; especially the discussion of what roles the AU should play
beyond peace enforcement with regard to the policing and civilian components of
international engagement in Somalia. It was noted in this context that the curre nt
administrative and financial procedures at the AU are inadequate to meet the needs
of most of its peace support operations. Participants agreed on the need to
harmonize the AMISOM’s mandate since it comes from more than one source of
authority. It was noted that conceptual gaps still exist between the UN and AU
(including at secretariat levels) and that these need to be bridged and harmonized.
Some of these gaps are related to interpretations of the UN Charter and the AU
Constitutive Act on the principle of subsidiarity and comparative advantages related
to conflict resolution issues. Others relate to the nature of the strategic partnership
between the UN and AU, and relations between the AU and 1GAD. Consequently,
participants identified the need to strengthen the harmonization of mandates for
AMISOM between the Security Council and AU PSC.
10. Participants agreed that AMISOM had remained too military heavy. This was
understandable during AMISOM’s early years when insecurity in Mogadishu
prevented the deployment of the Mission’s police and civilian components. Since
late 2011, the Mission was too slow to adapt itself to the multidimensional character
of its mandate and configuration. There were even cases where AMISOM
representatives were excluded from governance mechanisms in 5omalia because it
26/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

was seen as a heavily military Mission. Consequently, it was noted that there was no
question about the necessity for AMISOM’s multidimensional composition.
11. Participants also noted that even though AMISOM is a multidimensional
mission, there was limited guidance on the role, and integration, of the non -military
components against Mission goals. It was recognized that the African Union has a
comparative advantage in immediate stabilization and support to the polit ical
process were seen as salient. In this regard, it was recommended that AMISOM
deploy civilian capacity at the state level, and act as liaisons on stabilization
through daily interaction with local administration and communities and linkage
with development actors in Mogadishu, as well as providing necessary guidance to
sectors on QIPs.
12. One of the areas of repeated disconnect in the AMISOM “model” was the
relationship between AMISOM and UNSOS. Specifically, a disconnect was
identified between the timing of the UN budget approval process and the various
iterations of the revised AMISOM CONOPS, There is a need for UNSOS to be
involved in the CONORS planning process from the onset to ensure delivery on the
requested support in a timely manner. It was suggested that relevant SOPs be
developed as a way to formalize the necessary coordination.
13. Participants were in agreement that AMISOM and its partners have not been
able to sufficiently empower Somalis so that they can take over from the AU
Mission. The question was raised of why Somali National Security Forces have not
developed sufficiently during AMISOM’s ten years of operations? AMISOM and its
partners must therefore strengthen their focus on empowering the Somali national
security forces and developing effective institutions of governance to sustain results
by delivering a “peace dividend” to populations in areas recovered from
Al-Shabaab. This would also involve the need to secure the Main Supply Routes
between AMISOM and SNA bases across south-central Somalia and thereby
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance. This took on even greater urgency
in light of the current famine and drought.
14. Participants agreed that it was imperative for AMISOM to develop more
effective strategic communications. Somalis are constantly evaluating AMISOM
and are not always coming to positive conclusions about the Mission ’s impact. This
raised the question of why there might be a divergence between AMISOM ’s selfimage as a broadly successful operation and local populations who do not
necessarily appreciate the Mission’s achievements in the same way. Participants
agreed on the need for AMISOM to more effectively develop its narrative and key
messages to tell its story to the right audiences, particularly to Soma lis. Concern
was expressed that despite having a broadly positive narrative to tell, AMISOM
continued to lose the battle on social media. Participants emphasized that the
solution lay not solely with improving the Mission’s strategic communications
instruments but with encouraging a comprehensive response that generated political
buy-in and support from Somalia’s political leaders, civic associations and ordinary
citizens. In sum, a unified political response was needed to prevent radicalization
and fight against extremist ideology propagated by Al-Shabaab. This would require
capabilities and resources in support of the current AU -UN information Support
Team. It would also require Somali scholars, intellectuals and politicians to come
out in public and denounce Al-Shabaab and explain why its ideology is wrong,
dangerous, and unacceptable.
15. In discussions on AMISOM’s civilian component, it was observed that some
clarification was needed on cooperation and division of labour between UNSOM
and the civilian component of AMISOM. It was emphasized that the conceptual
origin of AU PSOs is based on multidimensionality, comprising of civilian, police
17-13092

27/43

S/2017/653

and military components. There was a need to deepen the support provided by
UNSOA/UNSOS to AMISOM civilian and police components, in order to improve
effectiveness.
Strategic level
16. Participants agreed on the urgent need to align mandated tasks and available
resources. This should include ensuring that the question of appropriate resources
and capabilities is part of the initial deliberations about the Mission’s mandate.
However, participants also noted that there was a tendency for the UN Security
Council to set ceilings for funding and allow financial imperatives to drive the
discussion of force requirements rather than the other way around. There was also
consensus that AMISOM had been consistently under-resourced in key areas
throughout its entire ten years of operations. Not only were the authorized
capabilities insufficient compared to the mandated tasks b ut the AU and its partners
inadequately generated and deployed the authorized forces, leaving AMISOM
lacking significant capabilities in the field. Notably, AMISOM forces were
generated from only approximately 8% of the AU’s 54 Member States, which is
significantly lower than other AU PSOs such as the African -led International
Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) where Member States pledged more capacities
for less complex multidimensional peace support operations. While it was
acknowledged that the AU Commission had struggled to ensure effective force
generation for AMISOM, it was also noted that the Mission’s TCCs must also
deliver forces as per the terms of their MoUs, including related to the clauses
concerning sustainment capabilities and equipment. A sugge stion was made that the
PSC might want to ensure that relevant resources were available before mandating
peace operations.
17. There was discussion as to how the principle of subsidiarity should influence
the AU’s strategic management of AMISOM. It was noted that there is a need for
enhancing collaboration between the AU and IGAD in the political engagements on
Somalia.
18. Consensus emerged on the need to strengthen the role of the AU Commission,
which is the strategic headquarters for the Union ’s peace support operations in
general. In addition, it was noted that once a PSO is authorized, there must be a
Commission-wide approach to supporting it. There have been previous efforts to
ensure coordination amongst various PSD divisions and other AUC departments ,
such as the now defunct Peace Support Operations Coordinating Committee
(PSOCC), established and chaired by the Deputy Chairperson to meet on a monthly
basis and bringing together representatives from PSOD, PSD Finance and other
departmental representatives, Internal Audit, Human Resources to discuss matters
relating to ongoing operations, share information and provide updates on issues
related to operations and mission support. In the case of AMISOM, not only did the
AU Commission lack a prepared force generation plan, it also did not adequately
marshal all its component parts in support of the Mission. Areas identified for
strengthened involvement by the AU Commission included Post Conflict
Reconstruction and Development, State Building, Rule of Law and Security
Institutions (Security Sector Reform; Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration) and Political/Civil Affairs. Calls were also made for closer
involvement of the Commission’s Department of Political Affairs and the Defense
and Security Division of PSD.
19. Participants noted that the strategic management of AMISOM was consistently
hindered by limitations relating to human resources. Not only were there challenges
related to force generation, bureaucratic systems to hire and retain appropriately
qualified personnel were not aligned to the need for rapid deployment. Staff
28/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

retention and rotation also proved challenging, especially for personnel with
specialized skills (e.g., intelligence and security sector reform). This, in turn,
hindered mandate delivery and the establishment of a well-functioning working
relationship with UN counterparts. Current administrative and financial procedures
at the AU are inadequate to the needs of a peace enforcement mission, it was
suggested that it would be imperative to find a way to better integrate the AU Peace
Support Operations Division (PSOD) with the Administration and Finance
Department.
20. Participants also raised the need to strengthen AU -AMISOM informationsharing and knowledge management. Between 2007 and 2017, the AU PSC issued
over forty communiques on the situation in Somalia, indicating its seriousness and
AMISOM as one of its priorities. Yet although a decision was taken in 2011 for the
PSC to visit AMISOM in Somalia no such visit was undertaken until October 2013.
From the start of the Mission in 2007, daily strategic management of AMISOM was
under an ad hoc arrangement, the Strategic Planning and Management Unit
(SPMU), which combined personnel from the AU, UN, NATO and other partners. It
was not until 2012 that the planning and management of AMISOM transitioned to
the PSOD. In addition, a real time video-conferencing system between PSOD and
AMISOM was not established until 2009/10. On the basis of better communication,
participants also agreed on the need to strengthen documentation about AMISOM to
ensure lessons learned are captured and disseminated. As the only AU mission that
has tasted more than two years, AMISOM can potentially generate a rich body of
lessons learned that has the potential to influence future AU PSO doctrine.
21. A related point was raised about the continued disconnect between the nature
of AU peace operations and the available policies and guidelines. Specifically, the
AU has largely relied on UN guidelines crafted for a peacekeeping context. Yet
there is a fundamental mismatch between UN processes and systems designed for
peacekeeping and the tasks at hand for AMISOM, which involve counterinsurgency,
stabilization and war-fighting. There is therefore a need to adapt AU policies and
guidelines to fit the challenges posed by the realities on the ground in Somalia,
which call for enforcement of peace.
Operational level
22. Participants noted that although AMISOM had achieved a variety of
operational successes over the last decade, some of those gains remained fragile and
could be reversed, especially if Somalia governance structures could not deliver
safety, services and justice to local populations in the areas recovered from
Al-Shabaab.
23. It was noted that effective operations require an effective command and
control structure. Participants reiterated that AMISOM ’s command and control
structures had not always performed effectively and could be improved. In many
instances, the command of AMISOM troops was exercised not by the Force
Commander but from the national capitals of the TCCs. In contrast, participants
observed that command and control structures for AMISOM’s police component had
not suffered similar problems. To improve current command and control structures
for the Mission’s military component, it was suggested that ICC Governments
should empower the Mission’s senior leadership including the Force Commander to
control his troops. Furthermore, communications should be strengthened; both by
ensuring better communication between the AU, AMISOM and TCCs, as well as
between the Mission Force Headquarters and Sector Commands. While the
establishment of the intelligence (i2 cell) had improved the situation, more could be
done in this area.

17-13092

29/43

S/2017/653

24. Another point of consensus was the need for available capabilities to be
aligned with the nature of AMISOM’s operations. This meant placing greater
emphasis on the key elements of counterinsurgency doctrine, which require
mobility, accurate and timely intelligence-gathering and adequate logistical support.
AMISOM’s operations must therefore be politically coherent, information -led, and
recognize that insurgencies like Al-Shabaab are best beaten by local forces and
governments rather than foreigners, in practice, however, AMISOM had become
bogged down and vulnerable with its forces stretched across a very large area of
operations. AMISOM had also previously focused too much effort on capturing
territory rather than degrading Al-Shabaab’s core combat capabilities. AMISOM’s
forces were over-stretched as a result and struggled to bring with them local Somali
troops, police and administrators. When implementing its current manda te to
degrade Al-Shabaab, participants noted that AMISOM was not optimally configured
to deal with Al-Shabaab’s more asymmetric tactics and it would be useful to
produce more data on the extent to which AMISOM and the Somali national
security forces had degraded its capabilities.
25. With regard to logistics, participants noted the challenge that AMISOM does
not control its logistics, which come from the United Nations and other forms of
partner support. This placed a premium on ensuring a good working rela tionship
between the AU and UNSOS. It was also noted that UNSOS was regularly asked to
engage in innovative activities, including fixing partner -donated vehicles to the
AMISOM TCCs that did not come with their own maintenance packages.
26. Participants also called for AMISOM to receive an additional troop surge in
order to successfully execute renewed offensive operations along the Juba valley. In
addition, effective offensive operations would also require AMISOM to emphasize
intelligence enhancement and generate more enablers to help in the fight.
27. There was a strong consensus that AMISOM needs to strengthen the
integration between its military, police and civilian components in order to deliver
the Mission’s political objectives. It was noted that AMISO M’s police component
had achieved a number of successes but remained under-resourced. One innovation
had been the decision to split some of AMISOM ’s Formed Police Units to operate at
platoon level in order to support the most recent election process in Kis mayo and
Baidoa, Part of operating as a more multidimensional operation should entail
developing an active CIMIC element. AMISOM’s limited CIMIC operations were
noted as having played a critical role in winning hearts and minds amongst the local
population. Yet, AMISOM was not well configured to undertake more intense levels
of CIMIC activity.
28. With regard to AMISOM’s civilian component, it was agreed that its role
should be integrated and complementary to the military effort by leveraging support
from all the key stakeholders and partners to generate the political and governance
actions necessary to make the overall stabilization strategy a success. Put simply,
stability cannot be sustained if a political settlement is not forthcoming and if the
governance vacuum in recovered areas is not filled. There could also have been
clearer leadership in the mission. It was observed that AMISOM ’s senior civilian
leadership was largely absent from Somalia during the first five years of the
Mission. There was also little done to track and assess the contribution of the
civilian component against mission goals and better integrate it into AMISOM ’s
planning processes. The result was that for too long the civilian dimension was
treated as a low priority. Consequently, it was noted that AMISOM still lacked staff
in a number of key positions, including in the Joint Support Operations Centre and
mission support positions more generally, it was suggested that there should be a
significant increase In the capacity of AMISOM’s political and civil affairs staff,

30/43

17-13092

S/2017/653

including by hiring more Somali nationals especially to work at the regional and
local levels.
29. A consensus of opinion emerged that AMISOM needed to strengthen its
counter-IED capabilities and deploy additional force multipliers, especially the
attack helicopters that had been authorized by the UN Security Council in 2012,
Although AMISOM had received in December 2016 three Kenyan helicopters, these
were utility aircraft and not the type of gunships required to destroy Al-Shabaab’s
combat assets. Given the long-standing problems of generating these assets, it was
suggested that the AU should look beyond the AMISOM TCCs to other African
countries and perhaps beyond the continent.
30. Participants emphasized that the nature of current AMISOM operations should
be reflected in the pre-deployment training available to the peacekeepers. Having
previously required significant training in techniques of urban warfare, AMISOM
operations now emphasized aspects of counterinsurgency, stabilization and
countering IED networks.
Exit strategy
31. AMISOM’s exit strategy is currently predicated on three interrelated factors:
the TCCs have expressed an interest in drawing down the Mission starting in
October 2018; the growing likelihood of dwindling resources from AMISOM’s
partners; and the minimal prospect of a UN peacekeeping operation taking over.
32. In light of these factors, participants agreed on the need for a condition -based
exit strategy for AMISOM, anchored on a politically agreed set of Somali security
institutions and tied to the capacity of the Somali national security forces to take
over. It was noted that the AU and international partners should guard against
building only a strong SNA, in case this increased the risks o f future coups, and
instead develop the full range of security services. There was also some criticism of
the envisioned timeline for AMISOM’s drawdown, in part because the timing is
unfortunate given the political vision of “one-person-one-vote” elections in Somalia
by 2020. It was suggested that it might be more constructive to talk about
AMISOM’s “transformation” into a smaller, leaner, more effective mobile counter terrorism force rather than just its exit.
33. Participants agreed on the need to ensure more effective training of the Somali
national security forces. This includes ensuring that efforts are aligned with
identified needs including equipping and provision of stipends and services; there is
better coordination and harmonization between the multiple training initiatives
currently underway, including those involving private sector firms; and that an
effective tracking mechanism is developed to efficiently utilize resources. It was
also observed that although numerous trainings had been conducted of the Somali
national security forces, in a number of cases, these had mainly been done for
individuals and few specific units. In addition, leadership development remained an
important blind spot. New initiatives were required to identify and cultivate t he
future leaders of the Somali national security forces, including commanders of the
subsequent companies, battalions, and brigades in the SNA.
34. Concerns were raised that the SNA will not have developed the sufficient
capacity within the timelines currently envisaged for AMISOM’s withdrawal. It was
noted, for instance, that with the exception of the “Danaab” battalion, not a single
SNA unit was fully trained, equipped, and at full capacity to deploy, conduct
operations and sustain themselves in the field, in part, this was linked to the
problems in current efforts to train the SNA. But it was also noted that the inability
to regularly pay Somali security forces had partly encouraged defections and
undermined morale.
17-13092

31/43

S/2017/653

35. There was consequently broad recognition that the building of an effective and
legitimate SNA is a long-term endeavour. Considerable emphasis was also placed on
the need to recognize that security sector reform and empowering the Somali
national security forces was ultimately a political issue. Without the necessary
political will and agreed vision between the FGS and Somalia ’s regional states,
establishing an inclusive, legitimate and professional set of forces would prove
elusive. Participants agreed on the need to recalibrate the strateg y for developing an
effective set of Somali national security forces and sketch an appropriate roadmap.
36. There was also a call for the AU and its partners to develop shorter -term
solutions that would allow AMISOM to commence drawdown and reconfiguration
in line with its exit strategy. It was suggested that there should be increased
co-location and more joint operations with AMISOM, with the SNA increasingly
being given leading roles. It was noted that a follow -up conference specifically on
this topic would be useful and that the details of a “security pact’’ between the
Somali authorities and international partners would be a key theme of discussions at
the London Conference. At the London conference on Somalia, held on 11 May
2017, the Government of Somalia, the AU and the other partners agreed on a New
Partnership for Somalia and a security pact. The AU and the partners agreed on a
mechanism for implementing the partnership, with a view to optimizing the impact
of joint efforts to support the Somali national security forces.

32/43

17-13092

17-13092

Annex IV
A.

Table of the human rights due diligence policy, migratory measures and mechanisms of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, and recommendations for their strengthening

Measures and mechanisms

Status and challenges

Recommendations and responsibilities

African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) troops and
police

-Integrate background checks criteria (grade, history of
deployment) in predeployment visits or troop- and policecontributing countries training centres (AMISOM, AU,
troop- and police-contributing countries with United Nations
support)

Prevention
Selection and
screening

-Selection of troops/police carried out by troop- and policecontributing countries prior to the pre-deployment trainings
-Ongoing AU/United Nations cooperation to develop background
checks/screening mechanisms

Challenges

-Establish a process by which the AU/AMISOM provide
information to the United Nations about future deployment/
appointment/rotation and request support for purpose of
background checks (AU and United Nations Headquarters)

-Limited or no United Nations/AU visibility on background
checks mechanisms used by troop- and police-contributing
countries
Child soldiers
-Force Commander’s directive on protection of children in armed
conflict adopted in 2014
-General order 1 of 2011 on prohibited practices for Somali
National Armed Forces personnel in all areas of Somalia

Challenges
-Continued concerns about use of children or violations of
children rights during joint operations with Somali National Army
or local troops

-Strengthen the implementation of FC directive and ensure
that Somali National Armed Forces has screened its combat
units to identify/separate children prior to joint operations
(AMISOM with United Nations support)
-Provide information on dissemination, level of
implementation and compliance with the directive of the
Force Commander and the Somalia’s action plans to end the
recruitment and use and the killing and maiming of children
by Somali National Armed Forces and security forces
(AMISOM)

S/2017/653

33/43

Status and challenges

Recommendations and responsibilities

Training

Predeployment training

-Establish an oversight mechanism, including through
predeployment visits, to monitor the delivery and impact of
training, ensure AU consultation on training curricula and
share reports on training status with the United Nations
(AMISOM/AU/United Nations)

-Predeployment training for commanding officers and key
appointment holders delivered with the involvement of the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS), the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and AMISOM
-Trainees sign a document acknowledging they have been trained
and committing to respect/comply with international human
rights, humanitarian and refugee law

Challenges
-Absence of system to cross-reference names of trained personnel
via-a-vis deployed personnel
-Challenges in assessing effectiveness of training

In-mission training
-In-mission refresher training in international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law, including on child protection,
delivered by AMISOM and other actors

Challenges
-Absence of visibility or coordination of actors providing
in-mission training

Rules, policies and
planning

-Conduct a joint assessment on the effectiveness of
predeployment training, including in terms of behaviour
change, in all sectors (United Nations/AMISOM)
-Include elements of accountability process (boards of
inquiry), Civilian Casualty Tracking Analysis and Response
Cell and judgmental training in predeployment training
curricula (AU with United Nations support)
-Establish a training database for systematic registration of
participants to facilitate tracking of individual deployments,
training information and compliance with international
human rights, humanitarian and refugee law (AMISOM/
United Nations)
-Strengthen coordination between actors delivering
in-mission training to/for AMISOM, including by
encouraging their participation in the training working group
of the Defense Steering Group, and advocate for inclusion of
international human rights, humanitarian and refugee law in
all training (AMISOM with United Nations support)
-Strengthen in-mission training, including the provision of
facilities for training at sector level (United Nations)
-Ensure that international human rights, humanitarian and
refugee law training-of-trainers sessions are established
within AMISOM (AMISOM)

17-13092

Rules of engagement (general)

-Formally endorse rules of engagement (AU)

-The 2014 AMISOM rules of engagement (revised and unsigned)
are reported to be applicable

-Create “pocket cards” on rules of engagement, including
specific provisions on the use of helicopters and translate the
existing version of the soldier’s cards in languages of all
troop- and police-contributing countries (AMISOM/United
Nations)

-Ongoing translation of the rules of engagement in the languages
of the troop-and police-contributing countries

S/2017/653

34/43

Measures and mechanisms

17-13092

Measures and mechanisms

Status and challenges

Challenges

Recommendations and responsibilities

-Ensure full awareness of and compliance with rules of
engagement by AMISOM troops and police (AMISOM)

-Rules of engagement not formally adopted by AU
-Different background and military doctrines among troop- and
police-contributing countries may impact on full awareness of and
compliance with the rules of engagement
Rules of engagement and policies for air assets
-Letter of assist signed with the United Nations

Challenges
-Lack of AMISOM specific policies on the operational use and
tasking of the air assets
Detention
-Standard operating procedures on detention adopted
-Somali security forces standard operating procedures for the
reception and handover of children separated from armed groups
in Somalia

Challenges
-Challenges in coordination and handover of detained persons due
to lack of facilities/resources and fear of violations by the
receiving Somali security forces

-Review rules of engagement to include elements on
targeting, measures mitigating risk of civilian casualties and
damage to civilian property (AMISOM/AU)
-Establish specific provisions on the operational use and
tasking of AMISOM helicopters, in line with the letter of
assist and international human rights, humanitarian and
refugee law(AMISOM with United Nations support)
-Update the AMISOM/United Nations joint working group
on human rights due diligence policy regarding the
implementation of the standard operating procedures,
including challenges and follow up actions (AMISOM)
-Ensure that there is a reporting process with Civilian
Casualty Tracking Analysis and Response Cell/International
Committee of the Red Cross as to who is detained and who
is being handed over (AMISOM)
-Consider participating in a disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration forum with the Federal Government of
Somalia and other partners (AMISOM)
-Explore the establishment of a framework for support to and
safe handling of persons temporarily detained by AMSIOM ,
including communication of information on children handed
over to the Federal Government of Somalia counterparts
(AMISOM/United Nations)
S/2017/653

35/43

Status and challenges

Recommendations and responsibilities

Indirect fire policy

-Update the AMISOM/ United Nations joint working group
on human rights due diligence policy on the implementation
of the policy, including any challenges and follow-up to
allegations received (AMISOM)

-Policy elaborated in 2011

Challenges
-Delays of feedback on investigations on allegations of civilian
casualties as a result of possible indirect fire partly due to
capacity challenges in AMISOM
Prevention of
sexual exploitation
and abuse

-AMISOM guidelines for the prevention of sexual exploitation
and abuse developed
-Campaigns carried out within Mogadishu International Airport,
Mogadishu and AMISOM sectors
-Training on the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse and
public outreach campaigns
-Toll-free hotline for confidential complaints established

Challenges
-Limited information on findings and complaints handling
through the toll-free line
-Actions and challenges on victims/witness protection not
sufficiently shared.

-Update the AMISOM/United Nations joint working group
on human rights due diligence policy regarding statistics on
the number of sexual exploitation and abuse cases received
and handled, including trends and patterns (AMISOM)
-Include information on cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse in quarterly report to the Security Council on the
implementation of AMISOM mandate (AU)
-Develop measures for the protection of victims and
witnesses and a protocol on confidentiality of information
(AMISOM with United Nations support)
-Finalize the whistle blower policy, which addresses the
issue of victims/witness protection, and the conduct and
discipline policy (AU)
-Expand the scope of complaints for the hotline number to
include cases not involving sexual exploitation or abuse

S/2017/653

36/43

Measures and mechanisms

17-13092

17-13092

Measures and mechanisms

Status and challenges

Recommendations and responsibilities

Monitoring and reporting
Civilian Casualty
Tracking Analysis
and Response Cell

-Civilian Casualty Tracking Analysis and Response Cell
established and staffed by two active technical staff and additional
military support staff

-Agree on information sharing arrangements between the
United Nations and the Response Cell (AMISOM/United
Nations)

-Standard operating procedures on ex gratia payment cleared at
the technical level

-Resolve funding issue for the implementation of the
standard operating procedures on ex gratia/amends
(AMISOM/United Nations)

Challenges
-Insufficient staffing hampers capability to follow up on all
allegations, verify civilian casualties in a timely manner, maintain
contact with victims/witnesses and produce updated trends and
patterns
-Information not sufficiently shared with relevant actors including
the United Nations
-Limited access for the public and no base in the regions
-Absence of dedicated staff to receive and handle complaints
-Absence of measures to ensure victims and witness protection

-Disseminate information, including through the media, on
the Response Cell, how the population can access its
services and improve collaboration with partners (AMISOM)
-Improve social media monitoring when air assets are being
used to identify potential incidents (AMISOM)
-Include sexual exploitation and abuse incidents in the
Response Cell processes and database, with consideration for
confidentiality aspects (AMISOM)
-Promote cooperation and establish accountability
mechanism for reporting by sectors (AMISOM)
-Improve links between existing complaints handling
mechanisms, including Provost Marshall, Civilian Casualty
Tracking Analysis and Response Cell, Board of Inquiry and
CEEBLA crisis hotline (AMISOM with United Nations
support)
-Create a mechanism to protect victims and witnesses
(AMISOM)
-Ensure timely review, follow-up and feedback to the United
Nations on complaints received or communicated to
AMISOM (AMISOM)
-Improve analytical function of the Civilian Casualty
Tracking Analysis and Response Cell (AMISOM with United
Nations support)

37/43

S/2017/653

-Resolve staffing issues

Status and challenges

Recommendations and responsibilities

Reporting on air
operations

-Letter of assist provides for incident and monthly reports relating
to air operations

-Submit (air crews) incident reports involving deaths or
injuries to AMISOM within 24 hours and ensure subsequent
timely sharing with the United Nations (AMISOM)

Challenges
-Lack of Information sharing hinders the verification of
allegations, which in turn hampers the attribution of
responsibilities

-Share monthly report with the United Nations on incidents
arising from air operation, in particular the number of people
affected, including their gender, the nature of harm, and the
circumstances of the incidents (AMISOM)

-Blurring of lines/identities between AMISOM and troops present
as bilateral foreign forces, hampers the monitoring and attribution
of responsibilities for civilian casualties or destruction of civilian
objects
AMISOM/United
Nations human
rights due
diligence policy
joint working
group

-Review of status of implementation of human rights due
diligence policy mitigation measures is done on an ad hoc basis in
the framework of the joint working group on human rights due
diligence policy
-Review of allegations of violations is a standing agenda item of
the joint working group on human rights due diligence policy

Challenges
-Review and follow up of implementation of mitigation measures
not systematic

-Ensure the quarterly meetings of the joint working group
(AMISOM and United Nations)
-Add the review of implementation of mitigation measures
as a standing agenda item of the joint working group
(AMISOM)
-Enforce weekly meetings of UNSOM, UNSOS and
AMISOM technical teams (AMISOM and United Nations)
-Share with the United Nations the command structure and
locations of AMISOM troops in the sectors or provide
updates whenever there are any changes (AMISOM)

-Lack of information on command and control presents a
challenge when verifying allegations and attributing responsibility
Response
BOIs

-Board of Inquiry standard operating procedures under review to
include international human rights, humanitarian and refugee law
and sexual exploitation and abuse issues

-Expedite the review of Board of Inquiry procedures and
standard operating procedures and integrate gender/child
protection dimension, including through the organization of
a technical workshop (AMISOM/United Nations)

S/2017/653

38/43

Measures and mechanisms

17-13092

17-13092

Measures and mechanisms

Status and challenges

Recommendations and responsibilities

Challenges

-Consider the deployment of five AU troop-contributing
countries (not AMISOM troop- and police-contributing
countries) dedicated AU staff with specific investigative skills
to boost AMISOM standing investigation capacity (AU)

-Need for streamlined Board of Inquiry policies and procedures
and timely feedback on allegations transmitted by the U nited
Nations to AMISOM
-Need for information on temporary measures taken by AMISOM
(if any) and recommendations transmitted to the AU and troopand police-contributing countries
-Need for more and timely information-sharing on the findings of
the Board of Inquiry with alleged victims/communities
-Need for a standing special investigative capacity to support the
Board of Inquiry process

-Ensure timely formal feedback on allegations transmitted by
the United Nations to AMISOM (including those that did not
require a board of inquiry) as per the United Nations/
AMISOM established procedure, including actions taken by
AMISOM to implement the recommendations (AMISOM).
-Share with the United Nations Board of Inquiry
recommendations transmitted to the AU for troop- and
police-contributing countries follow-up (AMISOM)
-Improve the conduct of investigations, including through a
review of the methodology used (AMISOM with United
Nations support)
-Strengthen Board of Inquiry information management
system as part of the measures to strengthen its effectiveness
(United Nations Headquarters)
-Continue the advocacy with troop- and police-contributing
countries on the possibility of court martial in loco (AU and
United Nations Headquarters)
-Sharing of information when violations are committed by
non-AMISOM troop-contributing countries

S/2017/653

39/43

African Union Mission in Somalia and United Nations Support Office in Somalia: measures to
strengthen accountability and efficiency (June 2017)

Serial
(a)

Activity
(b)

Issue
(c)

Recommendation (2017 timeline)
(d)

Lead responsibility
(e)

1.

Reporting

 Enhance the Joint Support Operations Centre

 Need to have a “pull” support requests

by reviewing its functions and staff output

tracking and reporting cell/unit within the Joint
Support Operations Centre (1 Aug.)

Joint Support
Operations Centre

 All “pull” support requests to be channelled

through a mechanism that allows for effective
command, control and accountability
2.

Co-location and
information-sharing

 The United Nations Support Office (UNSOS),

 Co-location of troop contributing countries

troop-contributing countries and the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) are
duplicating some efforts, exacerbated by
insufficient coordination meetings

and AMISOM mission support elements in the
Joint Support Operations Centre, under medical,
engineering, geospatial, information technology
and telecommunications, movement control and
aviation components (1 Aug.)

 Bilateral action between troop-contributing

3.

Joint planning

countries and UNSOS that bypasses AMISOM
Force headquarters is symptomatic of multiple
steps in communication through Force
headquarters between troop-contributing
countries sector clients and UNSOS service
delivery, and involving the non-alignment of
troop-contributing countries with Security
Council resolutions 2245 (2015) and 2297
(2016), AMISOM concept of operations and
United Nations policies, which undermines the
sustainable delivery of logistical support

 Pair up positions within AMISOM and troop-

 There is a need for an improved AMISOM and

 Joint planning to be enhanced by embedding

troop-contributing countries integrated approach
in order to determine priorities for mandated
areas of support

AMISOM and troop-contributing countries
logistics, medical, engineering and
communication branches within a Logistics
Planning Unit (1 Aug.)

 Need to enhance joint planning between
17-13092

AMISOM, troop-contributing countries and
UNSOS.

Joint Support
Operations Centre
and troopcontributing
countries

contributing countries to improve trust,
communications and hand-over of duties when
AMISOM military staff officers reach their end
of assignment (1 July)

 Weekly mission support meetings to include

troop-contributing countries and UNSOS
counterparts (1 June)

Joint Support
Operations Centre
and troopcontributing
countries

S/2017/653

40/43

B.

17-13092

Serial
(a)

4.

Activity
(b)

Civilian staffing for
mission support
component

Issue
(c)

Recommendation (2017 timeline)
(d)

 Need for improved communications on all

 Creation of a joint mission support and the

levels

troop-contributing countries committee (1 July)

 Need to address vacant AMISOM civilian

 Review the structure, civilian staffing and

positions; recruitment of international and
national civilians is ongoing.

terms of references of mission support personnel
to enable targeted recruitment planning (1 Aug.)

Lead responsibility
(e)

AMISOM Chief of
Administrative
Services

 Deployment of civilian staff to all sectors will

require enhanced effort.
5.

Maintenance of
non-contingentowned equipment

 Need to improve the serviceability status of all

 Deliver training course on the equipment

partner-owned equipment and non-contingentowned equipment in accordance with Security
Council resolution 2245 (2015).

support process — conducted by AMISOM
mission support for troop-contributing countries
contingent-owned equipment officers (1 Aug.)


Donors, troop-contributing countries, AMISOM
and UNSOS to improve and share data on the
serviceability, location and repair of partnerowned equipment, including equipment beyond
economical repair, for UNSOS de-recognition as
partner-owned equipment and disposal by donors
and troop-contributing countries
6.

Fuel consumption

 Large percentage of contingent-owned

 United Nations electronic fuel management

equipment and partner-owned equipment do not
have odometers or hour meters, which is
required by the Fuel Unit to monitor
consumption

system to be implemented (31 Dec.)

 There is restricted UNSOS access to remote

AMISOM locations

 UNSOS and AMISOM to undertake joint

review of consumption patterns to establish
baseline data (1 July)
 Implement of joint troop-contributing

AMISOM mission
support for
serviceability
status; UNSOS for
items beyond
economical repair;
troop-contributing
countries for
disposal

UNSOS for
sustainable delivery
of fuel. Joint
Support Operations
Centre for
accountability for
fuel consumption

countries and AMISOM fuel consumption
accountability mechanism based on physical
utilization for the purposes intended by the
Security Council (1 June)

41/43

commodity. (1 June)

S/2017/653

 UNSOS to implement fuel as a “push”

Activity
(b)

Issue
(c)

Recommendation (2017 timeline)
(d)

Lead responsibility
(e)

7.

Field defence stores

 United Nations-provided HESCO defensive
barriers and sandbags are being sold in local
markets — indicates lack of commodities
control

 Troop-contributing countries and AMISOM to

 Limited number of commercial vendors

and defence stores and conduct joint site
inspections (1 Aug.)

Troop-contributing
countries and
AMISOM
engineering
component.
Redesign and
training by UNSOS

improve tracking of field defence stores issued
to troop-contributing countries
 Establish photographic catalogue of all sites

 Redesign forward operating bases to reduce

dependence on defensive barriers and train
military and police in the correct use of defence
stores. (1 June)
8.

Transport modalities

 Heavy reliance on air transport to deliver
logistics in some sectors
 Limited funds do not allow for sustained air
transport support for logistics delivery
 A formalized agreement is needed on the use
of main supply routes, which aligns with the
realities of the UNSOS approved budget and the
requirements of United Nations policies

9.

Troop strength
reporting

 AMISOM headquarters (J1) provides
personnel report based on the troop ceiling
instead of actual personnel deployed
 This reporting has impact on rations planning
and other support

UNSOS for
exceptional air
supply budget and
 Provide budget for exceptional
Force headquarters
implementation of air supply as per the approved
for plans and troopUNSOS budget
contributing
 Force headquarters and troop-contributing
countries agreement
countries to provide accurate and complete
monthly convoy reports and reach agreement on
main supply routes plan (1 Aug.)
 Develop plans for sustained use of road

transport.

 UNSOS to implement rations as a “push”

UNSOS for
commodity and use standard vacancy rates based sustainable delivery
on previous deployments
of rations. Force
headquarters, troop Implement joint troop-contributing countries
contributing
and AMISOM rations consumption
countries and
accountability and credible reporting system
personal
based on physical utilization for the purposes
consumption quotas
intended by the Security Council (1 Aug.)
for accountability
for food
consumption

S/2017/653

42/43

Serial
(a)

17-13092

17-13092

Serial
(a)

Activity
(b)

Issue
(c)

Recommendation (2017 timeline)
(d)

Lead responsibility
(e)

10.

Tracking of United
Nations-owned
equipment issued to
AMISOM

 4.5 per cent of United Nations-owned
equipment has not been accounted for since
2013/14

 UNSOS to review and investigate

UNSOS and
AMISOM

 13 per cent of United Nations ownedequipment is pending property verification

discrepancies with AMISOM issued United
Nations owned-equipment, to write off eligible
equipment and to reconcile issue vouchers
 Any future United Nations-owned equipment

issued to AMISOM to be approved first by
AMISOM mission support, second by the Joint
Support Operations Centre and finally by the
respective UNSOS commodity managers
 AMISOM mission support to approve all

requests from individual police officers and staff
officers and from AMISOM civilian personnel
(1 Aug.)

S/2017/653

43/43
