United Nations

S/PV.3730

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-second Year

3730th Meeting
Friday, 10 January 1997, 6.35 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Owada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Larraín
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Berrocal Soto
Mr. Elaraby
Mr. Dejammet
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Mahugu
Mr. Wlosowicz
Mr. Monteiro
Mr. Park
Mr. Fedotov
Mr. Osvald
Sir John Weston
Mr. Gnehm

Agenda
Central America: efforts towards peace
Report of the Secretary-General (S/1996/1045 and Add.1 and 2)

97-85011 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The meeting was called to order at 6.35 p.m.
Expression of welcome to the new members of the
Security Council and of thanks to the outgoing members
of the Security Council

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council to be held this year, I should like to
welcome the new members of the Council: Costa Rica,
Kenya, Portugal, Sweden and Japan. We all look forward
with confidence to their participation in the work of the
Council, which will be of invaluable assistance in the
discharge of the Council’s enormous responsibilities as it
tackles so many challenges.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Martini
Herrera (Guatemala) took a seat at the Council
table; Ms. Ramírez (Argentina), Mr. Fowler
(Canada), Mr. Londoño-Paredes (Colombia), Mr.
Tello (Mexico), Mr. Biegman (Netherlands), Mr.
Aass (Norway), Mr. Laclaustra (Spain) and Mr. De
Rojas (Venezuela), took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should also like to express the Council’s gratitude to
the outgoing members for their important contributions to
the Council’s work. The representatives of Botswana,
Germany, Honduras, Indonesia and Italy all, in an excellent
manner, contributed their talents to the conduct of the
business of the Council.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: I should also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to my
predecessor, Ambassador Francesco Paolo Fulci, Permanent
Representative of Italy to the United Nations, for the
service he rendered as President of the Council for the
month of December 1996. I am sure I speak for all the
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Fulci for the great diplomatic
skill with which he conducted the Council’s business last
month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central America: efforts towards peace
Report of the Secretary-General (S/1996/1045 and
Add.1 and 2)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina, Canada, Colombia, Guatemala, Mexico, the
Netherlands, Norway, Spain and Venezuela, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,

2

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on Central America: efforts
towards peace, documents S/1996/1045 and Addenda 1
and 2.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1997/18, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Mexico, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America and Venezuela.
Members of the Council have received photocopies
of a letter dated 10 January 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Guatemala to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the text of a letter of the same date from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala addressed to
the President of the Security Council, which will be
issued as document S/1997/23.
The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Guatemala, on whom I now call.
Mr. Martini Herrera (Guatemala) (interpretation
from Spanish): With the signing of the final agreement
last 29 December, Guatemala has successfully concluded
a process of peace negotiations which merely requires
verification by means of a peacekeeping force, as
requested by the Secretary-General in his reports of 17
and 30 December 1996.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Over the past several years, the international
community has followed with great interest and supported
the Guatemalan process, and it has expressed its great
appreciation at the signing of the peace agreement. Now it
awaits eagerly the Council’s decision to send a
peacekeeping mission which will allow the Guatemalan
people to consolidate the peace process and reunite the
nation. It will also aid in the fulfilment of the agreements
entered into as regards the ceasefire and the disarmament
and demobilization of the combatants.
The process of peace negotiations in Guatemala was
complex and difficult, requiring enormous internal and
external efforts, and it will lead not only to reconciliation
and the establishment of peaceful coexistence, but also to
significant changes in the country. The United Nations has
supported this process in a resolute and consistent fashion,
and its involvement has been crucial and profound. The
General Assembly has given firm support during the past
few years which these negotiation have taken. It has
authorized the United Nations Mission for the Verification
of Human Rights and of Compliance with the
Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human
Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA). The Secretariat has had
central responsibility in conducting intelligent and creative
mediation. And Guatemala has also had the support of the
Group of Friends of the Guatemalan Peace Process which
has promoted this broad effort for the United Nations. To
all of them, on behalf of the people and of the Government
of Guatemala, we reiterate our appreciation and gratitude.
All of this valuable effort has a logical extension.
After the conclusion of the negotiations and the signing of
the Agreement on a Firm and Lasting Peace, we come to
the stage of application and implementation. Toward this
end there is a need for international verification of the
measures related to the agreement on the ceasefire through
the authorization of a military component, which has been
proposed by the Secretary-General upon the request of the
parties, and on which the Security Council must take a
decision.
We fully believe that the majority of Security Council
members will agree to authorize this mission. And of
course we know full well that all the members of the
Council have a proper understanding of their responsibilities
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. The
case that you have before you is clear. It consists simply in
facilitating the verification of an agreement between the
parties which have been in conflict. We therefore trust that
the distinguished members of the Council will favourably

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
resolve the request that has been put before them by the
Secretary-General.
No one is unaware of the problem of a bilateral
nature which has been raised by one of the permanent
members of the Council in connection with this subject.
In spite of how unusual this situation is, Guatemala has
seen fit to conduct consultations with the delegation of
that country on certain issues of a bilateral nature with the
best of intentions and with the flexibility required to
overcome the existing difficulty. In this connection I wish
to emphasize my Government’s willingness to contribute
constructively to friendly relations among countries, and
I would like to give assurances that it has never been our
intention to interfere in the internal affairs of any other
State. I also wish to reiterate that our international
conduct is guided by respect for the principles contained
in the United Nations Charter as regards refraining from
taking actions that could affect the territorial integrity or
political independence of other States.
Recognizing the gravity of the situation, in addition
to the important bilateral consultations in which there
have been constructive exchanges and substantial
advances, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country
has sent a letter to the President of the Council explaining
the scope of these consultations. All of this represents
palpable evidence of the goodwill of my Government and
of its great desire to do its part to resolve this situation
and to attain a favourable decision from the Council.
We believe that it must be borne in mind that the
members of the Council, in fulfilment of their
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter, must not
allow bilateral issues unrelated to matters under their
consideration to hinder their decisions. The fulfilment of
the obligations of members of the Council requires
prudence, equanimity and a sense of justice.
May I observe that abuse of the status of a
permanent member through misuse of the veto is
unacceptable. If this were to occur, the General Assembly
would have to take note of it.
This matter is in the Council’s hands. It means
giving an opportunity to a country that has achieved
peace following many sacrifices. The international
community and all the Guatemalan people await your
decision, which we hope will be favourable.

3

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Colombia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make a statement.
Mr. Londoño-Paredes (Colombia) (interpretation
from Spanish): May I first of all congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
at this important stage. We wish you every success. We
know you, and we are certain that as you have always
done, you will be guiding deliberations in this important
organ of the United Nations in a brilliant and most
constructive way.
It is very gratifying for my delegation to speak in the
discussion of this item, at a historic moment in the process
of seeking and consolidating peace in Guatemala. The
signing of the peace accords on 29 December 1996 is of
enormous significance for the peoples of Central America
and for an entire hemisphere that has had to face the
terrible reality of armed confrontation.
Colombia has always maintained close bonds of
friendship and cooperation with the countries of Central
America, several of which are neighbours and bordering
States with which we share the Caribbean Sea. During the
complex period of the Central American conflict, our
country, together with Mexico, Panama and Venezuela,
formed the Contadora Group, and were later joined in our
efforts by four other brotherly countries of Latin America.
Three years of great and constant efforts prevented the
conflict from spreading and sowed the seeds for bringing
peace to the region.
We also actively participated in the peace process in
El Salvador and acted as promoters of the first dialogue
between the Government of that country and the leaders of
the Frente Farabundo Martí guerillas. In a small town in the
north of El Salvador, somewhere between the jungle and
the mountains, we were witnesses to that historic first step.
Later we became members of the Secretary-General’s
Group of Friends of the Guatemala Peace Process. We are
therefore proud to have contributed to the quest for peace
and the consolidation of genuine democracy in that region,
of which we feel we are a part.
With the signing of the Guatemala peace accords, not
only is one of the most painful and long-standing
confrontations on the continent being ended, but, with this
closing of the chapter on the last of the Central American
conflicts, it is clear that today, more than ever, violence is
an outdated instrument of political struggle. Peace among
the Guatemalan people is the result of an arduous process

4

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
that was not free of vicissitudes, but which had the virtue
of reflecting the feelings and determination of the people
of Guatemala regarding peace as the only way to bring
down the barriers that limit their economic and social
development.
We believe that the negotiation process has been
rigorous with regard to substantive issues and pragmatic
with regard to operational aspects, and has the necessary
legitimacy to contribute to the building of a new
Guatemala. That is why we want to express our
appreciation and praise to the Government of our sister
Republic of Guatemala, and to the Unidad Revolucionaria
Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG) for their brave and
sincere approach, as well as to the United Nations for the
intelligent and tireless mediation work that it carried out.
Now is the time for a delicate and complex process
of step-by-step demobilization of the guerilla forces and
verification of the peace accords. We know that the entire
international community, and, of course, members of the
Security Council, will do all in their power to achieve the
desired result, which will also be a great achievement for
the United Nations, as it participates in one of the major
endeavours that the world expects of it following the end
of the cold war.
We are convinced that this process will help
consolidate democracy and promote and strengthen
relations between Guatemala and all the States Members
of the United Nations.
The President: I thank the representative of
Colombia for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Venezuela.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. De Rojas (Venezuela) (interpretation from
Spanish): First, I should like to associate Venezuela with
the congratulations extended to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of January. We wish you every success in the
discharge of this very important responsibility.
Venezuela asked to address the Council on this
occasion in order to express complete support for the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission for the Verification of Human Rights and of
Compliance with the Commitments of the Comprehensive
Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA),

Security Council
Fifty-second year
as contained in document S/1996/1045 and addenda 1 and
2, as well as for the draft resolution before the Security
Council, contained in document S/1997/18. Venezuela is a
member of the Group of Friends of the Guatemala Peace
Process, as well as a contributor to MINUGUA, and as
such, as members are aware, is, together with the other
members of the Group of Friends, a sponsor of the draft
resolution.
We support the deployment of a small United Nations
military component, attached to MINUGUA, as requested
by the Secretary-General in his report. We are convinced
that this is the best way of achieving a firm and lasting
peace in accordance with the agreements signed in
Guatemala City on 29 December 1996 by the
representatives of the Government of Guatemala and the
Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG), in
which both parties request the dispatch of a military
mission by the United Nations in order to verify the
implementation of the ceasefire agreements that were
achieved during the process.
In this respect, Venezuela believes that it is the
responsibility of the international community to give all the
support that is necessary for the full implementation of the
agreements, so that the Guatemalan people can begin to
travel down the road to lasting peace and stable democracy,
for the benefit of all the citizens of Guatemala and of our
Latin American region. We also note the great importance
of the letter from the Government of Guatemala, to which
reference has been made here, and which is contained in
document S/1997/23. For all of these reasons we hope that
the draft resolution will be given the full support that it
deserves from all the members of this Council.
In conclusion we would like, through you,
Mr. President, to convey to the representatives of our sister
Republic of Guatemala, our feelings of fraternal solidarity
and steadfast support at this very important moment in its
history. We assure them that we will continue to be with
them at this time, and at all times in the future.
The President: I thank the representative of
Venezuela for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the
Netherlands. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Biegman (Netherlands): Offering the customary
congratulations on your presidency, Sir, I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The following

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
associated countries have aligned themselves with this
intervention: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia.
The Union warmly welcomed the signing in
Guatemala City on 29 December of the Agreement on a
Firm and Lasting Peace.
That signing was a historic step in Guatemala’s
history, bringing an end to the longest-running conflict in
the region, which had brought immense pain and
suffering to the Guatemalan people. It is at the same time
the culmination of the peace process in Central America.
The European Union has for a long time taken an
active interest in the Central American peace process, in
particular through the San José dialogue, and reiterates its
readiness to support the Guatemalan people in
implementing the peace agreements.
We wish to congratulate the Government of
Guatemala and the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional
Guatemalteca (URNG). Their common determination and
the persistent efforts of the United Nations, in particular
of United Nations Moderator Jean Arnault, assisted by the
Group of Friends, have laid the basis for the far-reaching
agreements signed in Mexico, Oslo, Stockholm and
Madrid that entered into force on the occasion of the
signing ceremony in Guatemala City.
The implementation of the Agreement needs the full
cooperation of the parties. We call upon them to fulfil in
good faith the commitments they have entered into,
bearing in mind that it is their primary responsibility to
consolidate the peace and to prevent any resurgence of
violence. The citizens of Guatemala deserve at last to live
in peace.
Guatemala now faces the challenge of building a
democratic society based on the rule of law, open to the
equal participation of all Guatemalan citizens and with
full respect for human rights.
The verification of the peace accords has been
entrusted by both parties to the United Nations. The
European Union therefore agrees with the report of the
Secretary-General of 17 December 1996, which states that
the verification will require the deployment of United
Nations military observers and that, in accordance with
the established practice of the United Nations, such
deployment will require the authorization of the Security
Council, which has consistently supported the peace

5

Security Council
Fifty-second year
process in Central America since it first commended the
efforts of the Contadora countries in resolution 530 (1983).
We therefore hope that the draft resolution before the
Council today can be adopted by consensus, as a testimony
of the continued determination of the whole international
community to support the peace process in Guatemala.
We support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
for the attachment of a group of 155 military observers to
the United Nations Mission for the Verification of Human
Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala
(MINUGUA).
At the same time, we subscribe to the call contained
in the draft resolution for both parties to honour their
mutual commitments and to cooperate fully with the
verification of the ceasefire agreement and all the resulting
obligations.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Netherlands for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Norway, on
whom I now call.
Mr. Aass (Norway): Allow me to associate Norway
with the words of congratulation extended to you, Sir, upon
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January. We wish you every success in the
execution of this important mission.
Since the late 1980s there has been a positive trend in
Latin America towards democratization and peaceful
resolution of conflicts. A milestone in this regard was the
signing on 29 December last year of a final peace
Agreement in Guatemala, which put an end to an internal
armed conflict that had been ravaging the country for 36
years, causing the death of 150,000 people and displacing
a million men, women and children.
The peace Agreement came as a result of arduous
negotiations between the Guatemalan Government and the
guerrilla movement, the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional
Guatemalteca (URNG). The negotiations which started with
an accord in Oslo, in March 1990, establishing the format
for formal talks. The perseverance and pragmatism shown
by the negotiating parties bode well for the handling of the
important challenges with respect to the social, economic
and reconciliation issues which now confront the
Guatemalans.

6

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
Guatemala is a poor country in a purely economic
sense, but rich in history, traditions, culture and ethnic
diversity. A majority of the population is of indigenous
origin, and they have paid a heavy price in terms of
social injustice and the sufferings of war. The Guatemalan
people deserves a better tomorrow, and the peace
agreement represents a historic opportunity in that respect.
The international community and the United Nations
have played an essential role in the Guatemalan peace
process. The patient and constructive mediation by the
United Nations since 1994, coupled with the constructive
engagement and encouragement of the Group of Friends,
contributed in a significant way to the peaceful outcome
of the conflict. Now the weapons have been silenced.
However, peace is not merely the absence of war. There
cannot be peace in Guatemala without development,
education, tolerance and equal opportunities. Today the
Guatemalans are eager to construct a better Guatemala.
To assure a smooth transition to the new phase of
reconstruction and reconciliation, Guatemala is, however,
still in need of some help from its many friends. Some of
this will be assistance provided by donor countries and
international institutions. But to assist the Guatemalans in
the process of beating swords into ploughshares, the
Secretary-General has recommended the attachment to the
United Nations Mission for the Verification of Human
Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in
Guatemala (MINUGUA) of a group of 155 military
observers and the requisite medical personnel.
Norway, as a member of the Group of Friends, has
co-sponsored the draft resolution authorizing military
observers in Guatemala. The reintegration of the URNG
into civilian life is a crucial element of the peace process.
Considering the heavy toll which has been exacted from
its people throughout the armed conflict, it is our hope
that no extraneous issue will be allowed to impede the
endeavours to assure Guatemala a better future. In this
respect, the members of the Security Council, and its
permanent members in particular, bear a very special
responsibility. My Government therefore urges the
Security Council to adopt the present draft resolution.
If the international community is prepared to
accompany Guatemala a bit further on the road to peace
and normalization, the Guatemalan experience may
become a model of constructive and effective
international solidarity.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
There is much at stake in the vote today. It is in the
hands of the Security Council to give peace a chance in
Guatemala.
The President: I thank the representative of Norway
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Mexico, on
whom I now call.
Mr. Tello (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mexico wishes to express its gratification and joy at the
signing last 29 December of the Agreement on a Firm and
Lasting Peace by the Government of Guatemala and the
Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG).
The signing of this Agreement is rightly a source of pride
for the people of Guatemala. This is a time of joy and hope
for millions of Guatemalans: Men and women of all social
classes, ethnic groups and creeds whose shared objective is
a harmonious and peaceful coexistence.
The people and the Government of Mexico cannot fail
to express their greatest satisfaction at this historic moment
for the Guatemalan people. Guatemala and Mexico are
united by a past that gives them a shared frame of
reference. We share history, geography, culture, traditions,
languages and character. More than bordering countries, we
are fraternal countries with converging hopes and
aspirations, as we endeavour to be two modern and
dynamic nations on the threshold of the twenty-first
century.
The Government of Mexico wishes once again to pay
tribute to the Government of Guatemala, led by President
Alvaro Arzú, for its historic conviction that the only course
for its people is that of harmony and peace. We also
commend those who fought to build a society of freedom,
justice and democracy. We sincerely congratulate the
Government and the URNG for their dedication and their
efforts to place above confrontation the objective of using
dialogue and reason as the most valuable means to resolve
disputes.
In the final analysis, this success belongs to
Guatemalan society as a whole, which left behind doubts,
fears and distrust and decided with courage and
determination to set out on the road of solidarity and peace.
I also wish to pay tribute to Mr. Boutros BoutrosGhali, who, with the vision of a statesman, tirelessly
promoted the peace process in Guatemala. The SecretaryGeneral showed a sensitivity characteristic only of the great

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
internationalists. We also owe a debt of gratitude to those
who have given to this process their dedication and
personal conviction. I refer in particular to Mr. Jean
Arnault, and also to the team of the Guatemala Unit, who
at all times were able to imbue the peace process with
confidence and optimism.
The draft resolution before the Security Council,
contained in document S/1997/18, is not — I repeat, is
not — the solution or the definitive element of peace in
Guatemala. That was provided by a decision already taken
by Guatemalan society. The draft resolution signifies only
the recognition by the international community that the
United Nations has a role to play in building an order —
if not a new one, at least a different one — within the
society of that country.
As is evident, the draft resolution is neither very
ambitious nor very costly. It is a small expression of the
solidarity the Guatemalan people needs in order to launch
from a firm, secure and reliable base this new stage in its
history as a free, independent and democratic nation.
Mexico appeals sincerely and deeply to all Security
Council members to adopt this draft resolution. The
Council would thus once again show its determination to
discharge fully the primary responsibility that we have
conferred upon it for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Peace in Guatemala is not a regional
issue. It is a matter that involves all Members of the
United Nations.
It is in this spirit and this context that the
Government of Mexico hopes that this draft resolution
will be adopted unanimously in order to reflect the firm
support of the international community for the efforts that
ended the last conflict spilling blood on the American
continent.
I cannot conclude without sincerely congratulating
you, Sir, on the recent election of your country as a nonpermanent member of the Security Council, as well as on
your assumption of the presidency during the first month
of your term. I also wish to express our appreciation to
the Permanent Representative of Italy, who discharged the
responsibilities of President with great skill in the month
of December, at a particularly delicate time for our
Organization.
The President: I thank the representative of Mexico
for his kind words addressed to me.

7

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3730th meeting
10 January 1997

The next speaker is the representative of Spain, on
whom I now call.

process between the parties to begin to have concrete
results on the ground.

Mr. Laclaustra (Spain)(interpretation from Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of January. I also wish to associate my delegation fully
with the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of the Netherlands on behalf of the European Union.

The Security Council, with the decision that it is
preparing to adopt today, must once again exercise the
primary responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security conferred upon its members by the United
Nations Charter. In this way, the presence of United
Nations military observers in Guatemala will make it
possible to verify the implementation of the agreement on
the definitive ceasefire and for Central America to
become a conflict-free region of true peace, freedom and
democracy.

On 29 December 1996 the Government of Guatemala
and the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca
(URNG) signed the Agreement on a Firm and Lasting
Peace, bringing an end to a brutal conflict and opening a
new page in the history of Guatemala. On that date the full
set of peace agreements entered into force, having been
concluded following a negotiation process in which the
parties, assisted by the valuable moderation of the United
Nations and the support of the Group of Friends,
demonstrated their firm commitment to peace.
The time has now come to implement the agreements
reached and to apply the will of the parties and the wish of
the entire people of Guatemala to lay the foundations for a
firm and lasting peace, which must be ensured through the
continued support of the international community, and of
the United Nations in particular.
The agreement on the definitive ceasefire, signed in
Oslo, is one of the pillars that will ensure the building of
peace in Guatemala through the verification of the
ceasefire, the separation of forces, disarmament and the
demobilization of the URNG combatants. The mechanism
for the verification of this agreement and for the other
agreements signed between the parties has been entrusted
to the United Nations.
In his report of 17 December 1996 and its addenda of
23 and 30 December, the Secretary-General underscores the
need to deploy United Nations military personnel through
the authorization of the Security Council of an additional
military component of 155 personnel for a period of three
months for the United Nations Mission for the Verification
of Human Rights and of Compliance with the
Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human
Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA).
The draft resolution before the Security Council,
sponsored by Spain together with the other members of the
Group of Friends, will authorize that deployment and will
make it possible for the achievements of the negotiating

8

My delegation wishes to stress Spain’s readiness to
participate in the exercise of this collective responsibility
by making an important contribution of its own troops to
this military component of MINUGUA.
The firm commitment to the peace process that my
country has shared with the other members of the Group
of Friends remains fully intact in this new and hopeful
stage of reconciliation, reconstruction and development
that is beginning in a climate of peace, freedom and
democracy for the people of Guatemala. The participation
of the President of the Spanish Government, José María
Aznar, in the signature ceremony of the Agreement on a
Firm and Lasting Peace, and the bilateral cooperation that
my authorities have decided to increase considerably in
pursuit of our assistance to Guatemala, are solid evidence
of that commitment.
I wish to conclude by recalling that Madrid was host
to the signing, on 12 December 1996, of one of the
important agreements between the parties: that on the
basis for the reintegration of URNG into the political life
of the country. On that occasion, my country also
sponsored a forum for reflection on reinsertion and
demobilization in Guatemala, which made it possible to
put forward ideas and proposals to ensure that the
international community was in a position to meet the
requirements of the parties and the immediate needs for
the implementation of the peace accords in that crucial
aspect.
The President: I thank the representative of Spain
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Argentina.
I invite her to take a seat at the Council table and to
make her statement.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Mrs. Ramirez (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir,
on your election and to wish you, on behalf of my
delegation, every success in your work, which we are
convinced will be characterized by efficiency and
transparency.
We also congratulate the Permanent Representative of
Italy for his outstanding and well-appreciated work in
December and for all the efforts made by his delegation.
I wish to refer to the Agreement on a Firm and
Lasting Peace that was signed at Guatemala City on 29
December 1996 between the Government of Guatemala and
the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG),
ending a conflict that for decades affected an important
country of Central America. We have no doubt that the
Agreement will make it possible to reverse the political,
institutional, economic and social consequences of the
conflict.
Furthermore, the implementation of the Guatemalan
peace Agreement will make it possible to consolidate and
stabilize democracy in the region, laying the foundations for
a society in which peace, freedom, the rule of law, respect
for human rights, justice and sustained economic
development will prevail.
All of this joint effort of the Guatemalan people, the
political leadership involved in the peace negotiations, the
United Nations, the Group of Friends of the SecretaryGeneral and the officials who have been in charge of this
arduous task now makes it possible for the international
community to express its gratification at the conclusion of
this stage.
The process is not complete, however, since there is
a need to follow up the agreements reached. In this
framework, the follow-up action of the United Nations is
significant. Thus, the task of monitoring the ceasefire,
separating the forces and disarming and demobilizing the
URNG combatants are the challenges that lie ahead.
In order to meet these challenges successfully, we
fully support the Secretary-General’s proposal, formulated
in his report of 17 December, for the establishment of a
military component of the United Nations Mission for the
Verification of Human Rights and of Compliance with the
Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human
Rights in Guatemala. We believe that the proposals and
plans of the Secretary-General for this mission are wise and
that they are appropriately reflected in the draft resolution

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
before us. The adoption of the draft resolution would
show that the understandable difficulties and concerns had
been overcome.
Argentina is a sponsor of the draft resolution
because we fully support the Guatemalan efforts to
achieve peace. We are prepared to continue to support
these efforts through practical action. The presence of
civilian police, which my Government has been sending
since 1995, is evidence of our commitment to this cause.
The President: I thank the representative of
Argentina for her kind words addressed to me and my
predecessor.
The next speaker is the representative of Canada. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Less than two weeks ago, the Foreign Minister of Canada,
in company with the former Secretary-General and many
other supporters of peace in Guatemala, witnessed the
signature ceremonies in Guatemala of the Agreement on
a Firm and Lasting Peace aimed at ending over 35 years
of civil conflict in that country. We celebrate this
achievement. We also recognize, as do the Guatemalan
parties to the peace accords and the people of Guatemala,
that there is much to be done — and to be done
quickly — to effect a complete national reconciliation.
The fundamental issue today is how the international
community can help the people of Guatemala inculcate a
culture of peace in their society. After decades of conflict,
mistrust and extreme insecurity, there is an urgent need to
establish sustainable security in Guatemala, including
human rights and fundamental freedoms, the rule of law,
good governance, sustainable development and social
equity. All of these are as important as the military
aspects of the peace settlement.
(spoke in English)
Canada believes that we are now at the critical point
where the peace-building measures envisaged in the
Guatemala accords must be rapidly implemented if the
momentum is not to be lost. We need to help put in place
the conditions that will allow Guatemala to take charge of
its own destiny and move forward with the important
tasks of social, political and economic reconstruction it
has set itself in the peace accords.

9

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3730th meeting
10 January 1997

Among the immediate tasks to be taken up are the
implementation of the ceasefire, the separation of forces
and the disarmament and demobilization of combatants of
the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG).
The successful reintegration of the former combatants into
civilian life is perhaps the first and most essential act of
peace-building, because until this happens there can be no
lasting peace and because these former rebels must secure
a stake in building the new Guatemala.

Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG)
in Guatemala City on 29 December 1996. The Agreement
signals the end of 36 years of conflict and marks the
culmination of a long and complex process of negotiation.
We pay tribute to both parties, who have demonstrated
that when the political will exists, even the most
intractable conflicts can be resolved. We also commend
the role of the United Nations mediation team, who have
worked tirelessly in pursuit of this achievement.

In order to move forward with this work, we are
pleased that the Security Council is considering a draft
resolution which provides for a mandate for a military
component to be added to the United Nations Mission for
the Verification of Human Rights and of Compliance with
the Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on
Human Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA). Canada
enthusiastically supports this initiative and stands ready to
contribute military observers to this United Nations
Mission.

The foundations for a lasting peace in Guatemala
have been laid. A period of reconciliation and
reconstruction is now necessary to insure a lasting peace
for that country. Implementation of the Agreement will
not be easy. It is essential that, at this crucial juncture, the
international community and this Council, in particular,
should demonstrate the commitment to support the
process of reconciliation in Guatemala.

Canada recognizes the historic achievement of the
Government of Guatemala and the Unidad Revolucionaria
Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG) in the peace accords. This
is the last stage in the Central American peace process,
which Canada has supported in many direct and material
ways. The parties and the people of Guatemala can remain
assured that Canada will continue to support them actively
as they move forward to implement the peace settlement.
I would also like to pay tribute at this time to the
work both of United Nations Mission for the Verification
of Human Rights and of Compliance with the
Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human
Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA) and of the United
Nations Moderator of the Peace Talks, Jean Arnault, which
has been so essential to the successful conclusion of the
peace accords.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom warmly welcomes the signing of the final peace
Agreement between the Guatemalan Government and the

10

The United Kingdom, along with — as I understand
it — all other members of the Council, agree with the
Secretary-General that a rapid deployment of United
Nations military observers is necessary in order to verify
the ceasefire. The observer group has a clear mandate and
exit strategy, as well as the consent of the parties.
Authorization of such a deployment is clearly the
responsibility of this Council. That is why, as a sponsor
of the draft resolution before us, the United Kingdom will
vote in favour of its adoption, and we strongly hope that
it will in fact be adopted, on the objective grounds that
the proposed deployment is necessary and desirable. We
should all measure up to our Security Council
responsibilities over this.
We look to both parties to the Agreement fully to
implement their commitments, and to give the United
Nations full cooperation in the verification of the
ceasefire and demobilization of combatants.
The United Kingdom has long been a firm supporter
of the peace process in Central America. We have
participated actively in the San José dialogue between the
European Union and Central American States. We will
continue to work to ensure an effective European Union
contribution to the consolidation of democracy in
Guatemala. Together with other members of the Security
Council, we pledge our full support to the long-suffering
people of Guatemala. They have put their past behind
them; let us do everything possible to ensure that they
now enjoy a peaceful and prosperous future.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) (interpretation from French):
Portugal has for centuries had very strong ties to Central
America. It is therefore with particular satisfaction that my
country welcomed the signing in Guatemala City on 29
December of the final peace Agreement between the
representatives of the Government and the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca. We believe that
peace, national reconciliation and economic development
are now within the grasp of the Guatemalan people.
This final Agreement, in conjunction with the
agreements signed in Madrid, Mexico, Oslo and Stockholm,
will lead to the end of the domestic conflict in Guatemala,
which has been the longest in Central America.
The consequences of this Agreement are not limited to
Guatemala. They have a particular meaning in the context
of the overall process underway in Central America, and
they can become an important contribution to the cause of
peace, democracy, stability and economic development in
the region.
In recent years, the United Nations has played a very
important role in Guatemala. I would also like to pay
tribute today to the patient and constructive efforts of the
Secretary-General, the Group of Friends of the Guatemalan
Peace Process, the United Nations system as a whole, and
to all other international agencies which have supported and
continue to support the peace process.
It is our hope that democracy and respect for human
rights will continue to be consolidated in Guatemala.
Portugal is gratified by these developments and also wishes
to convey its special thanks to the men and women whom
make up the United Nations Mission for the Verification of
Human Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments
of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in
Guatemala (MINUGUA). Since November 1994, when the
Mission was established as part of the framework of the
peace negotiations, they have verified the respect for the
overall Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala which
was signed by the parties, as well as some aspects of the
agreement on the identity and rights of indigenous peoples,
which is of fundamental importance.
The presence of MINUGUA was essential in putting
in place a peace process whose purpose was to put an end
to a conflict that had beset the people of Guatemala for the
past 35 years. MINUGUA has played an indispensable and
exemplary role in the restoration of law and order and
respect for human rights in this country. We hope that
henceforth all the national minorities will be able to

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
participate fully in building a free and democratic society
in Guatemala where social justice becomes a reality.
Portugal feels that the international community has
the duty to respond positively to the requests of the two
Guatemalan parties, by providing adequate means to
verify the ceasefire, the separation of forces and the
disarmament and demobilization of the forces of the
Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca. It is
therefore a matter of helping and encouraging the parties
to respect their commitments under the agreements they
have signed.
The adoption of the draft resolution before us, which
Portugal has co-sponsored, would be an essential
contribution to peace and to national reconciliation and
would be a follow-on to the recommendations in the
report of the Secretary-General.
One cannot overestimate the primary responsibility
and the fundamental role which either the Government or
the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca must
continue to discharge in order to honour the mutual
commitments they made to pursue the long-term
consolidation of peace, democracy and stability in the
country.
Portugal firmly believes that the peace process in
Guatemala is an example to be followed by peoples and
countries in similar situations throughout the world. We
are certain that the two parties and the people of
Guatemala will both be up to this challenge.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from
French): The signing of the peace Agreement in
Guatemala on 29 December will go down in the history
of Central America. The conflict in Guatemala, the oldest
in the area, had been going on for more than 40 years.
The settlement of the conflict is the culmination of a
process that began in Esquipulas in 1987. That has made
it possible to arrive at a settlement of the conflicts in the
other countries of the region, particularly in El Salvador
and Nicaragua.
The United Nations has played a central role in this
process. The United Nations assumed this role
successfully in Guatemala through the negotiation of
various agreements which constituted the framework for
peace.
Particularly sincere tribute is due to the efforts of the
Secretary-General. I shall also mention, as was done

11

Security Council
Fifty-second year
earlier by the Ambassador of Mexico, the special
contribution by the United Nations Moderator of the Peace
Talks, Mr. Jean Arnault.
It is natural that the Guatemalan parties turned to the
United Nations to ask it to supervise the implementation of
these agreements. Obviously, if we wish to express
congratulations and good wishes, it is first and foremost to
the people of Guatemala that we should address ourselves.
The United Nations Mission for the Verification of Human
Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala
(MINUGUA) has already been entrusted by the General
Assembly with supervising those aspects of these
agreements which relate to human rights. With regard to the
military aspects, the Secretary-General has proposed to the
Security Council the creation of an observer unit attached
to MINUGUA with a mandate of three months.
No one can doubt — as has been pointed out and
stressed — that this proposal is in keeping with the United
Nations mission and with the competence of the Security
Council and the responsibilities of its members. This is why
France has given its support to this proposal. It will thus
vote in favour of the draft resolution before the Council,
which in principle enjoys the broadest support.
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My Government
warmly welcomes the signing of the Agreement on a Firm
and Lasting Peace between the Guatemalan Government
and the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca
(URNG) in Guatemala City on 29 December 1996. We are
pleased that the longest and most destructive armed conflict
in Central America — along with the tremendous suffering
it inflicted on the people of Guatemala — has finally come
to a peaceful conclusion. We extend our heartfelt
congratulations to the Government and people of Guatemala
on this watershed event in their country’s history.
We commend the parties concerned for their firm
commitment to peace and the spirit of compromise, without
which the successful conclusion of the negotiations could
not have been achieved. We also wish to recognize the
Secretary-General, the Group of Friends of the Guatemalan
Peace Process and the United Nations system as a whole
for the invaluable assistance they rendered to the parties
concerned in their search for firm and lasting peace.
The entire Central American region can take pride in
this remarkable achievement. With the end of conflict in
Guatemala, the region is peaceful for the first time in nearly

12

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
three decades and is free to continue peaceful progress
towards democracy and development.
We believe the peace process in Guatemala has
demonstrated that, even in the wake of severe civil
conflict, peace and democracy are not unattainable goals
so long as the parties concerned exhibit the necessary
political will to make peace, and are supported in their
efforts by their regional neighbours, the United Nations
and the international community as a whole. The role of
the United Nations in the peace process has been
particularly noteworthy. As elsewhere in Central America,
throughout the conflict in Guatemala the United Nations
has played an indispensable role in promoting peace by
making available its good offices and by establishing in
1994 the United Nations Mission for the Verification of
Human Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments
of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in
Guatemala (MINUGUA). Recently, in anticipation of the
historic conclusion of the final peace agreement, the
General Assembly renewed the mandate of MINUGUA
until 31 March 1997 as a clear expression of the
international community’s continued political support for
the peace process in Guatemala.
Notwithstanding the ground-breaking achievements
made thus far, Guatemala’s journey to lasting and longterm peace and stability is not yet over and is unlikely to
become any less arduous. The most important task in the
coming days must be to ensure the implementation of all
the agreements which the parties have freely entered into.
Needless to say, peace and reconciliation agreed to on
paper can only be translated into reality if both parties
comply fully with their obligations under the peace
agreements.
With the signing of the final peace agreement last
December, the overall package of peace accords is now
in full force. In light of the peace package’s
comprehensive nature, its implementation will present a
major challenge, not only to the parties themselves but
also to the United Nations and the international
community as a whole. While we encourage both the
Government of Guatemala and the URNG to use the
momentum now created to undertake all necessary
measures to fully implement the peace package, we
believe that the United Nations should also help
consolidate the historic progress made towards a lasting
peace in Guatemala.
It has long been anticipated that verification of the
military aspects of the peace agreement will require the

Security Council
Fifty-second year
deployment of military observers. Given that the overall
package of peace accords has entered into force and the
request has been made by the parties for the deployment of
the United Nations verification mission, we support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to attach a group
of military observers to the existing MINUGUA operation.
We believe that the recommended dimensions of
deployment would enable the effective fulfilment of the
entrusted tasks, namely, ceasefire verification, separation of
forces, and the disarmament and demobilization of URNG
combatants.
My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution on authorizing the attachment to
MINUGUA of a group of 155 military observers and
requisite medical personnel for a period of three months.
Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): My delegation
wholeheartedly welcomes the final agreement signed on 29
December 1996 between the Government of Guatemala and
the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG)
and the fact that the two parties are united at long last in
their willingness to secure peaceful and stable life for their
country.
We congratulate yesterday’s adversaries on their
courage and farsightedness, but it is the people of
Guatemala who should be congratulated in the first place.
The end of the war and the commitment of the parties to
implement their agreements will undoubtedly create an
environment favourable to further democratization,
economic recovery and the promotion of the rule of law.
I believe it would not be unfair to say that the
international community in general and the United Nations
in particular deserve to be commended for assisting the
parties in their attempts to peacefully resolve the conflict
and in setting up the framework within which the parties
have agreed to cooperate. In this context my delegation
highly appreciates the contribution made by the United
Nations Mission for the Verification of Human Rights and
of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala
(MINUGUA).
In the opinion of the Polish delegation, continued
United Nations assistance is indispensable for the successful
implementation of the peace agreements in Guatemala. It
also, and perhaps above all, applies to the agreement on the
definitive ceasefire signed at Oslo on 4 December 1996 and
to the related verification measures. We believe that in light
of previous international investments in the peace process

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
in Guatemala, we cannot afford to fail to respond
positively to the parties’ request to entrust the United
Nations team of military observers with the task of
verification of the above-mentioned agreement.
Consequently, my delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution authorizing the attachment of the
group of observers to MINUGUA, as recommended by
the Secretary-General.
Finally, let me pay tribute to the members of the
Group of Friends of the Guatemalan Peace Process for
the role they have played in preparing the draft resolution
before us.
Mr. Osvald (Sweden): The signing of the peace
Agreement in Guatemala on 29 December 1996 put an
end to 36 years of bitter conflict. Guatemala will now
finally have the opportunity to devote its energies to
peaceful, long-term development, together with the rest of
the Central American region. Since the 1970s, Sweden
has worked in support of democracy and peace in Central
America and has played an active part in developments
leading to the historic peace Agreement in Guatemala.
The Swedish Government was honoured to host the
signing of the agreement on constitutional reforms and the
electoral regime in Stockholm last December. Sweden has
pledged substantial contributions in support of the
important tasks of demobilization and the reintegration
into society of former combatants. Sweden participates in
the United Nations Mission for the Verification of Human
Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in
Guatemala (MINUGUA). Sweden is also a substantial
contributor to MINUGUA’s fund for institution-building.
The United Nations has played a crucial role in
laying a foundation for peace in Guatemala through the
efforts of MINUGUA, the Guatemala Unit of the
Secretariat and, of course, the United Nations Moderator,
Mr. Jean Arnault. The Group of Friends of Guatemala has
also made important contributions in support of the peace
process. The agreement on the definitive ceasefire
expressly assigns the role of verifying the military aspects
of the peace settlement to the United Nations. As
proposed by the Secretary-General, this task should be
carried out by the attachment to MINUGUA of a group
of military observers and some medical personnel. It is in
keeping with United Nations practice that this military
component should be authorized under a Security Council
mandate. This is a case in which the Security Council is
called upon to exercise its primary responsibility for the

13

Security Council
Fifty-second year
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
important that the draft resolution be adopted by the
Council. It enjoys Sweden’s full support.
The Guatemalan peace Agreement is multidimensional
in character. It is a good example of how the practical
application of a broader concept of security can create a
basis for peaceful development. In addition to ceasefire and
military provisions, the package of peace accords includes
agreements on constitutional, social and economic issues,
human rights and the identity and rights of indigenous
peoples. It is appropriate that verification is entrusted to a
multidimensional United Nations operation. The
contributions of various parts of the United Nations system,
in particular the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), will be of major importance in supporting
implementation of the peace agreements. Coordination
between all international organizations and agencies
supporting the peace process is important.
Tribute should in particular be paid today to the
Guatemalan parties themselves; they have carried the peace
process forward and will carry responsibility for its success.
The final success of the Guatemalan peace process will, of
course, be measured through the implementation of the
peace agreements in all their aspects — military and
civilian. The decision before us today would enhance the
contribution of the United Nations to assisting the parties in
this endeavour.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The signing of the overall package of peace accords on
Guatemala, the last of which was the final peace Agreement
signed on 29 December 1996, represents an important
milestone achieved by the United Nations in support of
peace and stability in a country long torn by disputes and
hostilities. Egypt again welcomes the signing of these
agreements and congratulates the people of Guatemala on
that achievement. The General Assembly has, so far, taken
the major role in the process of bringing about peace in
Guatemala by adopting many resolutions and decisions, the
most important of which was General Assembly resolution
48/267, which called for the establishment of the United
Nations Mission for the Verification of Human Rights and
of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala
(MINUGUA). That Mission successfully and ably
supervised all the efforts leading to the completion of the
agreements, which have been crowned with the final peace
accord.

14

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
We must also thank the Secretary-General and his
assistants for their efforts, which increased the chances of
achieving agreement. Guatemala and the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG) have now
requested the United Nations to verify the implementation
of all the agreements that, assisted by the United Nations,
they negotiated together. The Security Council must make
its contribution to increasing the chances of the
implementation of these accords by adopting the draft
resolution before the Council today.
The delegation of Egypt supports all the provisions
of this draft resolution, and we will vote in favour of it.
Egypt believes that any request by a State to the Security
Council to supervise the implementation of a peace
agreement negotiated with the assistance of the
Organization deserves a positive response, particularly
when such a response is consonant with the responsibility
of the Security Council for maintaining international
peace and security. While we appreciate the
circumstances surrounding negotiations on the draft
resolution, we hope that they will not prevent the Council
from adopting the draft resolution and thereby shouldering
its full responsibilities for assisting Guatemala to establish
peace and stability in accordance with the peace
agreement.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): We are encouraged by the
fact that one of the longest wars fought in this region is
finally coming to an end, and in this regard we welcome
the signing of the December accord. We are particularly
aware of the United Nations involvement in the peace
process in Guatemala and of how useful and successful
that involvement has been to date. The report of the
Secretary-General on the current status of the peace
process clearly sees a role for the United Nations in the
verification of the peace accords negotiated with its
assistance. Consequently, having considered the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations, my delegation is of the view
that increasing the strength of the United Nations Mission
for the Verification of Human Rights and of Compliance
with the Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement
on Human Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA) so as to
fulfil the additional verification functions entrusted to it
by the ceasefire agreement is crucial for its final
implementation.
In this regard, my delegation has noted the
Secretary-General’s confirmation that the mechanism to
oversee the preparation of assembly points to receive the
Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG)
combatants have been put in place. We have also

Security Council
Fifty-second year
observed that paragraph 16 of the report reaffirms the
desire of both parties to see the military aspects of the
peace settlement urgently implemented. Accordingly, we
strongly believe that the support of the international
community for the efforts of Guatemalans in their quest for
peace should be forthcoming and unequivocal and should
not be seen to waver at this critical stage. Kenya will
therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from
French): The agreement on the definitive ceasefire between
the Guatemalan Government and the Unidad Revolucionaria
Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG), signed in Oslo on 4
December 1996, is the felicitous outcome of a long process
marked by a series of peace agreements signed in Madrid,
Mexico, Oslo Stockholm and, finally, in Guatemala City on
29 December 1996. This is certainly the beginning of a new
era and the culmination of the joint efforts of the parties
themselves, the countries of the region and the entire
international community.
The United Nations has always followed the situation
in Guatemala with special attention and sustained interest
because it constituted, in everyone’s view, a serious threat
to international peace and security and, consequently, to the
members of the international community as a whole.
It is important to recall that the General Assembly, in
keeping with its obligations under the Charter, has always
played a central role in promoting peace in Guatemala, and
to this end it created the United Nations Mission for the
Verification of Human Rights and of Compliance with the
Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human
Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA).
The Security Council, aware of the importance of
peace in Central America for the rest of the world, paid
tribute through its resolution 530 (1983) to the Contadora
countries for their tireless efforts to facilitate the definitive
return of peace and stability to the region. It is therefore
quite appropriate, wise and also in keeping with its mandate
that the Security Council, 14 years after the adoption of that
resolution, decided to devote a debate to the new situation
in Guatemala.
We are grateful for the various clear reports of the
Secretary-General on this important issue, which have given
us all the elements we need for a detailed understanding of
the events and every reason to rejoice at the advent of the
long-awaited peace in Guatemala. My delegation therefore
welcomes with great satisfaction the Agreement the parties
to the conflict have reached, which, by providing for a

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
definitive ceasefire, opens up new prospects for peace,
stability and development in a country whose population
has suffered for too long the torments of a war that lasted
for decades, 35 years to be more precise.
In the view of my delegation, it is only natural that
the international community as a whole and the Security
Council in particular should support unreservedly the
peace process in Guatemala and should take all necessary
measures to consolidate this process and promote the
strict implementation of the ceasefire Agreement. This
Agreement is an important stage in the building of a
democratic society based on recognition of and respect for
its pluralistic make-up and the rights of each citizen.
In recalling that the negotiations in Guatemala were
both long and difficult, my delegation wishes to further
highlight the responsibility that the Security Council has
to respond favourably to the request made by the
Secretary-General in his report with respect to
strengthening in the short term the United Nations
Mission in Guatemala. The addition to MINUGUA of a
group of military observers and requisite medical
personnel would seem to us indispensable in order to
ensure that peace in Guatemala become a reality. Indeed,
there are prior conditions to be met and steps which the
two parties must take decisively and without delay in
order to make possible the overall implementation of the
provisions provided for in the peace Agreement.
Therefore, now more than ever the actors in the
political life of Guatemala, and more especially the people
of Guatemala, need to feel the presence and also enjoy
the concrete support of the United Nations so as to avert
the vicissitudes that are involved in any settlement of any
conflict of this type. In this way, they will be in a better
position to respond to the need to work to overcome the
numerous difficulties still remaining and any possible
pitfalls. The people of Guatemala, who have never
doubted the United Nations, deserve our unflagging
support and our total solidarity.
My delegation hopes that all the conditions will be
met so that the peace in Guatemala is a final and genuine
peace, with a return to a normal and decent life for the
entire population of this country. Yes, we hope that the
ceasefire, once it enters into force, will be respected
scrupulously by all the parties and that the separation of
the forces will take place in a spirit of cooperation and
mutual understanding. The disarming of the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG) under the
conditions provided for in the Agreement is necessary

15

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3730th meeting
10 January 1997

because it is the keystone for establishing and strengthening
trust between the parties.

of observers to verify the disarmament process and the
demobilization of the forces in conflict.

With regard to the demobilization of the combatants,
it seems essential to us to start thinking now — bearing in
mind similar situations — about the conditions needed in
order to help them to return to civilian life. This will only
be possible with the effective aid of the international
community.

This is one final effort by this Organization, and we
are all aware that within the scope of peacekeeping
operations that have been authorized by the Council, the
operation now being requested is truly one of minimal
dimensions. What has been requested is a group of 155
observers at an unusually low cost for this type of
operation. Not only is the operation necessary, but this
would also be a demonstration of political will by the
Council and an expression of its interest in the Central
American peace process.

While welcoming the important advance that brothers
who were once enemies have made in Guatemala, my
delegation recognizes and deeply appreciates the
contribution of the countries of the region, which have
expended much energy and demonstrated great savoir faire
in finding, inspired by the cultural values and political
concepts of their own countries, the ways and means of
bringing about a definitive peace in Guatemala.
We, in this respect, wish to extend, here and now, this
well-deserved tribute to the Governments of Norway, Spain
and Sweden, the United Nations personnel and all those
who, by their keen interest in the fate of the Guatemalan
people, have made it possible to bring about the return of
civil peace and to foster national reconciliation in the
country.
Guinea-Bissau will support all efforts to preserve this
peace so well deserved by the people of Guatemala.
Therefore, my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution, the merit of which has been disputed by no
one here and which should be adopted without opposition.
Mr. Larraín (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
We are at a crucial moment in the struggle for peace in
Guatemala. Even at the risk of being repetitive, we cannot
fail to say that we are witnessing the end of a civil war that
has gone on for more than 35 years and has taken a toll of
more than 100,000 victims.
The United Nations has played an important role in
restoring normality for the citizens of that beloved brotherly
country, and that should be a source of legitimate pride for
this Organization.
The two parties to the Guatemalan conflict have
requested one final step by the United Nations to
consolidate this long and successful effort for peace, and
we are confident that the Security Council will once again
be responsive to this appeal and will authorize the sending

16

We believe that the Security Council and all its
members are aware of their responsibilities for preserving
international peace and security and the importance of
successfully completing the United Nations actions to
bring peace to Guatemala and to the Central American
isthmus as a whole. This has been and continues to be a
matter of high priority for the entire hemisphere. Once
peace is consolidated in this region, a region that once
was a focus of concerns in this Council and is today
becoming an area of great hope, there will remain a long
difficult road to restore democratic coexistence and
economic well-being. Our country, so far as its means
permit, has been promoting programmes of cooperation in
the Central American region and is prepared to continue
doing so.
Millions of fellow human beings with a long history
of suffering and deprivation are looking to this Council
for support in their struggle for peace. We therefore make
another sincere appeal to the members of the Council to
assume their responsibilities towards these suffering
people and support a draft resolution which constitutes the
final stepping stone in the long process to consolidate in
Central America an area of peace, freedom, democracy
and development.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
Speaking in my national capacity, I wish to state that
Japan has on numerous occasions expressed its hope for
the early conclusion of an agreement to bring an end to
the decades-long conflict in Guatemala. Japan, thus,
heartily welcomes the signing by the Government of
Guatemala and the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional
Guatemalteca (URNG) on 29 December last year of the
Agreement on a Firm and Lasting Peace. Both parties are
to be commended for their courageous and determined

Security Council
Fifty-second year
efforts in achieving this important and decisive first step
towards peace and national reconciliation. I should like to
add that this peace Agreement is truly of historic
significance in that it puts an end to the last internal
conflict in the region. Peoples throughout Central America
can now look forward to building a peaceful and prosperous
future.
The involvement of the United Nations played an
important, indeed, I would say crucial role in bringing the
two sides to the negotiating table and in achieving a
successful outcome, reminding us once again of the
valuable contribution this Organization continues to make
to the maintenance of international peace and security. I
should also like to express my admiration for the
contributions made by the Group of Friends of the
Guatemala Peace Process in promoting the negotiations.
Japan strongly hopes that genuine and enduring peace
will take firm hold in Guatemala, and would urge the
Government of Guatemala and its people to join together in
the effort to achieve national reconciliation and economic
and social development. We believe that the deployment of
a group of 155 military observers and medical personnel
will be useful in solidifying the peace, and thus we strongly
support the draft resolution authorizing that effort. My
delegation expresses its sincere appreciation to the countries
that participated in drafting such a concise and effective
draft resolution. We hope that it will be adopted
unanimously, thus demonstrating to the broader
international community that the Security Council is indeed
united in supporting the consolidation of peace in
Guatemala and, in particular, the role that the United
Nations has to play in that process.
In closing, let me take this opportunity to state that the
Government of Japan has followed with great interest and
concern the peace and democratization process in
Guatemala. At the time of the presidential election in
November 1995, for example, Japan sent an electoral
observer and made a contribution of $100,000 to the
Organization of American States for its election monitoring
activities. It also sent two electoral observers for the
presidential election held in January 1996. Japan intends to
make further contributions, both political and financial, to
the peace process in Guatemala, taking into account the
specific needs of that country.
I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/1997/18.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Chile, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation,
Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
China
The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 14 in favour, one against and no abstentions. The
draft resolution has not been adopted, owing to the
negative vote of a permanent member of the Security
Council.
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting on the
draft resolution.
Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): It is most
unfortunate that the Security Council could not reach
agreement on authorizing a military observer component
to the United Nations Human Rights Verification Mission
in Guatemala, the Mission that we call MINUGUA. After
36 years of war, the Guatemalan people have the chance
to fulfil their rich potential. The Guatemalan Government,
the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (URNG),
the United Nations, the Friends of Guatemala and others
have invested significant diplomatic and financial
resources in bringing peace to Guatemala. We regret that
one member of the Council was not able to give the
larger interest of regional peace and security the priority
it deserves.
Since democratic government was restored in
Guatemala in 1985, the United States has supported a
negotiated settlement of the conflict. We are proud to
have served as a member of the Group of Friends since
1994, when the United Nations took over moderation of
the negotiations. The international community has made
peace in Guatemala a priority. The tireless efforts of the
Government of Guatemala and the Guatemalan National
Revolutionary Unity, together with the international
community, have now come to fruition. On 29 December
in Guatemala City, the Government of Guatemala and
URNG ended their nation’s long, bloody civil war, which

17

Security Council
Fifty-second year
has cost more than 100,000 lives. The realization of a
comprehensive peace in Guatemala is a tremendous
achievement. It ends the last conflict in Central America
and the longest-running armed conflict in the hemisphere.
The most immediate need in Guatemala is to
demobilize 3,000 URNG guerrillas and help them return to
civilian life. Unfortunately, this body failed to agree upon
the Secretary-General’s recommendation for the
establishment of a military observer group to monitor that
demobilization.
URNG and the Guatemalan Government agree on the
need for a short demobilization period that will quickly get
URNG fighters back into productive civilian life. The
United States and the other Friends of Guatemala will
continue to seek a means to that end.
The reconstruction of Guatemala’s infrastructure and
reconciliation in Guatemalan society will take time and
substantial international support: financial and moral.
Donors will meet in Brussels later this month to coordinate
international assistance to Guatemala. The United States has
already begun an ambitious post-war assistance programme
that will provide millions of dollars in additional aid as part
of a process to create a new, peaceful and prosperous
Guatemala.
Despite this setback today, we remain determined that
those who support peace in Guatemala will find a way to
support the noble ends of the Guatemalan peace process.
Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): As this is the first time that my country is
speaking as a member of the Security Council, I should like
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir. Under your able
leadership and guidance, we are in the best possible hands.
That is my conclusion after having worked with you since
1 January. My delegation also takes this opportunity to
express its appreciation to you for your enormous diligence,
which has made it possible for our informal consultations
of recent days to conclude today and for the Security
Council to pronounce itself — however regrettably — on
the dispatch to Guatemala of a mission of military
observers.
Our gratitude also goes to the Group of Friends of
Guatemala and the Secretariat.
As a Central American country and brother of
Guatemala, Costa Rica has embraced the enormous task
undertaken by the Guatemalan people to achieve a firm and

18

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
lasting peace. Ten years ago in Guatemala, we Central
Americans took a firm decision to assume direction of a
negotiating process that we ourselves had designed and
agreed upon, which led to the end of fighting in our
region, the achievement of peace, the consolidation of
democracy, respect for human rights and the
reconciliation of our peoples.
In Guatemala in 1987, the Presidents of Central
America effectively endorsed a procedure for the
establishment of a firm and lasting peace in Central
America, known as the Esquipulas II Agreement, which
consolidated the fruits of the useful negotiations
undertaken over three years through the mediation of the
Contadora Group.
Based on Esquipulas II, Central America, with the
active support and solidarity of the international
community, carried through a broad political negotiation
and dialogue, the achievements of which are now before
us: War has ended in Nicaragua, El Salvador and, now,
in Guatemala. In the five Central American countries,
there are democratic Governments established through
free and pluralistic electoral processes. Throughout the
countries of the area, there is a broad pattern of respect
for individual freedoms and the rule of law is the basis of
political organization.
In this scenario developed by Central America, our
Guatemalan brothers have carried out an important
exercise of negotiation and national reconciliation that has
brought peace, an end to a long-standing conflict of over
35 years and the establishment of a series of political,
economic and social agreements aimed at transforming
and modernizing Guatemala.
Guatemala has not only put an end to war; it has
made significant strides towards establishing a broadbased, pluralistic, multiethnic society that respects human
rights and whose fundamental aim, based on national
reconciliation, is the achievement of progress,
development, justice and equity for all its inhabitants,
without exception.
It is a source of special satisfaction to my country
that this noteworthy effort of the people of Guatemala has
always enjoyed the valuable support of the international
community, expressed, on the one hand, by the teamwork
of the Group of Friends — made up of Colombia, France,
Mexico, Norway, Spain, the United States of America and
Venezuela — in the context of the negotiating process;
and, on the other, by the United Nations, whose active

Security Council
Fifty-second year
presence was essential in promoting a resolution of the
conflict and fostering the conditions necessary to the return
of refugees and displaced persons, the observance of human
rights and development assistance, and as an expression of
the political support necessary for the pursuance of peace
negotiations through the active and successful mediation of
the Secretariat.
For over 10 years, the United Nations has clearly and
unyieldingly supported the peace efforts of Central
America. Repeated resolutions of the General Assembly
have established the necessary political backing and support
for the tasks of development. Moreover, this Council,
through its own competence established under the Charter,
has given constant attention to the situation in Central
America and responded promptly to the peacekeeping needs
of the region, as evidenced by the operations of the United
Nations Observer Group in Central America, the United
Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador and the United
Nations Mission for the Verification of Human Rights and
of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala.
For all these reasons, my delegation deeply regrets that
on this, Costa Rica’s first opportunity to participate in the
formal voting of the Security Council, and with regard to
a situation that has nothing whatsoever to do with the peace
process in Guatemala, one delegation has exercised its right
of veto. We have thus lost an excellent opportunity for the
United Nations to assume a leading and active role in that
brotherly Central American country.
The exercise of this veto is doubly regrettable, given
the clear and firm assertions of that delegation that it agrees
with the objectives and has no objection whatever to the
text of the draft resolution submitted to the Security
Council by the Group of Friends, which enjoys the
sponsorship of my country and several other member
States.
The situation in which we find ourselves following the
exercise of that veto is extremely damaging not to
Guatemala or to Central America, but to the United
Nations. The Government of Guatemala and the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca have faithfully
carried out all that was agreed in and established by the
peace accords. We are sure that, in the worst-case scenario,
there will be friendly democratic countries ready to carry
out the important functions that would have been entrusted
to that mission of military observers, if the Government of
Guatemala requests it of them. For the United Nations,
however, this is the loss of an extraordinary opportunity to

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
uphold the objectives of the Charter and to maintain its
presence and influence on a peace process that,
fortunately, is drawing to a close and with which not only
Guatemala, but the entire Central American region, is
closing the door on many years of war, death and
destruction.
It is particularly painful for the delegation of Costa
Rica to have to make this statement. My country has
played an active and leading role in the Central American
peace process. Without being involved in the armed
conflicts that have torn our region over the past two
decades, Costa Rica was actively committed to the
negotiations that ultimately achieved peace and
reconciliation in Nicaragua and El Salvador. We would
have been happy today if, with our vote, the Security
Council had unanimously approved the dispatch of that
mission of military observers to Guatemala. We deeply
regret that this has not been possible. The damage is to
the United Nations.
The President: I thank the representative of Costa
Rica for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): The Russian Federation notes with great
satisfaction that, after long years of armed conflict and
instability, Central America has now embarked on a stage
of consolidating peace processes and strengthening
democratic institutions and economic recovery. It is one
of the few regions of the world in recent times to achieve
genuine and tangible progress in the settlement of internal
conflicts. This has been possible largely because of the
efforts of the international community, and above all of
the United Nations.
The signing between the Government of Guatemala
and the insurgent movement Unidad Revolucionaria
Nacional Guatemalteca on 29 December 1996 of the
Agreement on a Firm and Lasting Peace was an important
event, marking the culmination of a long-standing internal
conflict in that country and the last hotbed of armed
resistance in the Central American region. We are sure
that the achievement of peace in Guatemala, after 36
years of civil war, will promote the strengthening of
stability and security not only there, but throughout all
Central America.
Russia, which has consistently advocated a firm
political settlement in Guatemala, feels that the efforts of
the international community should now be directed
towards strengthening the peace process in that country.

19

Security Council
Fifty-second year
For our part, we are prepared to help further in the interests
of favourable external conditions for a successful
completion of that process.
Highest commendations deservedly go to the activities
of the United Nations mediation group in the negotiations
between the Guatemalan parties. We would like to express
to the members of that group our gratitude for their
contribution to achieving peace in Guatemala.
Bearing in mind the requests addressed by the
Guatemalan parties to the United Nations, the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and the views of
the Group of Friends of the Guatemalan Peace Process,
Russia supports the proposal to give to the United Nations
Mission for the Verification of Human Rights and of
Compliance with the Commitments of the Comprehensive
Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA),
on a temporary basis, a group of 155 military observers for
a three-month period, with a clearly defined one-time
mandate.
In light of what I have said, the Russian delegation
voted for that draft resolution. We regret that it was put to
a vote with such haste, at a time when consultations on the
issue could have been continued.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The Chinese delegation has just voted against the
draft resolution before us. This is not a situation we would
have liked to see. It was caused entirely by the erroneous
acts of the Government of Guatemala.
China has all along supported the peace process in
Guatemala and the relevant resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly. We welcome and are gratified by the
peace Agreement reached by the two parties in Guatemala,
and sincerely hope that peace and stability will prevail in
the country.
Regrettably, however, the Government of Guatemala
has, for four consecutive years, unscrupulously supported
activities aimed at splitting China at the United Nations, in
flagrant violation of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and in disregard of repeated
démarches of the Chinese Government. It was furthermore
bent on inviting, in disregard of the solemn warnings of the
Chinese Government, the authorities of Taiwan to the
signing ceremony of the peace Agreement in Guatemala,
thereby providing them with a venue for secessionist
activities against China.

20

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
It is the unshirkable responsibility of all Member
States to safeguard the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Government of
Guatemala, by its own doing, has trampled upon the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the Charter of
the United Nations, contravened General Assembly
resolution 2758 (XXVI), infringed upon China’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, interfered in its
internal affairs and hurt the feelings of the Chinese
people.
The Guatemalan authorities cannot expect to have
the cooperation of China in the Security Council while
taking actions to infringe upon China’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. No country’s peace process should be
at the expense of another country’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Despite the actions taken by the Government of
Guatemala that harmed China’s interests, we still made
reasonable suggestions in a constructive and forwardlooking approach in order to find a proper solution to the
issue at hand. We hoped that the Government of
Guatemala could take concrete actions to correct its
mistakes. This fully shows China’s sincerity. However,
the Government of Guatemala turned a deaf ear to all this
and clung to its erroneous position, thereby setting serious
obstacles in the way of our support for the draft
resolution. Undoubtedly, the Government of Guatemala
should be held responsible for all the consequences
arising therefrom.
I wish to reaffirm the principled position of China
on the question of Taiwan. There is but one China in the
world and the Government of the People’s Republic of
China is the sole legal Government representing the entire
Chinese people. The question of Taiwan is a major
question of principle that bears upon China’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the cause of national reunification.
It falls entirely within China’s internal affairs and brooks
no outside interference whatsoever. The Chinese
Government has no room for compromise on this
question. It is the unswerving determination of the
Chinese Government to safeguard its State sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
Finally, I wish to point out that if the Government
of Guatemala is indeed sincere, values its peace process
and moves to remove the obstacles, the Chinese
delegation may reconsider the authorization of the
deployment of military observers in Guatemala by the
Security Council.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item
on its agenda.

3730th meeting
10 January 1997
The meeting rose at 8.35 p.m.

21
