TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 23 JULY 1969

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1488) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/933 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SIPV.1488

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Offi.?ial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-EIGHTH MEETING
eld in New York on Wednesday,23 July 1969, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Ibrahima BOYE (Senegal).
Present:

The representatives

of the following

4. The first speaker on my list is the representative of the
Soviet Union, on whom I now call.

States:

Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,

5. Mr. ZAKHAROV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, before I proceed
to state the position of the Soviet Union on the item on the
agenda of the Security Council, may I be allowed, on behalf
of the delegation of the USSR, to join in the congratulations addressed at the Council’s last meeting by you,
Mr. President, to the United States astronauts and to the
people and Government of the United States on their
outstanding success-the first landing of human beings on
the moon from the spacecraft Apollo 11.

Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1488)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/933 1).

6. We should like to express our admiration for the
courage and endurance shown by the astronauts of the
United States of America in boldly confronting the
unknown, and to wish them a safe return to earth.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

7. Mr. President, this is not the first time the Security
Council has considered the question of armed raids by the
Portuguese colonialists against the young independent
African States. In recent years, Senegal and Guinea, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville), the United
Republic of Tanzania and Zambia have been the targets of
attacks by the Portuguese armed forces.

Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9331)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings, I invite
the representatives of Portugal, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Somalia to take places at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. E. OsanyaNyyneque (Kenya) took a place at the Council table.

8. Now, the tension created by Portugal on the borders of
Zambia and Mozambique has reached a very acute point.
Portugal’s armed incursions are assuming a character which
threatens the territorial integrity and inviolability of
Zambia; they constitute a danger to peace and security in
that part of the world, and make it necessary for the
Security Council to take measures to curb the Portuguese
colonialists. This was convincingly stated in the speech by
the representative of Zambia, Mr. Mwaanga, who cited facts
attesting, in particular, to the deliberate bombing of
Zambian territory by Portuguese armed forces, causing
bloodshed in the village of Lote and occasioning material
damage. The representatives of Algeria, Somalia and Tan
zania also spoke of this in their statements before the
Security Council, The representative of Hungary, Mr. Csatorday, made a well-reasoned statement on this subject at
the Council’s last meeting.

3. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The f&mrity Council will now consider the question before it.
Before calling on the first speaker on my list, however, I
should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the fact that the representative of Burundi, in a
letter dated 22 July 1969, has requested that Burundi be
added to the list of co-signers of the letter of 18 July 1969
fsee S/9340 and Add.l-31.

9. Portugal’s actions on the Zambian border constitute a
link in the chain of Portugal’s colonialist POhCY which is
aimed at crushing the national liberation movements in
southern Africa and maintaining the African peoples under
the domination of the colonialists and racists. The action
taken by the representatives of thirty-four independent
African States on 18 July 1968 in addressing a letter [fee
S/9340 and 4dd.l-31 to the President of the SecurltY

At the invitation of the President, Mr. B. de Miranda
(Portugal), Mr. M. A. Foum (United Republic of Tanzania)
and Mr. A. A. Farah (Somalia) took places at the Council
table.
2, The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have just
received a communication dated 23 July 1969 [S/93.50]
from the representative of Kenya asking to be invited to
participate in the Council’s debate on the item before it. If
I hear no objection, and in accordance with the provisional
rules of procedure and the practice of the Council, I
propose to invite the representative of Kenya to participate
in the discussion, without the right to vote.

1

Council on behalf of the Organization of African Unity,
constitutes an impressive condemnation of Lisboil’s policy;
that letter emphasizes Africa’s concern at the perpetual
threat posed by the Portuguese mercenaries in their war
against the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(E&au).

15. It is clear, of course, that neither Portugal nor the
fascist racist rdgimes in the Republic of South Africa and
Southern Rhodesia would be able to resist world public
opinion, disregard the United Nations, incur their enormous
military expenditure, and wage wars were they not receiv,.
ing direct or indirect political, economic, financial and
military aid from international monopolies and from the
NATO military bloc, It is precisely by force of arms and by
relying on NATO aid that the Portuguese colonialists are
seeking to maintain their domination. As the representatives of the national liberation movements showedduring
the recent meetings of the Committee of Twenty-Four1
held away from Headquarters, Portugal is making tide use!
of NATO weapons in order to wage its colonial war in1
Africa, The overlapping of the military and political
interests of the Portuguese colonialists and their NATO1
partners is also responsible for the support which, as we all1
know, Portugal receives in the United Nations from certain.
States.

10. For eight years, Portugal has been waging a war of
annihilation against these peoples, a war which arousesthe
indignation of hundreds of millions of people of goodwill
throughout the world. Portugal disregards the numerous
decisions of the United Nations calling for the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
11. Portugal’s latest actions once again clearly demonstrate that it is not worth waiting for any kind of
“evolution” or “liberalization” from the Portuguese colonialists, which some may have expected. The facts show that
Portugal is not only not cutting down, but, on the contrary,
is intensifying its military operations against the national
liberation movements of the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau); Portugal is increasing its military
expenditure and its army; it is strengthening its military and
police forces in those Territories; it is establishing in those
territories an increasing number of new paramilitary
organizations which are called upon to carry out punitive
actions against the forces of national liberation; it is
increasing the strength and expanding the activities of the
political police force which is waging a campaign of bloody
terror against the freedom fighters. All this shows that the
Lisbon r&me, together with its partners in Pretoria and
Salisbury, is nurturing far-reaching plans against the peoples
of southern Africa.

16. The liberation of southern Africa, which is one of thei
last areas of colonial domination, is of particular signif%
cance for the future of Africa and the causeof peace and it
is the duty of all freedom-loving States to support the
national liberation movements in colonial Territories, The
Soviet Union fully supports this just and heroic struggle.
17. Portugal’s actions on the Zambian border are part of a
plan designed to strike a blow at one of the countries which
uphold Africa’s right to full and final liberation from
colonialism, These actions on the Zambian border should
be considered in connexion with other facts which have
been reported recently: the concentration of large Southern
Rhodesian and South African contingents along the Zambesi river and on Zambia’s southern borders, the constant
reconnaissance flights of South African aircraft over Zam.
bian territory, dropping spies and saboteurs from Southern
Rhodesia into that country. In resorting to armed provocation against independent African States, Portugal. and the
racist rQimes of the Republic of South Africa and
Southern Rhodesia are trying to prevent free Africa from
giving assistance to the national liberation movements,,
which are constantly expanding their military activities
against the colonialists, and to intimidate the African
countries bordering on the colonialist and racist strongholds
of southern Africa.

12. Portugal is one of the active participants in the racist
colonialist bloc, the “unholy alliance”, which unites the
South African and Southern Rhodesian racists and the
Portuguese colonialists. The aim of this military and
political bloc is to crush the struggle of the peoples of
southern Africa for freedom and independence.
13. While the Government of Portugal is waging war
against the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau), the South African racists, having established a
regime of apartheid and oppression in their country,
illegally maintain Namibia under their domination, and
openly render military, economic and other assistanceto
the Portuguese colonialists. As was shown recently when
the Security Council considered the question of Southern
Rhodesia, Portugal and the Republic of South Africa are
assisting the r&me of the Southern Rhodesian racists in
every way possible. All this is aggravating the situation in
southern Africa and constitutes a serious threat to peace
and security in that part of the world.

18. The increasingly frequent acts of aggressionc~rtdted by Portugal against the independent African countries
demonstrate the danger which the maintenance of the
vestiges of colonialism represents to the causeof peaceia
the African continent and the whole world. Even in the
resolution (218 (1965)J which it adopted on 23 November
1965, the Security Council drew attention to the fact that
the situation resulting from Portugal’s policy towards the
African population of its colonies and towards the neighbouring African States was seriously disturbing intefi
national peace and security. As we all kndw, the General
Assembly has strongly condemned the colonial war being
waged by the Government of Portugal against the peaceful
peoples of the Territories under its domination, a war

14. There are plenty of facts attesting to the co-ordination
of action between the parties to this “unholy alliance”, and
to the assistancewhich they render each other in crushing
the national liberation movements. Recent events show that
this criminal alliance, which is a weapon of the imperialists
for the collective suppression of the liberation movements
in southern Africa, constitutes a threat not only to the
national liberation movements, but to the newly independent African States too.

1 SpecialCommittee on the Situation with regardto the ImPlp
mentation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to
Colonial Countriesand Peoples.
2

L

-

which the Assembly has described as “a crime against
humanity and a grave threat to international peace and
.security”[resolution 2270 (XXzr)l.

27. Later, the representative of Zambia gavehis version of
the alleged incidents at the village of Lote. According to
him, bombings of the same village took place on 30 June,
2 July and 4 July. If the first time the village was bombed
wason 30 June and the last time wason 4 July, we fail to
understand his earlier reference to 30 June and 3 July as
the outside dates of the incidents, There is obviously some
confusion. Besides, he mentioned no incident dated 3 July.
The three dates he mentioned in connexion with Lote were
30 June, 2 July and 4 July. From a single day he passesto
three days. All this is highly confusing to my delegation.

19. The Security Council should draw the necessary
conclusionsfrom all this. Our times demand that our planet
be purged of the evil of colonialism, that its last vestigesbe
removed, and that its m-emergence in new and disguised
formsbe prevented.
21). The Soviet Union, as its Minister for Foreign Affairs,
or, A. A. Gromyko, stated in his report to a meeting of the
SupremeSoviet on 10 July 1969, is true to the principles of
support for national liberation movements, and of strengthening the political and economic independence of States
whichhave appeared on the map of the world as a result of
the downfall of the colonial system. The Soviet Union is in
favour of friendship and active co-operation with the
African States.

28. What happened at Lote? It is difficult to know for
certain from this distance. To clarify issuessuch as these,
the Luso-Zambian mixed commission has been a very useful
instrument in the past and could have been used in this
instance to mutual advantage but for the fact that Zambia
came rushing to the Security Council. It still can be used.
Meanwhile, all that my delegation knows is that between 30
June and 3 July Portuguese security forces, having been
attacked by armed raiders coming from Zambia, mounted a
clean-up operation in a locality situated at 14O22 5” south
latitude and 32” 10’ east longitude-that is to say, well
within Portuguese territory and a good distance away from
the Zambian frontier. The attacking raiders fled back into
Zambia and possibly went to the village of Lote.

21. The Security Council has an obligation to put the
Portuguese colonialists in their place, to call them to order,
22. The USSR delegation supports Zambia’s just demands
that the Council should severely condemn the aggressive
acts of the Portuguese colonialists against that African
country; that it should invite Portugal to put an immediate
end to the violation of Zambia’s territorial integrity and to
unprovoked attacks on that country; that Zambian citizens
who have been kidnapped by the Portuguese armed forces
should be released and that all property illegally seized by
Portugal’s troops on Zambian territory should be returned
without delay. The Council must warn Portugal that if
Portugal fails to comply with these demands the Council
will take further measures in conformity with the Charter
of the United Nations.

29. I now come to the alleged Balovale incident. There
was no incident involving Portuguese security forces in
Balovale or anywhereelse in that part of Zambian territory.
However, on 23 June there was an encounter inside
Portuguese territory, in the vicinity, between Portuguese
security forces and raiders infiltrating from Zambia. The
placeof the encounter is situated at 13 kilometres north of
the southern frontier of Angola with Zambia and 36
kilometres west of the eastern frontier.

23. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on the list is the representative of Portugal, on
whom I now call.

30. In that encounter severalraiders werewounded. They
fled back to Zambia, where some of the wounded men
might have died, Among the things left behind by the
raiders there were membership cardsof the United National
Independence Party, the Zambian governmental party. My
delegation is prepared to exhibit or to circulate those cards
in the Security Council as soon as they are received in our
Permanent Mission. Meanwhile, we are led to formulate the
following hypothesis: either the raiders were members of
the Zambian governmental party or, at least, there were
Zambians among the infiltrating raiders. In either case, it
would reveal the support, or at least the connivance, of the
Zambian Government in the hostile activities being conducted from Zambia against Portugal.

24. Mr. MIRANDA (Portugal): When my delegation took
the floor at the 1486th meeting on 18 July, we had not yet
had time to read and analyse in detail the statement that
had been made earlier in the meeting by the representative
of Zambia. We could do little more than refer to his letter
of 15 July 1969 (S/9331] to the Security Council and to
rely on some notes which we had taken as he spoke. Now
that the provisional verbatim record of his intervention of
18 July /1486th meeting] is available, we are in a position
to complete our answer to his allegations.
25. The Council will have noticed that the Zambian letter
calling for a meeting of the Security Council makes a single
concrete allegation, referring to an incident said to have
occurred at the village of Lote on 30 June 1969. We gave
our answer to that allegation, We rejected it as false. We
reiterate that position.

31. That incident of 23 June, which took place well inside
Portuguese territory, is known to have been invoked by the
Zambian Home Minister and wasalso mentioned here in the
Security Council by the representative of Zambia. Between
the two, there seems to be a difference asto the number of
Zambians alleged to have died.

26. ln his intervention tlze representative of Zambia
indicated, first, that he had intended to deal only with
incidents covering the period between 30 June and 3 July,
and, secondly, that be would have to deal with one more
incident-namely, that of Balovale-which he alleged had
taken place since the filing of his complaint.

32. What is the conclusion to be drawn? Incidents are
provoked inside Portuguese territory by raiders coming
from Zambia; the raiders flee back to Zambian territory
where they are given shelter; then Zambia alleges that the
incidents took place inside Zambian territory. This wasin
3

the Government of the Republic of Zambia would
continue to take appropriate measures to ensure that
Zambian territory would not be used as a basefor hostile
activities against Portuguese territory.” [1486th meeting,

fact the sequence of events bearing on the alleged Balovale
incident as on many other similar Zambian allegations. May
it not be that the same sequence has occurred also in
connexion with the alleged Lote affair?

pa. 12.1

33. Although it falls outside the scope of the orginal
Zambian complaint, I shall comment on another allegation
made by the representative of Zambia in his intervention on
18 July, becauseit refersto a recent date. I refer to the case
of Mr. Jeremiah Lushindi. My delegation cannot help
expressing great surprise that that casehas been brought UP
here. The case was fully explained to the Zambian High
Commissioner in London by the Portuguese Ambassador in
that capital. The High Commissioner was told that, following an investigation conducted by the Portuguese authorities, it had been found that no Portuguese forces were
involved in the incident. On the night of 25 June, some
elements of the local population of Rivurigo, in Angola,
angered by the ill-treatment meted out in Zambia to a
woman of their tribe, apparently crossed the frontier and
captured an Angolan, resident in Zambia, whom they
considered responsible for the ill-treatment. The name of
the Angolan in question is known to be Jeremiah Lispuguoi
Niyinla. It is possible that he is the same person as
Jeremiah Lushindi. That matter is still under investigation
by the Portuguese authorities. After that information
conveyed by us in a spirit of co-operation to one Zambian
diplomat, it is hardly proper for another Zambian diplomat
to raise the point here with a different objective.

Zambia thus recognized and accepted its internations
obligation and made a definite promise to Portugal. Hasit:
fulfilled that promise? Can Zambia deny that since June
1968 there have been hundreds of armed raids carried out
from Zambian territory into Portuguese territory? I men..
tioned some of them in my last intervention, and they are
by no means few: not less than 110 attacks against the.
Benguela Railway alone between 1 January and April 1969.
Nevertheless, we have kept the Benguela Railway open for
Zambian traffic, knowing its vital importance to Zambian
trade.
36. The conclusion cannot be avoided that Zambia makes
promises in bad faith, proceeds in bad faith in its dealings
with Portugal. The latest evidence of that bad faith, as I
have already had occasion to point out, is the treacherous
way in which the Zambian immigration authorities tricked
two innocent Portuguese officers, by inviting them to leave
behind their arms and approach the frontier and by
detaining them afterwards. Since then the Zambian Govemment has itself become a party to this serious breach of
international good conduct.
37. At the 1486th meeting, the Zambian representative
quoted some words attributed by the pressto one of the
two detained Portuguese officers. Those wordsmake sense
only as an expression of his joy and surprise at the prospect
of being released as ordered by the Zambian High Court.
Surely he would not have uttered them had he known that
he would continue to be detained by the arbitrary ordersof
the Zambian Government. How is one to characterizethis
sort of conduct on the part of a Government? The Security
Council cannot be indifferent to the fact that two innocent
Portuguese are faithlessly held in Zambia. My delegation
has already formally requested the Council to call upon the
Zambian Government to release them forthwith and unconditionally, and to place them back on the Angolan frontier.
I now reiterate this request.

34. The Zambian representative went on to recite a long
litany of other allegations going back to 1966. Those
allegations are wholly irrelevant to this debate not only
because, by the Zambian representative’s own declaration,
they fall outside the scope of this debate-they are not
incidents which may have occurred between 30 June and
3 July-but also because all of them have been investigated
and settled by bilateral agreement. As I stated at the
1486th meeting, many of those alleged incidents were
found to have been provoked from the Zambian side. In
one or two cases,where the fault lay with the Portuguese
side, we expressedregret and paid the compensation asked
for by Zambia. Although the situation which gave rise to
even those incidents had been created by Zambia-namely,
by authorizing armed raids from its territory against ‘the
neighbouring Portuguese territories-we paid the compensation as a gesture of goodwill in the hope that Zambia would
thereafter put an end to those raids, as indeed it ought to
do in the fulfilment of its obligations as a member of the
international community.
35. In his statement on 18 July, the representative of
Zambia referred to the bilateral agreement arrived at in
June 1968 between Zambia and Portugal. That is a clear
admission that all previous allegations were dealt with and
considered by both sides as liquidated. Why does the
Zambian representative bring them up now? I cannot help
commenting that thereby Zambia is seeking to buttress a
case which does not exist. I refer to its present complaint
against Portugal. There is obviously more than meets the
eye in Zambia’s attitude. But let us proceed with the
analysis of the Zambian representative’s statement; he said:

38. The representative of Zambia has tried to create the
impression that the Luso-Zambian talks have been sbsadoned by the Zambian Government becausethe Portuguese
“have become intransigent”. Lacking arguments, he tries
slogans: Portuguese intransigence, Portuguese arrogance,
words which have no definite content and are purelY
demagogic. I take this opportunity to refer to the wild
accusations he levelled in this style against the Portuguese
armed forces in the concluding part of his main statement.
My delegation indignantly repudiates these allegations as
false and unworthy of attention. My delegation also expects
that the Zambian representative, after further thought, will
also withdraw the grossly insulting epithet which he has
applied to the Portuguese security elements in Angola sad
Mozambique. That epithet is not only unjust, but alsoirt
bad taste.

“The Zambian side, on its part, reassured the Portuguese delegation”-at the bilateral talks in 1968-“that

39. As I have said, the representative of Zambia has tdsd
to make out that his Government left the Luso-Zambisn

4

talks because the Portuguese became intransigent. In what
way did thcj become intransigent? The Zambian representative admits that his Government believes it wiser to
negotiate on a bilateral basis. We, on our side, have always
been ready for bilateral negotiations, and our attitude
remains unchanged. Where, then, is the Portuguese intransigence?

45. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker is the representativeof Kenya, on whom I now call.
46. Mr. OSANYA-NYYNEQUE (Kenya): Mr. President, I
thank you for inviting my delegation to participate in this
important debate. On the face of things, the debate is a
confrontation between Portugal and the Republic of
Zambia. At bottom, however, what is happening here
represents a general confrontation between, on the one
hand, an obnoxious system dying hard in the face of
contrary forces, to wit, European colonialism in its fmal
throes, and, on the other hand, the forces of liberation
determined never to yield to the former. The debate is thus
justly a causefor pan-African concern.

40. The Zarnbian side has made allegations to the effect
that Zambian territory has been violated by Podugd.
Zambia admits, on the other hand, that hostile elements
cross from its territory in order to attack Portuguese
territory. This admission has been made publicly on a
number of occasions. No law, no article of the Charter, no
resolution of the General Assembly or even of the Security
Council
can exonerate a Government which authorizes such
activities against a foreign territory, for the good reason
that such activities are the stuff of which frontier tensions
are made, If the contrary were the case, that would strike at
the very root of the rule of law in international relations.

47. I should, parenthetically, at this point like to convey
to you, Mr. President, the wishes of my delegation that
your term as President of the Council will be crowned with
success.It is not that we doubt the competence with which
you will preside over the proceedings of the Council this
month. On the contrary, my delegation feels sure that your
term will bring to the deliberations of the Council that
wisdom characteristic of your country, so well known as a
home of outstanding African scholarship.

41. Either the Zambian Government can control its
frontiers but does not wish to do so, or it cannot, If it
cannot, its responsibility is grave enough; it is even greater
if it can control its frontiers and will not do so. In either
case the Zambian Government cannot escaperesponsibility
for the attacks made on Portuguese territory by elements
proceeding from its territory and fleeing back for sanctuary, which is given them in Zambia. And Zambia, as I
pointed out a while ago, had already promised Portugal not
to allow such activities acrossthe frontier.

48. My delegation followed with keen interest the statements made in this Council on 18 July 1969, both by my
brother the representative of Zambia and by the representative of Portugal, who has this afternoon seen fit to go
over the same terrain, My delegation is easily convinced
that my distinguished brother, Mr. Mwaanga, has “told it
like it is”; the Portuguese representative, on the other hand,
has told it very much “like it is not”.

42. In the course of this debate there have been allegations
to the effect that Portugal is using NATO arms in Africa.
We have rejected such allegations in the past and we do so
again. My delegation challenges anyone who makes such
allegations to prove that arms supplied to us under NATO
arrangements are being used anywhere outside the NATO
area.

49. In his brilliant statement on 18 July, Mr.Mwaanga
gave a very detailed, if also comprehensive, account of
unprovoked raids carried out by Portugal on Zambian
territory. That account seems to have been deliberately
misunderstood by the representative of Portugal. He, for
example, does not like the fact that Mr.Mwaanga recounted events which took place as far back as 1966; he
would have the Council disregard those events on the
pretext that bilateral talks between Portugal and Zambia
have been taking place since then. He even expressed
surprise that Mr. Mwaangamentioned those events in spite
of the so-called bilateral talks. Yet, is it not precisely
because of those talks that the events of 1966 become a
significant part of the sorry affair now before the Council?

43. Many other allegations have been made here, both by
the Zambian representative and by other speakers who have
later taken the floor, in regard to matters that have nothing
to do with the present debate. My delegation does not feel
bound to deal with such allegations and limits itself to
rejecting them.
44. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have just
received a letter dated 23 July [S/9351/ from the
representative of the United Arab Republic asking to be
invited to participate in the Council’s debate on the
question before it, In accordance with the provisional rules
of procedure and the practice of the Council, and with the
consent of the members of the Council, I shall invite the
representative of the United Arab Republic to participate in
the Council’s debate, without the right to vote and to take
the place. reserved for birn at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when his turn comes to
speak.

50. By the admission of the Portuguese representative,
Portuguese raids on Zambian territory have continued
despite the talks by which he now purports to set so much
store. All the more surely is Zambia justified in seeking a
different solution. Quite correctly, the solution which
Zambia has chosen is that of bringing the matter to the
attention of the Security Council. The fact that three years
have elapsed since what is considered by the Portuguese
representative as the first incidents, in 1966, should not
lead us to treat those incidents as forgotten episodes. On
the contrary, they provide evidence, to which the Portuguese raids in 1967 and 1968 and the current ones are mere
additions, to Portuguese culpability. Above all, the fact that
Zambia has not up until now brought those Portuguese acts
of aggression before the Security Council is but a demon-

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. El-Erian (United
Arab Republic) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.
5

57. On this happy and historic occasion, I wish 110
associate myself with you, Mr. President, and with other
previous speakers in expressing my heartfelt congratulations
to the United States representative and, through him, to the
people and Government of the United States for their
epoch-making successin landing mankind’s first ambassa.
dors on the moon. We salute the genius and ingenuity of
the space scientists and technicians and the astound@ feat
of the three astronauts and join in prayer for the safemtarn
of those brave men.

stration of the patience with which the Zambian Govemment has handled the provoking, cowardly imperialist
exploits of Portugal.
51. The Portuguese representative has indeed taken issue
with the fact that Zambia has raised this matter here at all.
He seems to imply that Zambia is the guilty party by so
doing. This is a heinous perversion of logic which more than
amply demonstrates Portuguese disregard for principled
conduct. My delegation appeals to the Council to view the
situation in its proper perspective, namely, that the
Zambian complaint is a legitimate one brought before the
Council by a young, peaceable nation surrounded and
menaced by shamelessly hostile neighbours that, after all,
have no right to be its neighbours.

58. In this connexion, I should also like to expresscur
satisfaction at the atmosphere of growing cordiality and
co-operation between the spaceQowers, in accordancewith
the letter and spirit of the Outer Space Treaty.2 Tins
indeed augurs well for the peace and progress of mankind.
As the moon has always symbolized a messageof peaceaa.d
tranquillity, so also will this new moon era, we hope, bring
a more stable peace on earth and better understanding said
co-operation among all peoples.

52. As every member of this Council knows, the presence
of Portugal as a colonizing Power in Africa is bitterly
abhorred by all Africans. That Zambia has not taken up
arms’ against Portugal for the latter’s suppressive presence
on African soil contiguous to Zambian territory should not
bl taken to mean that Zambia accepts the anomalous
situation. As we have already observed, Zambia, while its
patience still lasts, is merely pursuing, as is the rest of
independent Africa, a policy of “live and let live”, even
though this means, for the time being, living next door to
the devil. Zambia’s policy is that of a reasonable and
peace-loving country, and one dares to hope that Portugal
will learn to appreciate that fact.

59. Opening the discussion on the question before the
Security Council, the representative of Zambia outlined ,a
series of violations of Zambian territorial integrity by
Portuguese armed forces over the past three years, WehavIe
carefully heard and read his statement. We have paid equsi
attention to the statement made by the representativeof
Portugal in reply to the Zambian complaint.
‘60. The representative of Portugal has dwelt at length on
the theme of bilateral negotiations-the usefulnessof such
negotiations, their relevance in the context of the present
Zambian complaint, and the obligation of the parties tc
pursue these means under Article 33 of the Charter of the
United Nations. My delegation holds the view that bilateral
negotiations constitute the best means of settling differences between States. We fully believe in the usefulnessof
bilateral negotiations.

53. The Council, of course, is aware that the unprovoked
raids on Zambian territory by the Portuguese forces of
occupation are but manifestations of the general menace
emanating from the unholy alliance of Portugal itself, the
fascist regime in South Africa and the rebel regime in
Zimbabwe. These three latter-day pedlars of imperialism
present a gigantic threat which, unfortunately, drawsheavy
support from outside Africa. It is a sorry state of affairs
that some of that outside support comes from members of
this Council.

61. However, when the representative of Portugal alleger
bad faith on the part of Zambia for abandoning bilateral
negotiations and bringing the question before the Council,
we are a little sceptical of the veracity of that allegation. AS
the records of the Council show, the incident of 30 Juneia
the village of Lote is not an isolated one that has occurred
in the frontier areas between. Zambia and the Portuguaz
colonial territories, The fact that the Government af
Zambia has come before the Council after more than 60
violations of its territorial integrity by Portugal over a
period of three years shows the restraint and moderation
with which it has conducted itself in its relations Wit11
Portugal. Evidence submitted in the Council indicates that
Zambia had exhausted all possible means of bilateral
negotiations with Portugal before it deemed it absclntel)r
necessary to bring the question before the Council for its
consideration.

54. Still, my delegation hopes that it is not yet too late for
the supporters of apartheid and colonialism to relent and
join forces with the United nations in seeking to see
freedom and good governance established on the African
continent, My delegation hopes in particular that at the end
of the debate the Council will, at the very minimum,
dissociate itself from the hostile activities of Portugal
against the Republic of Zambia, Actually, we can see no
reason why the Council should not merely condemn
Portugual for carrying out against Zambia premeditated and
unprovoked military aggression, needlessly causing death
and destruction to innocent civilian life and property.
55. The PRESIDENT (translated fvom Frenchl.’ I thank
the representative of Kenya for his kind words with regard
to my country and myself.

62. Zambia is a small, newly independent State of Afncs,
handicapped on two counts. First, it is a land-locked
country, and secondly, it is surrounded on three sidesby
hostile territories under the yoke of colonial Governments
2 Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities Of Statesh the

56. Mr, KHATRI (Nepal): Human history has witnessed
many turning-points, but never before has there been such a
giant leap forward as the successful voyage of Apollo 11.
The lunar landing has inaugurated a new era for mankind. It
has extended the frontier of knowledge and raised the
horizon of hope. The searching spirit of man could not have
been better satisfied.

Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and 0th~
Celestial Bodies.

6

which, moreover, preach and practise the doctrine and
system of racial supremacy. Therefore, we are in sympathy
with the desire of the Government of Zambia to seek the
protection of the Council against the threat posed by those
hostile elements against its territorial integrity.

suppressing the natural legitimate aspirations and rights of
the African peoples. Ironically, all evidence points to the
fact that in those acts of repression arms received from the
military allies of the colonial and racial regimes have been
indiscriminately used against the professed policies of the
arms-supplying Powers. My only hope is that those Powers
will recognize the gravity of this situation before it is too
Iate.

63. But that is not the only reason. The records of the
Council are replete with justifiable complaints by many
African States which have suffered the loss of life and
property as a result of extremely hostile Portuguese
activities. Thirty-four States, on behalf of the Organization
of African Unity, have announced their active solidarity
with Zambia on this question. As their letter to the
President of the Security Council /see S/9340 alzd
Add.l-3/ bears out, not only Zambia, but the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Senegal, Guinea, the Republic of
the Congo (Brazzaville), and the United Republic of
Tanzania have, at one time or another, suffered violations
of their territories by Portugal. It would appear that
Portugal has opened a policy of all-out hostilities against
every African State whose territory adjoins those of
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau). It can be seen
that in these circumstances Zambia and those thirty four
States are quite justified in bringing the matter before the
Council for its consideration.

67. Finally,, let me say that my delegation would be as
prepared as ever to support any measure by the Council
aimed at ameliorating the present dangerous situation.
68. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Allow me, first of all, to add
the congratulations of my delegation to the many already
received by the delegation of the United States on the
spectacular success of a unique enterprise in the history of
man. For us in Pakistan, the brilliant accomplishment of
Apollo 11 will be a memorable background to President
Nixon’s most welcome visit to our country. Poets will no
doubt rhapsodize over the event of man’s reaching the
moon. Philosophers will long brood over its consequences.
To lesser mortals, harried diplomats like us, it offers a
certain challenge. The challenge is that of bringing a
modicum of man’s enlarged capacities to bear on the task
of better organizing his relations on earth, especially in the
international sphere.

64. The third reason for our sympathy with the Zambian
complaint in this respect involves a much more fundamental question of principle. We sympathize with Zambia,
and indeed with all those States whose territories have been
violated, because all those infringements are the result of
Portugal’s attempt to perpetuate its domination over its
colonial Territories in Africa, in violation of United Nations
decisions and all canons of morality and also the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and fundamental freedoms.

69. The present debate in the Security Council is not the
first occasion on which the Council’s attention has been
directed to one of the most troubled areas in the world, the
region of southern Africa. We believe that the Council
cannot consider either the complaint lodged by Zambia or
the reply to it made by Portugal except in the context of
the situation caused in that region by the persistence of
colonialism and its concomitant evils of racial segregation
and minority rule.

65. As my friend the representative of Hungary so aptly
remarked yesterday: “The Portuguese colonialists are conducting a threefold war: a brutal colonial war against the
African peoples, a political and immoral war against the
United Nations and a desperate struggle against the chang
ing times” [1487th meeting, para. 211. That, more than
anything that I could say now, sums up the very core of the
problem involved in these discussions.

70. My delegation has carefully studied the statements
made by the parties at the opening of this debate. Our
study leads us to the conclusion that there have undoubtedly occurred incursions into the territory of Zambia,
resulting in loss of life and property, for which the
Portuguese authorities are responsible. The representative
of Zambia has supplied the Council with concrete evidence
of violations of the territorial integrity of his country. The
representative of Portugal has attempted to refute this
evidence, If it were a normal case of border incidents
between two neighbouring States Members of the United
Nations, our instinct in the Council would have been to
suspend judgement and either to call for bilateral negotiations, with hope for an amicable settlement between the
parties, or to institute an investigation of the situation. But
it is not a normal case. The usual perspective is radically
altered by the facts registered and the legal considerations
laid down in numerous resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council. These facts and considerations
are as follows.

66. In my statements before the General Assembly, the
apartheid Committee,3 the Security Council and elsewhere,
1 have repeatedly outlined the gravity of the situation
which obtains in southern Africa. The situation is very
serious, more serious than we seem to have realized up till
now. The triangle of unholy alliance between Lisbon,
Salisbury and Pretoria, based as it is on the concept of
colonialism, racialism and discrimination, portends an
ultimate, if not imminent, risk of a prolonged and bitter
racial war and bloodshed in Africa. Those among us who
have the responsibility, the capability and the means to
prevent this from happening have refused to realize the
danger so far. On the contrary, if I may say so, they have,
by their material assistance, encouraged, willy-nilly, the
racial and colonial regimes to persist in their defiance of
United Nations decisions and in their obnoxious policies of
3 SpecialCommittee on the Policies of Apartheid
ment of the Republic of South Africa.

71, First, the African Territories under Portuguese administration do not constitute the territory of Portugal but are
Non-Self-Governing Territories within the meaning of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations. I refer to
resolution 1542 (XV) of the General Assembly and all

of the Govern7

other subsequent resolutions which have confirmed that
declaration.
72. Second, the provisions of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence ’ to Colonial Countries and
Peoples are fully applicable to the Territories under
Pbrtuguese administration. I cite here resolution
1699 (XVI) of the General Assembly and all, other resolutions based on it.
73. Third, Portugal’s continuous refusal to recognize the
legitimate aspirations of the peoples of those Territories for
self-determination constitutes a permanent source of international friction. Considering this, Member States have
been requested by the General Assembly to deny Portugal
any support and assistancewhich may be used by it for the
suppression of the peoples of those Territories. I recall
resolution 1742 (XVI), which referred to the situation in
Angola, and resolution 1807 (XVII), in which the General
Assembly upheld without any reservationsthe claims of the
peoples of all these Territories for their immediate accession to independence.
74. Fourth, “the colonial war being carried on by the
Government of Portugal”-in the words of General Assembly resolution 1819 (XVII), which refers explicitly to
Angola and by implication to other African Territories
under Portuguese control-constitutes “a serious threat to
world peace and security”. Resolution 2022 (XX) noted
the increasing co-operation between the authorities of
Southern Rhodesia, South Africa and Portugal. Resolution
2270 (XXII) condemned the colonial war waged by the
Government of Portugal as “a crime against humanity”.
The most recent resolution of the General Assembly on the
subject, resolution 2395 (XXIII), stated that the grave
situation in the Territories under Portuguese domination
had “aggravated the explosive situation in southern Africa”,
condemned the collaboration between Portugal, the minority racist regime in South Africa and the illegal racist
minority r&me in Southern Rhodesia, and expressly
referred to the violations by the Government of Portugal of
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of independent
African States. The General Assembly’s condemnation of
those violations is most pertinent to this debate in the
Security Council.
75. In recapitulating the compelling facts and considerations of this case, I have referred only to some of the
General Assembly resolutions which have been adopted on
the subject by the vote of an overwhelming majority. An
examination of the record showsthat the Security Council
has endorsed the view taken by the Assembly. By its
resolution 163 (1961), the Security Council called upon the
Portuguese authorities to act in accordance with General
Assembly resolutions 1.514 (XV) and 1603 (XV). In resolution 178 (1963), the council deplored any incdrsion by
Portuguese military forces into Senegaleseterritory. When
in 1963 the Security Council took cognizance of the whole
question relating to Territories under Portuguese administration, it not only deprecated the attitude of the Portuguese Government in claiming these Territories as overseas
territories but, in resolution 180 (1963), made the deter.
mination that the situation in those Territories was se&
o~sly disturbing peace and security in Africa. This affirmation was repeated in its resolution 218 (1965).

76. These authoritative pronouncements of the General
Assembly and the Security Council constitute the basic
element of the case now before us. However, in weighing
the respective responsibilities of the two parties, Zambia
and Portugal, for the situation brought to the Council’s
attention, an equally basic consideration is the principle
laid down in many resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council. This principle wasfirst adumbrated in
resolution 2105 (XX) of the General Assembly, which,
recognizing the legitimacy of the struggle by the peoples
under colonial rule to exercise their right to self-determina.
tion and independence, invited all States to provide moral
and material assistance to the national liberation movements in colonial Territories. We recall that this appeal was
repeated, in one context or another, in General Assembly
resolutions 2022 (XX), 2107 (XX), 2184 (XXI), 2270
(XXII) and 2395 (XXIII).
As far as the Security
Council is concerned, this principle has been unreservedly
upheld in its resolution 253 (1968), paragraph 13, relating
to the situation in southern Rhodesia.
77. Bearing that principle in mind, my delegation cannot
accept the allegations made by the representative of
Portugal in attempted justification of the actions of
Portuguese authorities in relation to the territory of
Zambia, We believe that it is only natural that a resistance
movement should grow in all Territories where the right of
a people to self-det ermination, recognized by the United
Nations, is thwarted and that such a movement should draw
assistancefrom other friendly peoples, especially those in
neighbouring States.
78. Pakistan does not and cannot subscribe to the notion
that the spontaneous help and sympathy rendered to a
resistance movement should expose the country that
accords it to the penalty of reprisals. This notion is
advanced not only by colonial Powers but also by all those
who seek to efface a distinct people’s individuality and to
suppress its demand for self-determination. But it is a
notion which has been exploded by the international law
that is progressively developing in the post-colonial age.It is
this law which refuses to recognize the so-called right of
pursuit. The Council cannot but refuse to countenance the
claim to such a right, whether it is invoked in southern
Airica, in the Middle East or elsewhere, We regret that
much of the case which the representative of Portugal
sought to make out, if analysed, rests ultimately on nothing
but the assertion of this right of pursuit under the guise of
self-defence,
79. Lastly, I would join my other colleagues in this debate
in referring to the importance of Zambia as a truly
independent African country in southern Africa. The
deplorable state of affairs in that important region is known
to the Council, which is also seized of the questions of
Namibia and Zimbabwe.
80. If the Security Council is interested, as it undoubtedly
must be, in remedying the situation in southern Africa, if
the turmoil and turbulence there are to be eased,one of the
prerequisites is for the Council to extend the fullest moral
and political support to Zambia in defence of its freedom
and territorial integrity,

8

81. Under the leadership of its President, one of the great
sons of Africa and an outstanding statesman of our age,
Zambia is holding aloft the banner of freedom and human
dignity in a dark area where one of these values is
suppressedand the other relentlessly denied. Zambia is also
making a great economic sacrifice as a result of the
measures adopted by the Council against the racist majority
regime in Southern Rhodesia, even though these measures
have so far proved to be ineffectual. The United Nations
has done little to recompense Zambia for that sacrifice.
Considering these important political facts, an imperative
for the Council in this debate is to ensure that its result will
not cause a further disappointment to Zambia and thereby
to the African States.

pertinent resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly is the main cause for the continuous
tension in the area and the steady deterioration of
Portugal’s relations with neighbouring independent African
States.
87. Chapter XI of the Charter and the Declaration based
upon it stand for peaceful change from colonial rule to
self-determination. The substance of the resolutions
apprcved by the United Nations consists in a request to the
Government of Portugal to co-operate with the United
Nations in this peaceful endeavour. It would be tragic
indeed if, by its persistent refusal to take into account not
only the pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council but also the present realities in the
African Territories under Portuguese administration, the
Government of Portugal were to create a situation where
one day a peaceful solution would no longer be possible.

82. Mr. PASTINEN (Finland): Mr. President, before
speaking on the item before us, I should like to say how
very sincerely the Finnish delegation shares the sentiments
which you were good enough to express so eloquently
yesterday on behalf of us all in conveying the congratulations of the Council to the delegation and Government of
the United States on the occasion of the historic event of
the flight to the moon of Apollo 11.

88. Having dwelt at some length upon the underlying
reasons for the present situation in the area, my delegation
is no less aware of the fact that the Council is at present
seized of the particular complaint presented by Zambia. No
doubt the parties have an obligation to settle disputes of
this kind in the first instance by means envisaged in Article
33 of the Charter. The parties should in fact do their
utmost to find a solution to such disputes by negotiation
and conciliation, If, however, efforts to resort to that
procedure fail, every State is within its rights in bringing its
complaints and anxieties to the Security Council in order to
find an adequate remedy to the situation.

83. The Council was summoned on 18 July 1969 to
consider a complaint by Zambia against Portugal on the
grounds that Portugal had violated the territorial integrity
of Zambia and that units of the Portuguese air force had
struck on 30 June 1969 against civilian targets in Zambia,
resulting in loss of life and in material damage. In his
statement the Zambian representative told us that this was
but the most recent of a series of similar incidents
beginning early in 1966.

89. Mr. CHAYET (France) (translated porn French):
Mr. President, yesterday you expressed our feelings perfectly with regard to the extraordinary feat of Apollo 11, a
feat of which the technicians, the scientists, the people and
the Government of the United States of America may justly
be proud. It is true that we followed the flight of the
astronauts with intense emotion, and our fervent good
wishes accompany them on their return trip which,
although fraught with danger, is nevertheless already more
familiar. The lightning course of this feat has made Jules
Verne’s old dream come true, and has pushed back the
frontiers of the inaccessible. It has expanded our field of
knowledge.

84. The representative of Portugal, while disclaiming
responsibility for the incident of 30 June, does not deny
that numerous incidents did in fact take place earlier along
the borders of Zambia and the Territories under Portuguese
administration in Africa. He maintains, however, that the
origin of these incidents lies in the fact that the Zambian
Government allows its territory to be used by armed
elements infiltrating into Angola and Mozambique, and that
this takes place with the knowledge and the approval of the
Zambian authorities.
85. In our opinion, these incidents cannot be viewed in
isolation. They are but symptoms of the underlying serious
tension in the area. The Security council and the General
Assembly have repeatedly expressed serious concern over
this situation. They both have affirmed that the situation
resulting from the policies of Portugal in Africa seriously
disturbs international peace and security there. In spite of
repeated requests by the Security Council and the General
Assembly, Portugal has refused to act in accordance with
the basic principles set forth in the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.

90. But this triumph of the human mind also enables us,
here in this chamber perhaps, more than elsewhere, to
measure the gap which exists between technological progressand the imperfection of relations between peoples. It
takes less daring perhaps but more daily courage to conquer
hunger, disease, ignorance and oppression throughout the
world.
1
91. I now come to the subject of our debate. The French
delegation has listened carefully to the statements made by
the representatives of Zambia and Portugal to the Council
at its 1486th meeting on 18 July, statements which have
been supplemented today by Mr. Miranda’s speech.

86. It is the view of the Finnish Government that this
Declaration is fully applicable to the African Territories
under Portuguese administration and that the peoples of
these Territories therefore have the right to self-determination and independence. The failure of the Government of
Portugal to accept the Declaration and to heed the

92. Mr. Mwaanga has given us a detailed list of specific
incidents dating back to 21 November 1966, incidents that
arouse a concern which is all the more legitimate in that
some of these incidents have caused loss of life.. We
9

--

understand, however, that several of these incidents have
been settled by bilateral negotiation, a fact which we
should note with satisfaction. It appears, moreover, from
the statements made here by the official representatives of
the two States concerned, that mutual and specific commitments were made by both sides in June 1968 with a view to
ensuring the maintenance of peace on the common borders
of these two States. The Council should take note of this,
express its approval of this desire for peace, and seethat it
is once again fully implemented.

99. The PRESIDENT (translated fkom fierwh): The next
Speaker On my list is the representative of the United Arab
Republic. I invite him to take a pIace at the Council table
and I give him the floor.
100. Mr. ,ELERIAN (United Arab Republic): Mr. President, my.delegation wishes to thank you, and through ycu,
the members of the Security Council, for allowing it this
opportunity to express its views on the complaint of the
Republic of Zambia against Portugal, The Council is
convened to discuss the recent Portuguese violations of the
territorial integrity of the Republic of Zambia, the bombing
of villages, the killing and wounding of civilians, and the
destruction of property. In his letter to the President of the
Security Council dated 1.5 July 1969, the representative of
Zambia has pertinently brought to the attention of the
Council the threat to international peace and security
constituted by the policy of aggression pursued against his
country by Portugal, and the serious situation inherent in
the continuation of that policy.

93. There is no doubt that new incidents, which have
given rise to the present debate in the Council, have
occurred since that time. Regrettable though they may be,
however, they should not constitute an obstacle to a return
to a normal situation, especially if the State responsible is
determined, as it should be, to make reparations .for the
consequences, Indeed, under Article 33 of the Charter, it is
first of all by means of negotiation that the parties to a
dispute should seek to settle it. In this connexion, it is
regrettable that the bilateral procedure which, according to
the two parties concerned, produced satisfactory results for
a certain time, has been abandoned, This being the case,
however, we are happy that the Zambian Government,
instead of exercising its right of self-defence, has, asstated
in its letter of 15 July [S/9331] addressed to you,
Mr. President, preferred to bring its dispute with Portugal
before the Council.

101. In his statement before the Council at its 1486th
meeting on 18 July 1969, the representative of Zambia
furnished the Council with documented facts and conclusive evidence in support of his complaint which established
the responsibility of Portugal for the violation of the
territorial integrity of Zambia and other aggressiveacts
committed against it.

94. The representative of Portugal, for his part, has
referred to other incidents in which members of its own
armed forces were allegedly victims. He has assuredus of
Portugal’s desire for peace and of its desire to resume
bilateral negotiations. We also take note of that statement.

102. The position of the United Arab Republic on the
question under discussion is consistent and clear, It is based
on our faith in the principles of the Charter, our support of
the independence and territorial integrity of States and of
the inherent right of peoples to self-determination in
equality and dignity. It is equally based on our opposition
to aggressionin all of its forms and to the repressivedenial
and suppression of the rights of peoples, rights enshrined in
the Charter and reaffirmed and enunciated in a number of
basic resolutions of the world Organization, as well as
regional organizations, and supported by a number of
world-wide conferences of Asian-African and non-aligned
countries.

95. We know, of course, that the incidents reported by
both sides are only a few elements in the disturbed
situation prevailing in southern Africa. That situation
cannot be improved in any truly lasting manner until the
time when all the peoples of that region are in a position to
exercise their right to self-determination.
96. In the immediate future, it is the duty of this Council
to encourage and assist the two parties to maintain peace
on their borders. My delegation is ready to support any
appeal, any constructive proposal which would further that
end.

103. In extending our support to our sister African
country, the Republic of Zambia, we do not do so solely in
compliance with our obligations under the Charter of the
Organization of African Unity, which obliges all member
States “to promote the unity and solidarity of the African
States” and “to eradicate all forms of colonialism from
Africa”. We do so also as a member of the World
community dedicated to the proposition that aggression
against one State is aggression against the international
community and that repelling the aggressoris the collective
responsibility of all the members of the international
community inasmuch as aggression is a world problem
which no country can ignore, whether it is moved by its
concept of national self-interest or its conviction and vision
regarding a common world interest.

97. Before concluding, I should like to refer to the fact
that the representative of Zambia mentioned that rockets
of French origin had been discovered after the bombing of
the village of Chimpopi and its surroundings on 1 October
1968. All the information provided has been immediately
transmitted to the French Government for verification and
investigation.
98. In any case, I am authorized to inform the Council
that my Government had already informed the Portuguese
Government, last year, that unless the latter undertook to
take all necessary measures to ensure that war material
supplied by France was not used against an African State
friendly to France, the, French Government would be
obliged to discontinue the export of such material to
Portugal. Satisfactory assurances to that effect were given
by the Government of Portugal.

104. The aggression against Zambia, serious as it is,’
becomes even more disturbing when one views it, as It
should be viewed, in its true dimensions and inevitable
implications and in the context of Portuguese repressive
policy and colonialist patterns. For the recent violat.lons by
10

Portugal which constitute the subject of the complaint
before the Council are not the first series of aggressive
attacks against Zambia by that country. As stated in the
Council by the representative of Zambia: “Up until two
weeks ago, that is to say, in the period between 18 May
1966 and 30 June 1969, there have been no fewer than 60
Portuguese military incursions into the Republic of Zambia” [I486th meeting, para. 81. Moreover, it should be
noted that in December 1966 the representative of Zambia
pointed out to the Council that from 26 July 1966: “These
aggressiveacts of the Portuguese colonialists in Angola are
increasing along our common border and are a continuous
source of turmoil and instability; they are no doubt
threatening the peace and security not only of Zambia but
of Africa as a whole.” [S/7612]
105. Nor is Portuguese aggression confined to Zambia
alone. That aggression has also been directed against other
African States, some bordering the Territories under its
administration and some situated farther away, like the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of
Senegal, the Republic of Guinea and the Republic of the
Congo (Brazzaville), as indicated in the letter [see S/9340
and Add.-31 submitted by thirty-four African States to
the President of the Security Council.
106. The African States victims of these aggressiveacts are
told by Portugal that they should bear the responsibility for
their policies. It appears that in the view of the Portuguese
Government those countries are committing the unforgivable sin of supporting the African peoples who are still
denied their inherent right of self-determination and are
struggling for the attainment of their recognized right to
national independence. It is appropriate in this regard to
ponder the question: who bears the responsibility for the
serious situation prevailing in Africa? Is it the African
countries which support the struggle of the peoples of
Angola, Mozambique and so-called Portuguese Guinea? Or
is it the colonialist Power, which, through its obstructionist
and repressive policies, is causing these African peoples to
tiake the great sacrifices they are making for their
liberation and emancipation?

109. In concluding this statement, may I also express the
hope that such action on the part of the Council will
promptly set into motion. an effective process to remove
the continuous threat to *the integrity of Africa and to
international peace and security caused by the policy of
Portugal. Portugal is duty bound to discharge its responsibilitiei and honour. the obligations which it has assumed as
a Member of the United Nations and to implement the
resolutions of the United Nations on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples.
110. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): Since we
have apparently exhausted the list of speakers on the item
on our agenda today, I felt that although I had thanked you
yesterday, Mr. President, for your collective expression on
behalf of the Council with regard to the Apollo’ 11 landing,
I would be remiss if I did not say an additional word of
appreciation to each of those representatives who have
individually spoken with regard to the landing on the
moon. Therefore I do convey my deepest gratitude to those
who have had such kind words to say: to the representative
of Algeria, for the spontaneous and very warm remarks on
the launching which he made already last week; to the
Ambassador of Hungary, who has been both generous and
obviously sincere in his compliments; to the Ambassador of
Nepal, who spoke to us in an inspirational vein, to
Ambassador Shahi of Pakistan, who dealt with this on both
a warm and a personal basis; to the representatives of
Finland and France for their kind remarks; and last but not
least, to my colleague from the Soviet Union, Ambassador
Zakharov who was especially generous, I thought, in his
praise of the bravery of our astronauts, and I cannot but
note on this occasion that bravery, like outer space, really
knows no national boundaries. The courage of Soviet
cosmonauts has already been demonstrated, and it is indeed
in tribute to that courage that the crew of Apollo 11
has taken to the moon the medals given to Colonel Borman
by the widows of two Soviet cosmonauts who died in
the service of their country.
111. Now we can only hope, and hope with all our hearts,
that as we enter this whole new world that fraternity of
spirit which has already been clearly manifest among those
who travel in space will grow and flourish and lead to
greater co-operation both in space and on the earth.

107. Does the responsibility lie with the African countries
which stand for the prompt and effective implementation
of General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV) on the granting
of independence to colonial countries and peoples, resolution 1819 (XVII) on Angola, and related resolutions on
other Territories under Portuguese domination? Or does
the responsibility lie with the Portuguese authorities, who
are persisting in their policy of disregarding these resolutions and defying the political and moral authority of the
United Nations?

112. I should like to assure all of those who have spoken
that we shall forward the text of each individual statement
to our Government for transmittal to Houston, and ask that
they be brought to the attention of the astronauts on their
return. I am sure they will be tremendously gratified and
touched by these expressions. Again, I thank you all.
113. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): As no
representative wishes to take the floor at the present stage
in the debate, I propose to adjourn the meeting. Following
consultations with members of the Council, it has been
agreed that our next meeting will take place on Thursday,
24 July, at 3 p.m.

108. The delegation of the United Arab Republic extends
its full support to the request made by the representative of
Zambia to the Council to condemn Portuguese aggression
a.nd to take effective measures to compel Portugal to desist
.from any further aggression. It also supports the demands
of Zambia for full compensation for the damage caused by
that aggression.

The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m

11

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
Nations,
Sales Section,
to: United

throughout
New York

or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des
diporitaires
du monde
Notions
Unier,
Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

LE.5 PUBLICATIONS

Notions
Unies
sent
entier.
Informez-vour
des venter,
New York

PUBLICACIONES

DES NATIONS

en vente
dons
let libroirier
et les agencer
aupris
de votra
libroirie
ou q drerrer-vour
6:
ou Gen&ve.

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicacioner
de 10s Nocioner
Unidas
e&in
en todar
porter
del mundo.
ConsuIte
e IU librero
Ventas,
Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

UNIES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerios
o dirijore
o: Nocioner

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

y cosos distribuidoras
Unidos,
Secci6n

currencies)

de

82125-November

1972-2,050
