A /74/PV.64

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

64th plenary meeting

Friday, 11 September 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/74/L.91)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/74/L.91, entitled
“Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to
control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2030”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/74/L.91, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Azerbaijan, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brazil, Fiji, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Jordan,
Maldives, Myanmar, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, the
Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Suriname,
Turkey and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.91?
Draft resolution A/74/L.91
(resolution 74/305).

was

adopted

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): The United
States would like to deliver an explanation of position
with regard to resolution 74/305. The United States
wishes to note that it does not concur with the references
to the World Health Organization in the twelfth,
sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth, thirty-seventh and
thirty-eighth preambular paragraphs and paragraphs 1,
2, 3, 6, 12, 23, 24, 27, 28, 34, 40, 41, 44, 47 and 50.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position after adoption. May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 13?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 7 14 and 120 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the General
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item
120 at its 63rd plenary meeting, on 4 September 2020.
In order for the Assembly to take action on the draft
resolution and the draft amendment, it will be necessary
to reopen consideration of agenda item 120.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 120?

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-23461 (E)

*2023461*

A/74/PV.64

It is so decided.
Agenda items 14 and 120 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
Draft resolution (A/74/L.92)
Draft amendment (A/74/L.93)
The President: I would like to inform Members of
the following correction to paragraph 47 of the draft
resolution. The first sentence of paragraph 47 should
read as follows:
“Urges Member States to adopt a climate- and
environment-responsive approach to COVID-19
recovery efforts”.
Therefore, the words “climate- and environmentsensitive approach” are replaced with the words
“climate- and environment-responsive approach”. That
small correction will ensure that the text of document
A/74/L.92 accurately reflects the text from the
co-facilitators that was received yesterday.
I now give the floor to the representative of Cuba to
introduce the draft amendment contained in document
A/74/L.93.

11/09/2020

good faith in all informal consultations, demonstrated
a constructive spirit throughout the entire negotiation
process and shared many concrete proposals, both
individually and jointly, including on the agreed
language mentioned, the current wording of paragraph
20 of draft resolution A/74/L.92 does not address the
legitimate concerns of our countries about the negative
impact of the unilateral coercive measures on national
efforts to address the COVID-19 pandemic.
Acknowledgement of the negative impact of the
unilateral coercive measures on national efforts to
address the COVID-19 pandemic has been consistently
expressed by the overwhelming majority of the
international community, the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
as well as many United Nations Special Envoys and
Special Rapporteurs. In view of that, our delegations
propose the following amendment to draft resolution
A/74/L.92.
(spoke in English)
Our delegations propose deleting the current
paragraph 20, which reads as follows:
“Calls for the urgent removal of unjustified
obstacles, in order to ensure the universal, timely
and equitable access to, and fair distribution of, all
quality, safe, efficacious and affordable essential
health technologies and products, including their
components and precursors, that are required in the
response to the COVID-19 pandemic;”

Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the representatives
of Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Belarus, Belize,
Burundi, Cambodia, the People’s Republic of China,
the Commonwealth of Dominica, Grenada, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Republic of the Union of Myanmar,
Nicaragua, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, the Sudan, Suriname, the Syrian
Arab Republic, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
Zimbabwe and my country, Cuba.

We propose that the current paragraph 20 be
substituted with the following paragraph:

We have the honour to introduce the final version
of the omnibus draft resolution on the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, contained in document
A/74/L.92. In that regard, while we acknowledge all
the efforts and leadership on the issue by the appointed
co-facilitators, as well as you, Sir, as President of the
General Assembly, we are compelled to note that,
despite the fact that our delegations participated in

That is the agreed language verbatim in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, as reflected in
paragraph 30 of the resolution 70/1.

2/31

“Strongly urges States to refrain from
promulgating and applying any unilateral economic,
financial or trade measures not in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations that impede the full achievement of
economic and social development, particularly in
developing countries;”

(spoke in Spanish)
Given that it was not possible to reach consensus on
this important issue during the consultations, we believe
that the proposed exact wording of the 2030 Agenda
20-23461

11/09/2020

agreed by consensus for that important document is the
best possible compromise in the current circumstances.
Bearing that in mind, we call on all delegations
to support the draft amendment that I have set out,
which we hope will meet with consensus. If a vote is
requested on the draft amendment, we kindly request
that all representatives express their support by voting
in favour of the proposed draft amendment to draft
resolution A/74/L.92.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/74/L.92, as orally corrected, and a
draft amendment contained in A/74/L.93.
Before proceeding further, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Lindo (Belize): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS).
First, I would like to thank Her Excellency Mrs. Adela
Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
and His Excellency Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Permanent
Representative of Croatia, for their stellar efforts
throughout this process. Despite the challenges and
obstacles faced and the polar positions that delegations
held, this was a test of the multilateral spirit and the
struggles that we face as a global community in
responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. I would now like to make some brief remarks
on the procedure followed, as well as the substance of
draft resolution A/74/L.92, before us today.
We acknowledge that the draft resolution was
negotiated during trying and difficult times, with
extraordinary logistical constraints. We are no doubt
still finding our footing operating as the United Nations
via online platforms. At the same time, it is important
to remember that the purpose of the draft resolution is
precisely to address the challenging circumstances to
which none of us have been immune. Multilateralism
is key to driving common solutions, and it is therefore
critical to maintain an inclusive, transparent and
intergovernmental approach in our efforts. Our
common goals demand it and small delegations need it.
This draft resolution originated as a result of the
recognition by all Member States that there needs to be
a coordinated and coherent approach to address the farreaching impacts of COVID-19. What started as a health
crisis has ballooned into a socioeconomic catastrophe,
with many of us on the brink of a certain humanitarian

A/74/PV.64

emergency. The impacts on health systems, food
security and debt sustainability are entrenching
vulnerability and poverty. The implementation of
our development agendas — the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015-2030 and the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change — are all the more imperative. We are
startled that even citing such documents has become so
toxic. If not the agreements that we made just five years
ago and the commitments that we reiterated last year,
then what?
It is well documented that countries in special
situations are bearing an unimaginable and unenviable
position during this crisis. But, for the record, AOSIS
reiterates that small island developing States are
collapsing. Our backs are against the wall. Our health
systems are struggling; our economies are failing; and
our people are facing an uncertain future. We no longer
need platitudes and reassurances. We need the support
of Member States and tangible measurable action. It is
disconcerting that we still find ourselves bargaining for
even mediocre recognition. It is wholly inhumane.
AOSIS is of the view that many of these issues,
although covered by the draft resolution, are not placed
in a manner that would stave off the crisis that is still
unfolding. But do not be mistaken — we are not here
to upset the applecart. We recognize and appreciate
the effort. While we would have liked more ambitious
language in certain paragraphs, such as paragraph 40,
on climate change, we are pleased to see that most
of the critical elements for which we continuously
and vociferously advocated have been covered. We
are satisfied that it calls for aligning investments
and domestic policies with the 2030 Agenda and the
Paris Agreement and that it also recognizes the need
to communicate or update the nationally determined
contributions in 2020. That is essential for promoting
the resilient recovery for which many of us have been
calling and that complements the objectives of the
Paris Agreement.
However, we must emphasize the importance of
mobilizing the necessary means of implementation for
climate action, not only for adaptation and mitigation
but also for addressing loss and damage. That is
particularly important for countries that are already
experiencing loss and damage due to climate change,
while grappling with the response and recovery from
the pandemic. We are disappointed that that was not

20-234613/31

A/74/PV.64

expressly reflected in the draft text, and we wish to
register those concerns on the record.
The pandemic has impacted every country in the
world, and, from the beginning of this process, AOSIS
has emphasized that one of our own members continues
to suffer disproportionately in response and recovery
due to the unilateral course of measures levied against
it, which should be addressed. Furthermore, in March
of this year, the Secretary-General appealed to the
countries of the Group of Twenty to waive sanctions that
can undermine a country’s capacity to respond to the
pandemic. It remains unconscionable that the General
Assembly would fail to make a pronouncement on this
issue in a draft resolution that purports to address the
challenges of all people, which have been exacerbated
by the pandemic.
As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations, it is important to remember why we
joined this esteemed institution and our collective goal
of addressing the existing and emerging crises that we
face today.
Ms. Goebel (Germany): On behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States, I would like to call
for a vote on draft amendment A.74/L.93. I am also
taking the floor to deliver the following explanation
of vote.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union and its member States. We will abstain in the
voting on the draft amendment for the reasons that
we repeatedly explained during the negotiations. We
showed extreme flexibility throughout the negotiations,
and we are ready to accept the various texts proposed
by the coordinators, as well as the one submitted by
the President of the General Assembly. However, we
cannot go further and support the draft amendment in
the context of the omnibus draft resolution A/74/L.92,
on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Allow me to stress that in the EU sanctions are used
as part of a comprehensive policy aimed at influencing
political and security developments in third countries,
such as the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and aggressive policies against civilian populations, as
well as more global issues, such as the fight against
terrorism, the proliferation of chemical weapons and
the threat of cyberattacks. EU measures must be in
accordance with all obligations under international
law, in particular respect for international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
4/31

11/09/2020

humanitarian law. EU sanctions are targeted, aimed
at those responsible for the policies or actions, while
avoiding as far as possible any adverse humanitarian
effects or unintended consequences for persons not
targeted, in particular the civilian population or
neighbouring countries. Such a targeted approach
not only is a matter of effectiveness, but also reflects
the key principles that guide the EU in the use of
sanctions, in particular compliance with international
law, human rights and proportionality. In principle,
when sanctions include export restrictions, such
prohibitions do not cover the export of food, medicines
and medical equipment.
Moreover, EU sanctions include a system of
exceptions. That exception system also applies in the
context of a crisis, such as the current one caused by
COVID-19. Moreover, the EU continues to closely
follow the matter and is always open to listening to the
observations of experts on the ground, including with
regard to any need for mitigating measures.
The EU and its member States are, and will
continue to be, engaged with partners. We have
issued guidance, organized events and commissioned
studies to ensure that sanctions and counter-terrorism
measures do not limit the humanitarian space and to
ensure people-centred solutions.
Mr. Jiménez (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
We have the honour to refer to the draft resolution
on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), contained
in document A/74/L.92. At the outset, we would like
to express our solidarity with all families throughout
the world who have lost loved ones as a result of this
pandemic and are suffering from COVID-19, with its
consequences and complications.
We wish to thank the co-facilitators of this process
for their efforts with regard to the draft resolution.
However, it is regrettable that it was not possible to
take into account the legitimate concerns of the great
majority of States Members of the United Nations when
it comes to such an important issue as that of unilateral
coercive measures and on which the General Assembly
has adopted numerous resolutions calling for an end to
such illegal measures.
Our delegation was very flexible during the entire
negotiation process with regard to not only this draft
resolution but also all the other draft resolutions that
were submitted under the silence procedure, proposing
alternative wording, including an agreed paragraph
20-23461

11/09/2020

of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Countries that impose unilateral coercive measures
must immediately cease their illegal actions. They are
self-proclaimed custodians that operate contrary to
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
exacerbating poverty and inequality. Implementing
such measures in times of a pandemic raises their
illegality to the level of as a crime against humanity. It
is important to demonstrate unity and solidarity in order
to overcome this pandemic, with its global implications
and suffering for all, in particular in developing
countries. We must also recognize the negative impact
of those unilateral sanctions on such countries. They
are a genuine obstacle to the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
eradication of poverty.
For all those reasons, Nicaragua co-sponsored draft
amendment A/74/L.93, introduced by Cuba, for which
we thank it on behalf of 20 countries, in order for draft
resolution A/74/L.92 to fully reflect the multilateralism,
cooperation and solidarity that are necessary so as to
successfully overcome COVID-19.
Mr. Ilnytskyi (Ukraine): Ukraine regrets the
decision to submit draft amendment A/74/L.93 to
paragraph 20 of draft resolution A/74/L.92. At this
stage, such a draft amendment undermines the efforts
of the co-facilitators aimed at the consensual adoption
of the draft resolution.
The fight against the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic is an unprecedented challenge
that requires global unity, cooperation and solidarity.
Regrettably, some actors misuse the pandemic to
divert attention from other existing serious risks and
challenges to global peace and security. Nowadays, we
are witnessing attempts by some States to convince
the international community that sanctions constrain
their ability to counter COVID-19. Those claims are
artificial and groundless. As underlined in the statement
by High Representative Josep Borrell on behalf of
the European Union (EU) on 3 April, the European
Union and United Nations sanctions do not obstruct
the global fight against COVID-19. They continue to
play an indispensable role in countering breaches of
international law and proliferation, staunching the flow
of arms into war zones, combating human rights abuses
and targeting the spoilers of peace processes.
Taking note of the EU position, I would like to
underline that sanctions also remain important in order

A/74/PV.64

to restore respect for international law. Today there are
no sanctions that run counter to international law. There
are no sanctions anywhere that are aimed at decreasing
States’ ability to protect their peoples from COVID-19
or to participate in global efforts to overcome this crisis.
With that in mind, Ukraine rejects the manipulative
attempts of some States to lift sanctions imposed to
halt illegal activities. Using the pandemic for political
purposes and in calls to lift sanctions should be
considered a dishonourable manipulation and attempt
to use the suffering of the millions of people in pursuit
of one’s own profit for selfish aims. The only way for
sanctions to disappear is not through their cancellation
under the pretext of the need to face and counter the
new global pandemic, but through ensuring a thorough
implementation of the Charter of the United Nations
and a complete halting of continuous violations
of international law, including armed aggression,
occupation and human rights abuses.
Sanctions can and should be challenged, changed
or cancelled altogether if the underlying reasons for
their imposition and implementation are removed and
respect for international law and order is restored.
Anything else would amount of appeasement under a
false pretext.
Mr. Shahin (Egypt): Egypt wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for your relentless efforts. We also thank
the Ambassador of Afghanistan and the Ambassador of
Croatia for co-facilitating draft resolution A/74/L.92. It
has indeed been a long and daunting process, which has
been conducted in unprecedented circumstances.
Egypt supports the draft amendment contained in
document A/74/L.93, as presented by Cuba. We see that
the proposed text is based on language agreed upon for
document A/70/1, entitled “Transforming our world:
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”.
Mr. Reed (United Kingdom): Throughout this
process, the United Kingdom has continuously
strived for consensus and has shown great flexibility.
Throughout negotiations where consensus could not
be reached, we have always drawn on the most recent
example of agreed language from the World Health
Assembly that directly relates to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) crisis. For that reason, we fully supported
the text circulated by the co-facilitators yesterday.
We therefore regret that some Member States have
used this text for political gain and have decided to

20-234615/31

A/74/PV.64

disrupt consensus at the last minute by proposing draft
amendment A/74/L.93, which will offset the balance
in the text and prevent the General Assembly from
speaking with one unified voice on COVID-19. For that
reason, the United Kingdom will be voting against the
draft amendment.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
Before we take action on draft resolution
A/74/L.92, as orally corrected, in accordance with rule
90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly should first
take a decision on the draft amendment contained in
document A/74/L.93.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad,
China, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Egypt, Eritrea, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada,
Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu,
Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Georgia, Israel, Japan,
Republic of Korea, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
6/31

11/09/2020

Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Estonia, Eswatini, Finland, France, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritania,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Zambia
Draft amendment A/74/L.93 was adopted by 84
votes to 13, with 60 abstentions.
The President: I now call on the representative of
the United States.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): The United
States had informed the Secretariat that it was requesting
votes on both operative paragraph 7 and operative
paragraph 34 before we act on the entire resolution.
The President: Separate, recorded votes have been
requested on operative paragraphs 7 and 34 of draft
resolution A/74/L.92. Seeing as there is no objection
to this request, I shall put those paragraphs to the vote
first, one by one.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad,
Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar,
20-23461

11/09/2020

Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Viet Nam,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Iraq, Libya, United States of America
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Brazil, China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Guatemala, Guyana, Jamaica, Madagascar,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Paraguay, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad
and Tobago, United Arab Emirates, Yemen
Operative paragraph 7 of draft resolution
A/74/L.92, as orally corrected, was adopted by 122
votes to 3, with 25 abstentions.
The President: We shall now take a decision on
operative paragraph 34 of draft resolution A/74/L.92.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,

A/74/PV.64

Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, North Macedonia, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suri-name, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
India, United States of America
Abstaining:
Angola, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Israel, Japan,
Kenya, Malawi, Niger, Nigeria, Paraguay, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago
Operative paragraph 34 of draft resolution
A/74/L.92, as orally corrected and amended, was
adopted by 142 votes to 2, with 13 abstentions.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/74/L.92, as orally
corrected and amended.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,

20-234617/31

A/74/PV.64

Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Hungary, Ukraine
Draft resolution A/74/L.92, as orally corrected and
amended, was adopted by 169 votes to 2, with 2
abstentions (resolution 74/306).
The President: Before giving the floor in
explanation of vote after the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats. I shall now give the floor to those representatives
who wish to speak in explanation of vote or position on
the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): My delegation requested
the floor to exercise its right to explanation of vote after
the voting.
8/31

11/09/2020

In the first place, I would like to convey our
appreciation to you, Mr. President; the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Adela
Raz; and the Permanent Representative of Croatia,
Ambassador Ivan Šimonović, for their dedicated
efforts and tireless commitment as the co-facilitators
of resolution 74/306, entitled “Comprehensive and
coordinated response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic”, and congratulate you on
its adoption.
However, we regret that our delegation’s
amendment to paragraph 19, which reiterates the need
for compliance with international law and the guiding
principles of the humanitarian emergency assistance
of the United Nations, as reflected in the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, in particular
resolution 46/182, was not accommodated. Therefore,
my delegation registers its reservation with respect to
paragraph 19 of the said resolution.
Mr. De La Mora Salcedo (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico voted in favour of resolution 74/306,
entitled “Comprehensive and coordinated response to
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”, as it
believes that it was crucial that the General Assembly
respond effectively and in a timely way to that global
challenge, which affects not just the health of our
peoples, but also the economy, the sustenance and the
development of our countries. We would like to thank
the Permanent Representatives of Afghanistan and
Croatia for their devotion and commitment to this task.
However, we regret not just substantive shortcomings
in the text, but also some procedural issues.
First, Mexico has the impression that there was
unnecessary haste in moving towards adopting the
final version of this omnibus resolution. In Mexico’s
view, it would have been natural for this document,
which has been negotiated with devotion over various
months, to be adopted as an outcome of the thirty-first
special session. That would have resulted in a followup mechanism to the extraordinary session and would
have perhaps avoided a hasty adoption at the end of
this session.
Mexico believes that consensus is always desirable,
but it should never be a straitjacket with regard to the
possibility of having ambitious agreements. Consensus
does not mean unanimity.
20-23461

11/09/2020

We will now explain some of the shortcomings
of the document, which, in our view, could have been
avoided through political dialogue.
The twenty-first preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 22 are not consistent with each
other. The list of vulnerable groups should have been
incorporated equitably in both paragraphs on the
basis of the list of vulnerable groups that is contained
in paragraph 23 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Who loses out from this? Children,
youth, persons with disabilities, people living with
HIV/AIDS, older persons, indigenous peoples, refugees
and internally displaced persons and migrants all lose
out. While paragraph 21 duly takes up the universally
agreed list, it is very regrettable that these people are
suffering as a result of the unique position taken by
one delegation.
With regard to paragraphs 12 and 13, on equitable
access to a potential vaccine, Mexico underscores the
need to ensure that the vaccine is a global public good.
Mexico believes that the previously circulated version
of the document was more ambitious and actually made
progress in terms of what was agreed upon by the World
Health Assembly. We welcome the fact that there was
no regression on this issue. However, our country will
continue to strongly advocate the vaccine effectively
becoming a global public good through cooperation
and solidarity.
With regard to the references to sexual and
reproductive health, Mexico reiterates what will soon
be stated by the representative of Australia, on behalf of
a group of countries, indicating that paragraph 7, which
was put to a vote, is agreed language and consistent
with Sustainable Development Goal 5.6. Mexico wishes
to stress that any delegation that erroneously interprets
sexual and reproductive health services as something
that may mean bodily harm is empirically wrong in
its interpretation. Additionally, it is confusing that
there was no corresponding editorial modification
in paragraph 6 to use language that was agreed with
regard to maternal and child health.
Finally, Mexico believes that this document could
have been much more ambitious when it comes to the
issue of migrant workers and remittances. During
the negotiations, my country heard no objections to
strengthening this language. That is not surprising,
given that remittances are three times the value of
official development assistance. Migrant workers are

A/74/PV.64

agents of sustainable development and contribute to
their countries of origin and destination. We would
hope that, on future occasions, transparency and
decision-making on the basis of evidence and statistics
will prevail.
Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): We would like to
thank you, Mr. President, and the co-facilitators, the
Permanent Representatives of Afghanistan and Croatia,
for their very hard work and efforts.
Hungary wishes to highlight its national position
concerning the omnibus resolution 74/306, on the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
It is regrettable that the resolution seeks to give
the misleading impression that the pandemic does not
affect the whole of society in the same way. Instead,
the resolution highlights the difficulty faced by
randomly selected social groups, including migrants
and refugees. In our view, the COVID-19 pandemic
has a strong impact on the daily lives of every citizen.
Therefore, we should avoid making distinctions of any
kind in this respect.
For those reasons, Hungary disassociates itself from
the content of paragraphs 21 and 25 of the resolution and
wishes to stress again that the unnecessary proliferation
of COVID-19-related resolutions does not contribute
to finding effective solutions to the current crisis. We
should focus on tangible measures.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Afghanistan and of
Croatia for their leadership on the omnibus resolution
74/306 and for their tireless efforts during the
negotiations on the text.
We believe that the text put forward by the
co-facilitators was a comprehensive and balanced one.
We were disappointed by the amendment put forward
on paragraph 20 of the draft omnibus resolution, which
threatened the delicate balance in the text achieved by
the co-facilitators, and we therefore voted against the
resolution. It is very unfortunate that some delegations
preferred to ignore the efforts of the co-facilitators
and the compromise language they put forward in
paragraph 20, knowing that by doing so they would
prevent the resolution from being adopted by consensus.
Israel remains committed to working together with
the international community in the fight against the
coronavirus disease.

20-234619/31

A/74/PV.64

11/09/2020

Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): First, would have preferred resolution 74/306
to have been adopted by consensus. Secondly, I reiterate
our delegation’s gratitude to the co-facilitators from
Afghanistan and Croatia, which succeeded in crafting
a text that garnered consensus most of the time up
until this moment, and to which all Member States had
actively contributed. Your guidance, too, Sir, was very
important in the negotiations.

Ms. Goebel (Germany): I should now deliver our
explanation of vote on paragraph seven of resolution
74/306. I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. We
deeply regret the decision to call a vote on operative
paragraph 7. Voting on the resolution before us sent a
terribly wrong signal to people around the world and
our commitment to providing a united response to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.

The delegation of Uruguay wishes to refer to the
issue on paragraph 20 after the voting, although we would
have preferred to raise certain points before the voting.
We believe that this explanation will help in a certain
way to interpret the meaning of some of the paragraphs
in question. As I already said, we had a procedural or
formal question, which we would have liked to discuss.
What was, until today, operative paragraph 20, as put
forward by the co-facilitators and which Uruguay
supported, was justified as it appropriately addressed
the obstacles, excesses and deviations that may arise
in safely and equitably distributing medical supplies
and technologies essential for fighting the coronavirus
disease. Those obstacles must be eliminated since they
affect the enjoyment of human rights. The paragraph, as
it was previously drafted, would have been impossible
to base on agreed language since it referred to a new
and totally unprecedented situation.

We believe that the representatives of Afghanistan
and Croatia conducted the negotiations of the resolution
in a diligent, fair and transparent manner, and we
commend them for the genuine efforts to reflect the
different views expressed on the matter.

With respect to the proposed new paragraph 20,
as ultimately adopted, it is very clear that it refers to
the promulgation and implementation of unilateral
measures that contravene international law. Its
inclusion is timely. Its formulation, moreover, is in
keeping with the language of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Despite what I have just said, Uruguay understood
that the inclusion of the new paragraph 20 would not
undermine the previous paragraph as put forth by
the co-facilitators, since they referred to scenarios or
situations that were not exactly the same, or, rather, a
range of situations that should be given consideration
since they were not incompatible. That is why we
wished to have the opportunity to consider the
procedural aspects, or to receive advice or guidance
before the voting, or we would have preferred to include
both operative paragraphs, whether as subparagraphs
or separate paragraphs, because we recognize that
the original wording received from the co-facilitators
referred to situations not to be overlooked in or omitted
from the description.
10/31

As outlined by the World Health Organization, the
disruption of access to essential health services due to
COVID-19 has had a significant impact on the lives
of millions of women around the world. The lack of
access to those services represent a risk of reversing
decades of progress, exacerbating maternal mortality
and morbidity, and increasing rates of HIV and other
sexually transmitted diseases. We cannot turn a blind
eye to this emergency.
The European Union advocated for much stronger
references throughout the text. We recognize, however,
that the practice of the General Assembly is to revert
to the most recently agreed language when there is no
agreement on alternative wording. Operative paragraph
7 is based on agreed language from General Assembly
resolution 73/147, on fistula, presented by the Group of
African States.
The United Nations membership, many of whom
have divergent views on the issue at hand, has always
been able to agree this language. This illustrates how
carefully crafted and balanced this long-standing
paragraph is. For these reasons, we voted in favour of
retaining operative paragraph 7 in the text.
I would now like to read out a statement on the
resolution overall. I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union and its member State. The
candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this explanation of vote.
Allow us to start by praising your leadership,
Mr. President, throughout the unprecedented suspension
20-23461

11/09/2020

of in-person meetings at Headquarters over the past six
months. You not only ensured the business continuity
of the work of the General Assembly in extraordinary
circumstances; you also safeguarded its orderly
functioning and policy coherence, mainly through the
initiative of a comprehensive resolution encompassing
all aspects of the COVID-19 crisis and the coordinated
response expected from the United Nations and the
international community. We also express our gratitude
to the two co-facilitators, Ambassadors Šimonović
and Raz, and their teams for the tireless efforts
aimed at accommodating the concerns from across
the membership.
When the project of the omnibus resolution
was initiated, many were skeptical on the changes
of finalizing a text acceptable to all Member
States. Throughout the various town hall meetings,
transparent consultation process, as well as a number
of more specific engagements to try and narrow the
remaining differences, Ambassadors Šimonovićand
Raz embodied the cooperation and unity required from
the international community in these difficult times.
The EU and its member States worked with partners
in the spirit of compromise to allow the General
Assembly to adopt resolution 74/306 by consensus.
We are convinced that in view of the universal impact
COVID-19, which affects all our citizens, we need a
united response from the General Assembly, stressing the
central role of the United Nations system in responding
to the pandemic and its immediate consequences, but
also in recovering and rebuilding better.
We therefore made significant compromises in a
number of areas where we would have preferred more
ambition in view of their importance for the COVID-19
and recovery context, ranging from climate and the
environment to human rights and civil society on
operative paragraph 20, where we showed maximum
flexibility, but were ready to accept the text presented
by the co-facilitators. We also thank Member States for
the largely constructive spirit in which the negotiations
were conducted, and we certainly acknowledged the
concessions made by other delegations. Overall, we
believe that the draft resolution is a comprehensive
and balanced document that accurately reflects the
different views of Member States and addresses the
most important challenges the world is facing and
creates the conditions for strength strengthening the
international community’s capacity to act, including by

A/74/PV.64

supporting the initiatives of the Secretary-General and
of the United Nations relating to COVID-19.
While we would have liked to street stronger
references to human rights, we recognize the efforts
of the co-coordinators to find a balance between
the different positions expressed on the matter. The
COVID-19 pandemic affects everyone and every
aspect of our lives, but not uniformly. It increases
existing inequalities between and within countries. The
resolution rightly calls for the international community
to join forces to combat inequalities, discrimination,
racism and xenophobia in the context of the COVID-19
response and to leave no one behind. This is the time
for us to set aside differences and rally behind this
greater cause.
The acknowledgement of the central role of the
World Health Organization is also essential. as is the
reference to the important One Health approach to
prevent future health threats, including in particular
zoonotic diseases.
We strongly support the provisions reflecting the
need to fully address the climate and environmental
emergencies, even if we would have preferred stronger
language in that regard. Addressing climate change,
biodiversity loss and pollution with urgency and
ambition is indispensable, both to preventing future
zoonotic diseases and to making us more resilient to
future global shocks. Building back better must also
mean building back greener.
Finally, it was important to acknowledge the
significant role digital technologies played in mitigating
the crisis and showing their potential, but also in spelling
out the associated challenges, such as the digital divide,
and the risks posed by new technologies. We regret that,
despite our extreme flexibility on paragraph 20, where
we were ready to support the final proposal of the
coordinators, a number of Member States considered it
necessary to introduce an amendment.
Despite its imperfections and having in mind
the primary imperative of a strong, united measured
message from the General Assembly in facing this
crisis, we strongly support the adoption of this
important resolution.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): First, I should like to
make a procedural comment in my national capacity
by asking that the Secretariat, in giving its procedural
advice, consider whether it may be a better practice that

20-2346111/31

A/74/PV.64

statements be made before votes are taken so that States
have the benefit of the contribution of others when
considering their votes.
I also take the opportunity to thank you, Sir, for your
stewardship over the past 12 months and, in particular,
an extremely difficult six months. It would also be
remiss of me if I did not acknowledge the tremendous
work of Ambassadors Adela Raz and Ivan Šimonović
in getting us to this point today on resolution 74/306.
I shall now deliver an explanation of vote on
paragraph 7. I am making this statement on behalf of
the following 42 Member States: Albania, Argentina,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Nepal, the
Republic of North Macedonia, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, the United
Kingdom, Uruguay and my own country, Australia.
We are grateful to you, Mr. President, as well as
to the Permanent Representatives of Afghanistan and
Croatia, for your leadership on the resolution and for
the open and constructive way in which the text was
facilitated. We regret the breaking of consensus on
the resolution, particularly given the importance of
ensuring a united global response to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19).
As noted in the Secretary-General’s policy brief
on the impact of COVID-19 on women, sexual and
reproductive health services are at particular risk of being
deprioritized in the COVID-19 response and recovery.
This represents a significant risk of exacerbating
maternal mortality and morbidity and increasing rates
of HIV and sexually transmitted diseases. According to
reports, a 10 per cent decline in the use of sexual and
health care services resulting from COVID-19-related
disruptions would lead to an additional 28,000 maternal
deaths and 168,000 newborn deaths. These deaths are
a human tragedy and a violation of the rights of women
and girls around the world.
We acknowledge that these can be sensitive issues,
but terminology such as “sexual and reproductive
health” and “reproductive rights” has been used to
encompass a wide range of perspectives. Since the
mid-1990s, we have all agreed on the importance of
sexual and reproductive health. In the 2030 Agenda for
12/31

11/09/2020

Sustainable Development, we have all committed to
ensuring universal access to sexual and reproductive
health care services. It is deeply unfortunate that
today we see an attempt to upset the consensus and the
balance on these issues. At a time when international
cooperation and solidarity are more needed than ever,
it is essential that we do not go back on what are our
shared commitments. We must not accept attempts to
undermine the normative frameworks that underpin
our work.
Once again, we express our regret that we have been
forced to vote on these issues in the Assembly today,
but we thank delegations for supporting the rights
of women and girls in voting in favour of retaining
operative paragraph seven in the text.
Mr. Popolizio (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the delegations of Afghanistan
and Croatia, as co-facilitators of resolution 74/306,
entitled “Comprehensive and coordinated response
to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”,
for their efforts to achieve a consensus-based text
that adequately reflects the legitimate concerns of
the international community in the fight against this
serious scourge.
We have supported this important initiative since
its very inception. We believe that dealing with the
pandemic and its serious impacts throughout the world
necessarily require a coordinated response based on the
principles of international cooperation and solidarity.
That is why we actively participated in negotiations with
constructive proposals and sought to reach common
ground on sensitive issues. We wish to underscore
the fact that Peru always advocated throughout the
negotiations to consider the vaccine for COVID-19 as a
global public good in line with the Secretary-General’s
calls and the statements of the Director-General of the
World Health Organization and numerous world leaders.
This approach is not purely altruistic; rather,
it is driven principally by the tangible benefits for
humankind as a whole as the only realistic strategy to
defeat this disease. If vaccines are not available and
accessible to all countries, there will always be the risk
of further outbreaks. None of us will be safe until we
are all safe. That is why, even though we would have
preferred the draft resolution to contain a more explicit
reference designating such a vaccine a global public
good, we understand this to be reflected in paragraph
13’s recognition of extensive immunization against
20-23461

11/09/2020

COVID-19 as a global pubic good, which can be the
case only if the vaccine has the same status.
Peru today reiterates its readiness to work with all
States Members of the United Nations to strengthen
multilateralism, international cooperation and solidarity
to effectively address the COVID-19 pandemic and its
severe social and economic repercussions.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have genuinely missed you, Sir, and the
United Nations staff in this Hall. There really was not
a lot of time in yesterday’s online event, so I would like
to take this opportunity to express gratitude to you,
Sir, for bringing even greater glory to your country.
Delegations and your team will long remember the
dedicated work you have put in.
The Russian Federation welcomes the adoption
by the General Assembly of resolution 74/306,
entitled “Comprehensive and coordinated response to
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”, as
amended. We appreciate the fact that the document
clearly confirms the commitment of the international
community to strengthening multilateral cooperation
in addressing the pandemic and the duty of States to
cooperate with one another in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. That was a key part of
our contribution to the COVID-19 resolution. It also
recognizes the important contribution of the United
Nations system to the global coordinated COVID-19
response in support of the measures taken by national
Governments. The key leadership role of the World
Health Organization within the broader efforts of the
United Nations is rightly acknowledged.
Our delegation is pleased to see reflected in the
text such issues as the importance of primary health
care and universal health coverage to the fight against
the disease, as well as addressing non-communicable
diseases, tuberculosis and other health problems in the
context of the current pandemic.
Russia fully supports the strong and unequivocal
call in the resolution to refrain from unilateral coercive
measures against developing countries, especially in
the face of the common challenge of COVID-19. As
rightly mentioned by the Secretary-General, who has
also called for the waiver of sanctions, this is a time
for solidarity, not exclusion. We are not referring to
sanctions against Russia today; let those imposing such
measures make their own decisions about that. We are
referring to sanctions against developing countries.

A/74/PV.64

Maintaining such illegal unilateral measures would not
only cause suffering and hamper enjoyment of the rights
to health, food and life itself, but also disrupt the global
response to the pandemic. So-called humanitarian
exemptions are widely known to be futile and cannot
be used as a pretext for unlawful business as usual.
The vote that took place today on the consensus
language of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is illustrative of the stance of various
delegations with regard to international cooperation
and to achieving sustainable development worldwide.
We urge countries that use unilateral measures to stop
turning a deaf ear to the voices of those countries that
are suffering the most. Some may try to deceive others,
or even themselves, but it is impossible to deceive
time, and time will prove that ignoring the voices of
the suffering and international law will lead only to
greater problems.
We acknowledge the efforts of the co-coordinators in
preparing the text in extremely difficult circumstances.
Many elements were ultimately agreed by consensus.
At the same time, we regret that some groups of States
abused the resolution to forestall negotiations on
other topics. At times, the talks were aggravated by a
lack of transparency and double standards in the use
of language sources and in decision-making on the
reflections of countries’ proposals in the text. Indeed,
the process was dominated by a well-known block
of States, and the starting point for negotiations was
biased, which made some of the compromises reached
unsustainable. The arduous timeline for adoption was
also a matter of concern. We believe that this approach
risks undermining trust among delegations and their
willingness to engage and strive towards consensus.
We are therefore forced to state our interpretation
of or disassociate ourselves from specific language in a
number of paragraphs.
Concerning the fourth preambular paragraph,
we reiterate that documents of regional reviews of
the International Conference on Population and
Development or non-United Nations meetings on
the topic, which are not subject to consensus or
intergovernmental agreement, are not implied by the
wording and cannot be construed as providing any
guidance to Member States.
With regard to paragraph 19, we note that the
definitions used for “timely” humanitarian and medical
access distorts the language in the provisions of World

20-2346113/31

A/74/PV.64

Health Assembly resolution WHA73.1 on timely access
to medicines and vaccines. That language cannot set a
precedent for future work of the General Assembly on
humanitarian emergency assistance.
We disassociate ourselves from the twenty-first
preambular paragraph, which includes unclear wording
on the so-called “multiple and intersecting forms of
violence, discrimination, stigmatization, exclusion
and inequalities”. The same is true for the twentysecond preambular paragraph and operative paragraph
26, which contain dubious and technically incorrect
terminology on the subject of violence and do not
fully correspond to the evidence from the relevant
policy briefs of the Secretary-General. We strongly
believe that the General Assembly should operate with
unambiguous, well-defined terms.
In paragraph 21, the expression “health care and
services” is not clear and is not in line with the usual
language used for that topic. Thus, in the absence of
a recognized definition, we are forced to disassociate
ourselves from this language.
We believe that the reference to Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) in paragraph 28 is not appropriate,
since that paragraph does not take into account the
context and scope of that document’s applicability. We
therefore disassociate ourselves from that reference.
The wording of paragraph 47 attempts to redefine
agreed approaches to actions on climate change
and contains imbalanced language on energy. We
are committed to the fight against climate change.
However, that paragraph does not take into account the
socioeconomic effects of the pandemic, which could
potentially aggravate its impact, and does not recognize
the need for a sustainable approach to COVID-19
recovery efforts. Unfortunately, the coordinators opted
to ignore our suggestions on the paragraph. As a result,
we disassociate ourselves therefrom.
I am now wrapping up. Our delegation would like
to officially place on record the fact that we do not
consider ourselves bound by the formulations from
which we dissociated ourselves and do not see them as
agreed language for future negotiations.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): As you know, Mr. President, my country
voted in favour of resolution 74/306, and I sincerely,
from the bottom of my heart, would like to thank the
co-facilitators, from Afghanistan and Croatia, for the
14/31

11/09/2020

efforts that they have made to achieve the final form of
the resolution. I thank them also for their patience and
their flexibility.
Of course, nothing is perfect, and that is why
we were forced to introduce an amendment to
paragraph 20 and requested that it be replaced with
the wording from paragraph 30 of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
We wish to thank all those countries that supported
our amendment, and we deeply regret seeing in this
room those who defend unilateral coercive measures.
We call on those States to once again consider the
appeals made by the Secretary-General and his reports
on the impact of those unilateral measures and sanctions
on the ability of the States that are affected by them to
address economic, social and public-health challenges
resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
We call on those States that here in this room defend
unilateral coercive measures and that accuse us of
politicizing issues. We call on them to take another
look at the annual report of the Special Rapporteur on
the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on
the enjoyment of human rights in the countries affected
by them.
I recall that I read the following in one of those
reports on the situation in my country, Syria:
“When we look at the impact of these unilateral
measures on the ability of the Syrian people to
live a normal life, and when we consider the
implications of these measures, it is difficult or
indeed impossible to believe those who say that they
are imposing those unilateral measures by way of a
defence of human rights or to promote democracy”.
We regret the fact that the co-facilitators were not
able to insert language in the seventeenth preambular
paragraph on the impact of COVID-19 on the situation
of people living in the occupied territories. We also
disassociate ourselves from any language that pertains
to domestic violence. That is a vague term that does not
enjoy consensus, and we cannot accept it.
In conclusion, my country disassociates itself
from and places a reservation against paragraph
32. We believe that there is no logic that would
justify welcoming anything from the Group of 20,
which includes States and Governments that impose
unilateral coercive measures on a great many peoples
of the world. My country rejects, issues a reservation
20-23461

11/09/2020

against and disassociates itself from any positive
mention in paragraph 32 of the efforts of international
financial institutions, above all the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. Those institutions have
adopted biased and unbalanced policies and make their
facilitation and support for some States very clearly and
unambiguously conditional on the political pressure
brought to bear by certain Governments that are great
economic and political Powers.
Mr. Al-dabag (Iraq): I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan and the Permanent
Representative of Croatia, for their stellar work
and efforts.
My delegation decided to vote in favour of the
omnibus resolution on “Comprehensive and coordinated
response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic” (resolution 74/306) as a demonstration of
our commitment to expressing our solidarity with all
peoples and countries affected by the pandemic and the
need to address the pandemic through a global response
based on unity, solidarity and renewed multilateral
cooperation among States. We had hoped that the
resolution would be adopted by consensus.
My delegation would like to disassociate itself from
the phrase “marginalized segments of the population”
as used in the twenty-first preambular paragraph,
operative paragraph 21 and operative paragraph 28, as
it does not have an agreed definition.
Iraq would also like to disassociate itself from the
phrase used in the twenty-first preambular paragraph
“multiple and intersecting forms of violence [and]
discrimination” and from that used in operative
paragraph 7, “sexual and reproductive health, and
reproductive rights”.
While my delegation wishes to reiterate its strong
commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, we would like to indicate our view
on operative paragraph 47, which goes beyond the
purpose of the resolution and tackles issues that are not
necessarily related to its objective. The resolution is not
a suitable place to discuss those elements.
Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): We requested
the floor to provide Turkey’s explanation of vote in
connection with the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 74/306, entitled “Comprehensive and

A/74/PV.64

coordinated response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic”.
Turkey is determined to combat all climate-related
challenges on the basis of equity and within the
framework of the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities. Therefore,
our general support for the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) omnibus resolution on a comprehensive
and coordinated response to the COVID-19 pandemic
should not be considered as a change in Turkey’s
official position regarding the references made to the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and operative
paragraph 47 of the resolution, as Turkey is not a party
to the Paris Agreement.
Mr. Alshames (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, my delegation would like to take this
opportunity to thank the President of the General
Assembly for presenting resolution 74/306, which
we have just adopted and which is one of the most
important resolutions ever adopted by the Assembly.
We would like also to pay tribute to the efforts that
led to the adoption of the resolution and to thank all of
those who contributed to the negotiations.
While we deeply appreciate the content of the
resolution, we would at the same time underline our
country’s right to draw up its policies in line with
national legislation and our culture and traditions. On
that basis, my country’s delegation wishes to state its
reservations concerning the controversial terminology
on the issue of sexual and reproductive health that
appears in paragraph 7. These concepts should not
be accepted by the United Nations or United Nations
agencies and used against our country, as they go
against our national legislation.
Mr. Crilchuk (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Afghanistan and Croatia and their
teams for their outstanding efforts, which led to the
adoption of the omnibus resolution of the General
Assembly on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
(resolution 74/306), reaffirming the key role of this
body in the multilateral system.
My delegation would like to highlight the fact that
it would have been preferable to have a paragraph-byparagraph negotiation process. We deplore the fact that
we had insufficient time to look at the final version of
the text, which limited the possibility of introducing
amendments that could have improved the language.

20-2346115/31

A/74/PV.64

Argentina believes that access to medicines,
medical equipment and vaccines to deal with COVID-19
should be universal, timely and equitable, avoiding the
creation of any obstacles. Hence we deemed operative
paragraph 20, proposed by the co-facilitators, to
be timely.
In terms of the draft amendment (A/74/L.93)
submitted and adopted, Argentina has no objection
to the substantive issues mentioned in the paragraph,
recognizing that this is language agreed in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. On that basis,
and in spite of the fact that Argentina would have
preferred both paragraphs to remain in the resolution,
we voted in favour of the amendment.
We would also like to provide a brief explanation
on paragraph 18, which was submitted on a timely basis
to the co-facilitators but, unfortunately, was not able
to be included in the final version. The adopted text
refers to the negative effects of increasing food prices
on food insecurity. However, we believe that there is no
clear link such as the one mentioned and that in many
cases prices must be appropriate in order to incentivize
production and increase the supply of foodstuffs.
For that reason, we regret the fact that the
wording agreed upon in target 2.c of the Sustainable
Development Goals was not used. That wording refers
to extreme food price volatility, which can, of course,
have a negative effect on food security. Nonetheless,
given the importance of the issue dealt with in the
resolution, my delegation accepted that reference on
this occasion and voted in favour of the draft.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): I wish to
thank the co-facilitators for their efforts to achieve
agreement on resolution 74/306. The United States
appreciates the cooperation and collaboration of the
international community in the global effort to combat
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). As we strive to
make progress to defeat COVID-19, it is important that
we focus our efforts and jointly address this virus.
I should like to begin today by expressing our
condolences in connection with the illnesses, deaths and
other adverse consequences, including those affecting
health-care and humanitarian personnel, resulting from
the COVID-19 pandemic. Our never-ending gratitude
goes out to all health-care workers, all United Nations
staff and all essential personnel who continue to
put themselves in harm’s way every day to make us
all safer.
16/31

11/09/2020

The United States has been the largest bilateral
donor of global health assistance. Over just the past
few weeks, we have increased our funding for the
development of vaccines and therapeutics, global
preparedness efforts and overseas economic health
and humanitarian aid from $12 billion to more than
$20.5 billion. Our steadfast and heartfelt support for
such efforts encompasses all facets of the pandemic
response, including second- and third-order effects,
and we are working directly with those on the
ground to combat this virus, including Governments,
multilateral organizations, faith-based organizations,
non-governmental organizations, the private sector,
research institutions and many other organizations.
Additionally, we have supported the SecretaryGeneral’s call to resource the United Nations response.
As of 14 August, the United States had contributed a
total of $908 million in 44 countries to eight United
Nations agencies. That equates to 44 per cent of the total
humanitarian response raised to date. We welcome the
increased contributions that many have already made,
and we encourage other countries and stakeholders to
do the same immediately. We all need to step up.
Since the pandemic began, the Trump
Administration has been very clear that transparency
and the timely sharing of public-health data and
information are essential to fighting it effectively.
Unfortunately, however, failures at the outset of the
pandemic by the People’s Republic of China, where
COVID-19 originated and was first diagnosed, have
imperilled all of us and caused needless additional
suffering and death. In the early days of the virus,
the Chinese Communist Party hid the truth about the
outbreak from the world and prevented researchers
from accessing vital information. Innumerable deaths
that could have been prevented were the result.
We must hold those responsible accountable for
their actions and inaction early in this pandemic
and ensure that future pandemics are reported in a
transparent manner early instead of being hidden
from the world. Unfortunately, we might never know
for certain how much of the pain and suffering caused
by COVID-19 could have been avoided if the Chinese
Communist Party had behaved like a responsible
Government and immediately warned the rest of the
world of the virus that they had uncovered in Wuhan.
Not only did they fail world, but the World Health
Organization’s (WHO) failures in the early days of the
pandemic also contributed to needless suffering and
20-23461

11/09/2020

the worsening of the pandemic. WHO needs to reform,
including by demonstrating its independence from the
Chinese Communist Party. That lack of independence,
transparency and accountability is why President
Trump made the decision for the United States to
withdraw from the WHO. We will continue to call forth
its reform, and we will seek alternative, transparent
partners in our fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
It is incumbent on each of us to collectively
commit to the timely sharing of public-health data
and information with the international community.
Doing so is paramount to the ability to overcome this
crisis together and to building our resilience to future
pandemics. For those reasons, the United States does not
concur with the references to the WHO in preambular
paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 and operative paragraph 1.
The United States welcomes the strong healthspecific language in the text, including language on
therapeutics and anti-microbial resistance. We also
welcome language on countering disinformation and
calling for an independent evaluation of the WHO
coordinated international health response to COVID-19.
The United States also welcomes the human rights
references in this text, including a standalone paragraph
on human rights and fundamental freedoms and several
references to civil society and other stakeholders
throughout the text. Promoting and protecting human
rights and fundamental freedoms is critical to ensuring
that all people are fully included in COVID-19 response
and recovery efforts.
The United States welcomes the strong standalone
paragraph on persons with disabilities and particularly
welcomes the reference to the disproportionate impact
of COVID-19 on them, as well as their inclusion in
policy- and decision-making at all levels and in all
aspects of COVID-19 response and recovery. We
also welcome the listing of members of marginalized
groups in the text but regret that the full listing was
not included.
Despite those positive elements, we cannot support
a resolution that is missing key issues. It is regrettable
that the final text did not contain even one mention of
human rights defenders, which was in the zero draft.
We cannot in good faith adopt a resolution on
COVID-19 response and recovery without recognizing
those civil-society and human rights defenders at
the forefront of those efforts. We do not accept some
delegations’ ongoing assertion that this phrase is a

A/74/PV.64

red line, particularly as we use this phrase throughout
United Nations documents and have a consensual
declaration on human rights defenders.
We appreciate the additional reference to Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). We still think, however,
that this could have benefited from a standalone
paragraph on women and peace and security, especially
as we near the twentieth anniversary of the critical
agenda and the critical role that women and girls play
in COVID-19 response and recovery. We also reject the
assertion of this topic does not belong in the General
Assembly or that it is a red line for delegations,
particularly as those same delegations are members of
the Security Council and voted to create the agenda 20
years ago.
We also cannot allow the resolution to be hijacked
by several themes that are not pertinent to the
discussion, and for that reason we voted against the
resolution. The United States defends human dignity
and supports access to high-quality health care for
women and girls across the lifespan. We appreciate the
co-coordinators’ recognition of our red-line position
on sexual and reproductive health and sexual and
reproductive rights, and the removal of one reference
thereto in the preambular paragraphs. We do not accept
references to sexual and reproductive health, sexual
and reproductive health and reproductive rights, or
other language that suggests or explicitly states that
access to legal abortion is necessarily included in the
more general terms “health services” or “health-care
services” in particular contexts concerning women.
The United States believes in legal protections
for the unborn and rejects any interpretation of
international human rights to require any State party
to provide safe, legal and effective access to abortion.
As President Trump has stated, Americans will never
tire of defending innocent life. Each nation has the
sovereign right to implement related programmes
and activities consistent with their laws and policies.
There is no international right to abortion, nor is there
any duty on the part of States to finance or facilitate
abortion. Further, consistent with the 1994 Programme
of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development and the 1995 Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and their respective reports, we do
not recognize abortion as a method of family planning,
nor do we support abortion in our global health
assistance. We also do not recognize references to
non-United-Nations-negotiated conferences, summits

20-2346117/31

A/74/PV.64

or their respective outcome documents. We believe that
the General Assembly should include only references
to conferences and summits that were clearly mandated
through United Nations modalities resolutions, such as
this year’s Beijing Plus 25, and that others, such as the
Nairobi Summit, have no direct or indirect place in any
United Nations resolutions.
With respect to the language in operative paragraph
47, we would like to thank the co-coordinators, in
particular our colleagues from the United Kingdom,
the European Union and the Alliance of Small Island
States, for the constructive discussion and small-group
negotiation on that paragraph. Regarding the substance
of the text, we consider it outside the scope of what this
resolution on COVID-19 is intended to address. We
further note that the United States submitted formal
notification of its withdrawal from the Paris Agreement
to the United Nations on 4 November 2019. The
withdrawal will take effect one year from the delivery
of the notification, and therefore references to the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change are without prejudice to
United States positions.
On operative paragraph 35, the United States
agrees with the need to improve global supply chain
connectivity and security in addressing COVID-19,
which includes numerous interconnected processes.
However, we do not see a clear link between global
sustainable transportation and COVID-19 as phrased
in the paragraph. We made our concerns about this
paragraph clear at the beginning of the negotiations.
The United States cannot support the new
language in operative paragraph 20. The text
contained in operative paragraph 20 of the resolution
inappropriately challenges the sovereign right of
States to determine their economic relations and to
protect their legitimate national interests, including
taking certain related actions in response to national
security concerns. It also attempts to undermine the
international community’s ability to respond to acts
that are offensive to international norms. Economic
sanctions are a legitimate means of achieving foreign
policy, security and other international objectives, and
the United States is not alone in that view or in that
practice.
I wish to point out that all United States sanctions
include humanitarian exemptions. It has already been
well proved that the suffering and death in such cases is
due to the bombing of civilians, including doctors and
18/31

11/09/2020

hospitals; suppressing the flow of information about the
pandemic; and abuses of human rights by authoritarian,
non-democratic regimes against their own people.
The President: I should like to propose that the
list of speakers on the current item be closed in view
of the large number of delegations remaining on the
list, namely, Brazil, El Salvador, Indonesia, India,
Philippines, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Pakistan,
China, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, Colombia,
Guatemala and the Republic of Korea.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees to close the list of speakers.
It was so decided.
Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): Brazil decided
to vote in favour of the omnibus resolution 74/306,
“Comprehensive and coordinated response to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”, adopted
by the General Assembly today. The text raises
important issues and offers valuable contributions to
the coordination of international efforts to fight the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which are
dear to Brazil.
The text stresses the need to address the pandemic
through unity, solidarity and whole-of-Government
and whole-of-society approaches. It further recognizes
the primary responsibility of Governments to adopt
and implement a response to the COVID-19 pandemic
based on their national context and realities. They also
recognize the importance of considering the specific
needs of various segments of society, including women,
children, the elderly and people with disabilities, in the
responses that each country develops.
It reiterates the need to curb violence,
discrimination and disinformation. Furthermore, it
reaffirms the need to ensure global access to medicines,
vaccines and medical equipment to face COVID-19.
The text highlights the importance of saving lives and
livelihoods, taking into consideration World Trade
Organization rules and procedures. These issues remain
central for the Brazilian Government.
Brazil also wishes to reiterate its position with
regard to language related to sexual and reproductive
health. In no way should the text be interpreted as
promoting or supporting abortion as a method of family
planning. The Brazilian Government implements
policies of integral sexual and reproductive health
20-23461

11/09/2020

within the well-established framework set out in its
national legislation.
The omnibus resolution is an important document,
and Brazil wishes to commend the efforts required to
achieve it. Brazil wishes to reiterate its commitment to
cooperating and working together in the fight against
COVID-19.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like at the outset to express our
thanks for the leadership of and valuable work done
by Ambassadors Adela Raz and Ivan Šimonović
throughout the process involving resolution 74/306, and
we voted in favour thereof.
My delegation participated actively throughout
the entire negotiation process, taking into account
the urgent need to have a robust resolution on the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic that would
include various elements related to the immediate
impacts that our countries have suffered and continue
to suffer during this pandemic.
We fully agree with the representative of Mexico as
concerns the hasty adoption of this omnibus resolution.
The thirty-first special session of the General Assembly
on COVID-19, which will be held in coming months,
would have been the most appropriate forum for the
adoption of this important document. That would in
turn have made it possible to have more time to continue
to negotiate as we have been doing over the past few
months and would have avoided having to resort to a
vote.
El Salvador is grateful for the inclusion of language
that our country supports, such as the reference to
various international instruments in the fourth and fifth
preambular paragraphs; language on the importance
of international cooperation, multilateralism and
solidarity; language on peacekeeping personnel and
the role of other stakeholders, including civil society,
non-governmental organizations and national human
rights institutions, as well as the disproportionate effects
of the pandemic on women and children; language
on the taking of measures against stigmatization,
discrimination and hate speech, ageing, xenophobia,
racism and violence; language on transmissible and
non-transmissible diseases, such as HIV, malaria
and hepatitis; and language relating to the Forum on
Financing for Development, among other key aspects
of the final text of the resolution.

A/74/PV.64

Nevertheless, while we acknowledge all of that, we
believe that the references to the effects of the pandemic
in middle-income countries have not been adequately
addressed in the text. The same is true for the issue of
remittances and the immediate effects of the pandemic
on migrant workers.
We are concerned that paragraph 12 was modified,
and are troubled by the removal of the reference to
the need to make a future COVID-19 vaccine a global
public good, thus ensuring its universal distribution at
an affordable cost, which are vital aspects for not only
my country, but for all of humankind.
My delegation also expressed throughout the
negotiations that it was critical to focus on human rights
and the importance of protecting the human rights of
children; adolescents; women and girls; indigenous
people; the elderly; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer and intersex persons; migrants and internally
displaced persons; people living in extreme poverty;
and health services personnel, who are on the front
lines in this emergency.
However, that list of people was removed from both
the twenty-first preambular paragraph and operative
paragraph 21, thereby making all those vulnerable
groups invisible. In my delegation’s view, it is not
possible for the language in paragraph 21 to fall below
what is agreed in paragraph 23 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which represents the
roadmap to follow over the next 10 years and to which
we have committed.
As I have expressed previously, El Salvador voted
in favour of the resolution, which is the first document
negotiated by the entire membership of the United
Nations on the global emergency that still afflicts us.
We thank all the delegations for their efforts throughout
the negotiations process. Nevertheless, in our view,
paragraph 21 does not represent the consensus of
the entire membership and we cannot accept as
agreed language a lower standard than what has been
established in the 2030 Agenda.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): My delegation voted in
favour of the omnibus resolution 74/306, entitled
“Comprehensive and coordinated response to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”, under
agenda items 14 and 120, because Indonesia sees the
resolution in its entirety as a package on the important
and relevant topic of the COVID-19 pandemic.

20-2346119/31

A/74/PV.64

Nevertheless, Indonesia has reservations on the
twenty-first preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 21 and 28. We reiterate that Indonesia
does not support the unclear reference to vulnerable
and marginalized segments of the population in this
particular context. We also have reservations with
regard to paragraph 26, which mentions sexual and
gender-based violence, but does not clearly mention
violence against women and girls.
Our reservations are based solely on the context
and culture in Indonesia. Our vote today must therefore
not be understood as accepting those references as
agreed language for future outcome documents in the
General Assembly.
Mr. Kakanur (India): My delegation thanks you,
Mr. President, for your leadership and commitment
to producing an outcome document at the end of this
process. We also thank Ambassadors Adela Raz and
Ivan Šimonović for their efforts to bridge divergent
positions among Member States in this process.
My delegation has been consistent in stating that
the omnibus resolution 74/306 will be relevant only if
the text remains focused on the direct impact of the
pandemic and provides concrete strategies to address
those challenges. In the name of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), the resolution is pretty much aimed at
solving all the planet’s problems. While the intent may
be good, the result is that the text lacks balance and
precision.
We have always stressed the importance of having
text-based negotiations in this process, but that was
not done in this case. While we welcome the strong
intent to tackle climate change, paragraph 47 appears
to be a valiant but last-minute attempt to bridge
divergent viewpoints. We wish to put on record that
the positions reflected in that paragraph may not be
construed as reflective of my delegation’s position in
future negotiations on climate change, in the General
Assembly or in any other forum.
With regard to paragraph 34, it is like the voyages
of the starship Enterprise, as it ventures to boldly take
all 193 Members to a place where no Member has gone
before. We would also urge caution before reproducing
and replicating language from this text in future
negotiations, especially in the forthcoming Second and
Third Committee deliberations, as the formulations
were not negotiated and agreed among the Member
States.
20/31

11/09/2020

Overall, the resolution, while making a series of
prescriptions, falls short of providing a roadmap for
the United Nations to support the efforts of Member
States in this moment of crisis. However, in the spirit
of solidarity and cooperation, we joined consensus on
the text in the hope that this is the beginning of a more
purposeful discussion on the pandemic in the General
Assembly.
Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): I have the honour
to deliver this explanation of vote with regard to the
omnibus resolution 74/306, entitled “Comprehensive
and coordinated response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic”.
It is unfortunate that the final draft of the resolution
was circulated only yesterday, limiting important space
and time for consultations with other Member States
and capitals. We chose, however, not to let that concern
about process derail much-needed global action,
and voted in favour of the resolution. We thank the
Permanent Representatives of Afghanistan and Croatia
for their efforts.
We live in extraordinary times that require
unprecedented collective actions to strengthen the
global community and deepen our sense of humanity. It
is crucial for the people and countries that we represent
that we put up a strong, united and decisive front
against the common threat we face — the COVID-19
pandemic. For that reason, the Philippines voted in
favour of the resolution. However, we wish to register
our disappointment regarding two critical aspects of
the resolution.
The first has to do with the nineteenth preambular
paragraph, which expresses concern that the COVID-19
pandemic is having a devastating impact on sustainable
development and humanitarian needs, especially
on certain countries and groups of people. We are
disappointed that there is no explicit reference to lowand middle-income countries, despite the requests
articulated by my delegation from the very start of the
consultation process.
The latest data from various United Nations entities
and Secretary-General policy briefs have highlighted
that the loss of full-time employment and employment
in the informal sector, including among youth, and
debt stress are specifically impacting middle-income
countries. COVID-19 is projected to result in a decline
in remittances of $109 billion, causing hardship for the
20-23461

11/09/2020

800 million people in low- and middle-income countries
who heavily depend on them.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations has pronounced that the human and
economic toll of the pandemic will be massive and that
low- and middle-income countries are poised to be the
worst affected. Further, the World Health Organization
has stated that the COVID-19 pandemic has revealed
gaps in health systems, with low- and middle-income
countries bearing the brunt of lack of investment in
public health systems and shortages of health-care
workers. For truly impactful and transformative action,
it is therefore imperative that the global community
take cognizance of the available data and respond
accordingly.
Our second concern is with regard to the twentyfirst preambular paragraph, which recognizes the
disproportionate heavy impact of the pandemic on
vulnerable groups. We are deeply disappointed that
the paragraph does not mention migrants. That is a
regression from the listing of vulnerable groups in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Even
more importantly, that exclusion does not reflect the
reality of my country or that of many other countries
represented here today.
The Philippines migrant sector is one of the worst
hit by the virus, threatening the health and livelihood of
hundreds of thousands of overseas Filipino workers and
their families. In their host countries, many migrants
suffer from lack of access to health services, exclusion
in their host countries’ response to the pandemic,
inadequate living and working conditions and limited
local knowledge and networks. In addition, they are the
target of xenophobia and discrimination. Yet, migrants
are taking on a critical role on the front lines. Filipino
nurses working overseas have paid a great cost — some
with their very lives — healing and caring for the sick
in different parts of the world.
The migrant sector makes up a significant share
of the workforce in sectors that have remained open
during lockdowns. They are thus disproportionately
exposed to the health risks posed by the pandemic. The
socioeconomic impact of the pandemic on migrants and
their families is immense. Remittances make up more
than 10 per cent of the gross domestic product of the
Philippines. The impact of the projected drop of such
remittances is therefore very real.

A/74/PV.64

As thousands of Filipinos abroad continue to lose
their jobs, the Philippine Government has embarked
upon a repatriation programme of a magnitude that the
country has never seen. More than 200,000 overseas
Filipinos needed to come home. Many migrants remain
stranded at sea to this day. In these dire times, rather
than exclusion, we urge stronger cooperation and
solidarity among Member States in promoting and
protecting the human rights of migrants, regardless of
their migration status.
We note that the resolution is a reflection of the
continued struggle for inclusion and recognition of
the pronounced impact of the pandemic on vulnerable
populations in certain groups of countries and that the
words and intent that remain in this document, and
those that are missing, have far-reaching consequences
that can shape our future and that of the United Nations.
The Philippines views both the nineteenth and
twenty-first preambular paragraphs as exceptions, not
precedents. We do not consider those paragraphs to
reflect agreed language.
Mr. Sahraei (Iran): At the outset, I would like to
express my gratitude to the Permanent Representatives
of Afghanistan and Croatia for their hard work in
conducting the process of negotiations on the omnibus
resolution 74/306.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of the
resolution. We also welcome the adoption of the
amendments contained in document A/74/L.93, and
consider it a strong message from the international
community against resorting to illegal measures,
particularly against developing countries.
As you are well aware, Mr. President, the
common threat of the outbreak of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) poses a serious challenge
to the international community. It is threatening
overwhelmed public health-care systems and is having
a devastating impact on all spheres of life across the
world: the economy, social security, education and
food production.
Under the circumstances resulting from the outbreak
of the COVID-19 pandemic, the impact of unilateral
coercive measures, particularly sanctions, imposes
additional economic, commercial and financial burdens
on the targeted countries and limits the effectiveness
of their pandemic response. While Governments are
obliged to protect their population from COVID-19 in

20-2346121/31

A/74/PV.64

order to save lives, those countries have been effectively
prevented from doing so due to the economic and other
sanctions imposed by certain States.
In these critical circumstances, the United States
continues to impose new unilateral coercive measures
against various countries, particularly mine. Indeed,
by weaponizing this already lethal virus, the United
States Administration sees the current situation as an
opportunity to achieve what it has failed to do thus
far by simply imposing unilateral coercive measures
during a pandemic, which ultimately took hostage the
basic medical needs and health-care services of the
ordinary people, including women, children and the
elderly, while placing the lives of the Iranian health
worker at a much greater and significant risk.
Due to the illegal unilateral coercive measures,
procurement of medical and pharmaceutical items has
been significantly reduced due to the suspension of
cooperation between supplier companies of goods and
health equipment with Iran. Furthermore, unilateral
coercive measures have disrupted our ability to
secure the medical and pharmaceutical equipment
needed for the diagnosis, control and treatment of the
coronavirus disease due to the concerns of exporting
company regarding the punitive measures taken by the
United States.
At the same time, United States sanctions on
Iranian airlines have disrupted the process of directly
importing medical necessities and transporting medical
supplies, which undermines the country’s capability to
effectively and efficiently fight the coronavirus.
However, despite the immoral and illegal
restrictions that have been placed on the Iranian people,
I would like to emphasize that nothing will prevent us
from trying to overcome the difficulties resulting from
the coronavirus disease in order to save the lives of
our citizens.
In conclusion, I wish to express my sincere
gratitude to the delegation that voted in favour of the
proposed amendment and voiced their support for
affected countries at this critical juncture.
In reference to the fourth preambular paragraph
and operative paragraph 7, both refer to the outcome
document of the review conference of the International
Conference on Population and Development (ICPD),
which encompasses the twenty-fifth session of the
ICPD, held in Nairobi in November 2019, which was
22/31

11/09/2020

not a United Nations initiative, nor was its outcome
document negotiated among the Member States of the
United Nations. My delegation disassociates itself from
the phrases “the outcomes of their review conferences”
and “the outcome documents of their review
conferences” in those two paragraphs, respectively.
Mr. Zulqarnain (Pakistan): At the outset, we
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your very able
leadership. We also commend the coordinators for their
tireless efforts.
My delegation voted in favour of the omnibus
resolution 74/306, on the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), to reaffirm global solidarity in our fight
against the pandemic. It was important that the General
Assembly pronounced itself collectively to show our
unity in the face of a common threat. We agreed to the
swift conclusion of this process in the sole consideration
that it end during your presidency, which has been
heavily affected by the pandemic.
However, my delegation has serious reservations on
the way this process was carried out. Notwithstanding
the unprecedented challenges posed by the COVID-19
crisis, the format was in no way appropriate for such
an important document. For example, Member States
could not engage in text-based negotiations, resulting
in the omission of several important elements from
the text we adopted today and a lack of balance in the
final document.
While we voted in favour of the resolution, we wish
to place on the record that we do not think that the text
is balanced or that it constitutes intergovernmentally
agreed language. We therefore reserve the right to
disassociate ourselves from the language in some
elements of the resolution if they are proposed in future
negotiations, especially in the coming sessions.
Mr. Jisheng Xing (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The omnibus resolution 74/306, on the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), reaffirms our commitment to
multilateralism and fully recognizes the important role
of the United Nations and the World Health Organization
(WHO). It calls upon the international community to
strengthen solidarity, increase support for developing
countries and intensify efforts to implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. It voices clear
opposition to the racism, xenophobia, hate speech and
stigmatization associated with COVID-19.
20-23461

11/09/2020

A/74/PV.64

China voted in favour of the resolution. We
commend the President of the General Assembly and
the co-facilitators for their work. We regret that the
United States obstructed international consensus on
the resolution, and chose to stand on the opposite side
of the international community. Unilateral coercive
measures violate international law and seriously impair
people’s health and the post-pandemic recovery and
development of the sanctioned countries. We urge the
United States and other countries concerned to heed the
voice of justice from the international community and
immediately lift unilateral coercive measures.

On the other hand, according to media reports, the
United States was aware of the risks of COVID-19 in
the very early days, but deliberately chose to downplay
its seriousness so as to “avoid panic”. Who, then, has
been concealing the truth? Why does the United States
boast the most sophisticated medical technologies
and the most advanced medical systems in the world
and, simultaneously, hold the record for the highest
number of infections? Why did New York become the
epicentre, so much so that United Nations Headquarters
was forced to go into lockdown in its seventy-fifth
anniversary year?

The provision of the resolution about promoting
global sustainable transport is consistent with the
general aspirations of the international community for
enhancing interconnectivity. China finds it regrettable
that the United States has obstructed international
consensus on this issue.

I think the truth is now abundantly clear to the
international community and the lies and deception
of the United States are way past their sell-by date. If
the United States is genuinely serious about fighting
COVID-19, it should get down to business and focus
on protecting the lives and health of their own people
instead of running to shift the blame, shirk responsibility
and divert attention. If the United States is serious about
fighting COVID-19, it should immediately lift unilateral
sanctions, which are in breach of international law
and the basic norms of international relations, instead
of going out of their way to sabotage other countries’
responses to the crisis. If the United States is serious
about fighting COVID-19, it should return to the path
of solidarity, collaboration and multilateralism, which
is the only humane way, instead of pulling out of the
World Health Organization (WHO) and defunding it,
thus undermining the WHO’s actions in support of
national efforts.

Even as China faces tremendous pressure at
home with regard to the COVID-19 response, we have
provided assistance to combat the pandemic to 150
countries and four international organization, and have
exported medical supplies to more than 200 countries
and regions. China will continue to work together
with the international community in the fight against
the pandemic.
At this solemn moment in the Hall, as the General
Assembly calls for solidarity in the fight against
COVID-19, the United States representative once again
projected a jarring voice in a renewed attempt to turn
facts on their head, again pulling out all stops to shift
the blame and spread the political virus, which China
firmly opposes and categorically rejects.
I must point out that China brought COVID-19
under control on its soil within a very short time and
started to offer assistance and supplies to countries
around the world, including the United States. All of that
was achieved under the leadership of the Communist
Party of China. The Chinese people will never allow
any individual or force to misrepresent or vilify the
Communist Party of China.
Since the onset of COVID-19, China has been
sharing epidemiological information with the
international community on a continued basis in an
open, transparent and responsible manner. As early as
3 January, China began regular, official communication
with the United States on the pandemic.

China calls on the United Nations membership to
collectively demand that the United States respect facts
and science with regard to COVID-19, show genuine
care for the well-being of the international community,
including the lives and health of its own population,
and cease and desist from spreading the political virus,
thus pitting themselves against the international family
and slipping further and further down the wrong path.
Mr. Ilnytskyi (Ukraine): At the outset, let me
express my gratitude to the Permanent Representatives
of Afghanistan and Croatia for their leadership and
efforts to present a consolidated omnibus resolution
aimed at countering the global challenges posed by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
I would like to join Hungary and other delegations
that have expressed concern with the adoption of such
an important document by a recorded vote. I also

20-2346123/31

A/74/PV.64

support many of the points made by the delegations
of Mexico and Israel in that regard. We regret that the
omnibus resolution 74/306 was blocked from being
adopted by consensus due to a last-minute amendment
to paragraph 20.
In that regard, my delegation wishes to put on
record that Ukraine disassociates itself from paragraph
20 of the resolution, due to the reasons expressed in my
delegation’s explanation of vote during the adoption of
the amendment contained in document A/74/L.93. It is
disappointing that so many delegations, including my
own, have disassociated themselves with paragraphs
of the resolution. Other delegations have openly stated
that they would not implement entire paragraphs, which
clearly undermines the resolution’s authority.
We regret that the resolution was put on the fasttrack after so many months of deliberations. With so
many reservations, disassociations and even assertions
from certain countries that they will not implement
or follow entire paragraphs of the text, the resolution
has been deeply weakened due to the politicization
of COVID-19 and propaganda around the issue of
sanctions. It is utterly regrettable.
Mr. Reed (United Kingdom): I would like to start
by thanking you, Mr. President, for your quick work
early on in the pandemic to appoint two coordinators
to manage the General Assembly’s work on the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). That has enabled us
to come together to address the pandemic over the past
few months.
I would also like to put on record our deepest thanks
to Ambassadors Raz and Šimonović and their teams for
their heroic efforts in steering that process. As we said
all the way back in the first town hall in April, we knew
this would not be an easy process, but we believe that it
was worth doing, and worth doing well.
The text has many strengths. It reaffirms
our commitment to international cooperation,
multilateralism and solidarity. It calls upon Member
States to ensure that all human rights are respected,
protected and fulfilled while combating the pandemic.
As the Secretary-General himself has said, human
rights can and must guide the COVID-19 response
and recovery.
The text recognizes the negative impact the
pandemic is having on global humanitarian need
and reaffirms the need to ensure the safe, timely
24/31

11/09/2020

and unhindered access of humanitarian and medical
personnel responding to the pandemic. It calls upon
all Member States to strengthen health systems and
to recognize the value of an integrated One Health
approach. We particularly welcome the recognition
that mitigation of anti-microbial resistance is vital to
ensuring preparedness and prevention for pandemics.
It also urges us to all do better by aligning our
domestic policies with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
and the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change. On climate change, as President of the
twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the United Kingdom will continue to champion
action as we rebuild better.
We also want to express our firm support for the
language included on sexual and reproductive health
and rights. This is a vital part of the pandemic response.
Of course, the text could have been strengthened
further, were it not for some Member States drawing
artificial red lines. That includes resistance to the
inclusion of references to, inter alia, human rights
defenders, when those are the people on the front lines
in the pandemic. It also includes a refusal to recognize
the disproportionate impact that the pandemic is having
on marginalized people, including the lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex community.
Nevertheless, while we regret that we do not
have complete consensus on the text, we do welcome
its adoption. We once again than the co-coordinators
and their teams for steering the ship over the past
few months.
Mr. Rugeles (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank the coordinators, Croatia
and Afghanistan, for their extraordinary work, which
has enabled us to reach our goal. Throughout the process,
they demonstrated tremendous professionalism,
transparency and a balanced vision of the issues.
From the beginning, my delegation enthusiastically
welcomed the initiative of drafting an omnibus
resolution on coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The
situation required the quick reaction of States and
agreement among them on certain fundamental
principles and action in order to comprehensively
respond to the pandemic together.
20-23461

11/09/2020

A/74/PV.64

As a matter of principle, however, my delegation
regrets that a consensus was not reached on the
resolution. Unfortunately, we had to vote on it, and
that was not our wish. We are living in extraordinary
times that require extraordinary measures, enormous
flexibility and above all boldness on the part of
each of us. We cannot be complacent in the face of a
world that is asking the United Nations and each of
its States Members for answers. We must be unified
and leave behind fragmentation. Greater international
cooperation and greater solidarity are required, all
within the framework of strict respect for the principles
of international law.

Representatives of Afghanistan and Croatia, for their
dedicated leadership on the resolution just adopted,
entitled “Comprehensive and coordinated response
to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”
(resolution 74/306).

The vote we took today sends some clear messages
to the world — from the United Nations to the
world — because the world was expecting swift action.
Indeed, it was expecting the United Nations to take up
a great responsibility and show leadership. Today, my
delegation would like to make one message very clear,
namely, that we must all — all — work together to
build the United Nations of the future, and we must all
strengthen multilateralism, because it is our duty, and
it is a duty that all of our peoples are asking us to fulfil.

However, the Republic of Korea voted against the
amended paragraph 20. The paragraph in question is
from the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
which was adopted nearly five years ago. My delegation
believes that the language does not fully address
the challenges and needs caused by the COVID-19
pandemic today.

Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala voted in favour of resolution 74/306,
entitled “Comprehensive and coordinated response
to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”,
which was skilfully facilitated by the Ambassadors of
Afghanistan and Croatia.
Guatemala supports the substance of the resolution,
based as it is on the solidarity, cooperation and medical
assistance that must be provided during this pandemic.
The impact of this disease on the most vulnerable
groups, including migrants, indigenous peoples and
persons with disabilities, is also a concern.
Nevertheless, we would like to state that we express
our reservation with respect to paragraph 7 of the
resolution, since the term “reproductive rights” could
be erroneously interpreted, given that our national
legislation contemplates sexual and reproductive
health policies, and not sexual and reproductive rights,
which could be interpreted as a right to abortion
or abortion practices that contravene Guatemala’s
national legislation.
Ms. Pyo (Republic of Korea): Before I deliver
this explanation of vote on behalf of the delegation
of the Republic of Korea, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the coordinators, the Permanent

Today, the Republic of Korea voted in favour of the
resolution. The unprecedented challenges posed by the
present crisis warrant a unified global response, and my
delegation believes that the resolution adopted today
provides a wide range of useful tools for promoting an
effective response based on international cooperation
and solidarity.

My delegation also emphasizes the importance of
timely delivery of humanitarian assistance in addressing
the COVID-19 crisis. We appreciate that relevant
humanitarian exemptions to sanctions measures are
being adequately provided to this end.
The President: We will now hear a statement after
the adoption of the resolution.
Archbishop Caccia (Holy See): At the outset, I
would like to express thanks to the coordinators, the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ms. Adela
Raz, and the Permanent Representative of Croatia,
Mr. Ivan Šimonović, for their work.
Pope Francis recently underscored that
“the current pandemic has highlighted our
interdependence: we are all connected to each
other, for better or for worse. Therefore, to emerge
from this crisis better than before, we have to do so
together” .
Because of this the Holy See supported the idea of
this omnibus resolution (resolution 74/306) from the
beginning and during the negotiations emphasized the
need for a common and consensus-based approach. It is
unfortunate that this omnibus resolution, launched as a
means of showing the world that the General Assembly
stands as one, has been adopted without a consensus.
Like many others, the Holy See would have preferred

20-2346125/31

A/74/PV.64

to see much more time given to discussion on the
difficult issues.
As for the specific content of the resolution, my
delegation would like to make the following points and
express one reservation.
Extensive immunization could be a global public
good, provided that vaccines are not only adequate, safe,
quality, efficacious and effective, but also free from
ethical concerns and, especially, available to all. We
regret the exclusion of faith-based organizations from
the list of those that play an important role in response
to the pandemic. Through their hospitals, clinics,
dispensaries, schools and charitable organizations,
faith-based organizations support people on the ground,
especially those most affected by the pandemic.
Furthermore, religious leaders are crucial in
promoting dialogue and tolerance. The wording,
however, of the fifth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraph 4 should have followed applicable, agreed
language from consensual resolutions of the General
Assembly to ensure the safeguarding of freedom of
religion and belief and freedom of expression in this
context. The inclusion of specific references to older
persons in the text is crucial, considering the impact
the pandemic has had on the elderly in many countries.
This concern should have been buttressed by stressing
that health-care decisions affecting older persons
should always respect their right to life and never be
interpreted otherwise.
We are pleased to see consideration given to the
international debt architecture and the international
financial system as an integral part of our common
response to the pandemic. However, stronger language
about the need to renew the international financial
architecture would have given the text greater impact.
Reduction, if not cancellation, of the debt burdening the
poorest nations is essential to ensure that all countries
are put in a position to meet the needs of their people
during the pandemic.
We applaud the inclusion of comprehensive
language about climate change and the protection of
the environment. In this regard, it is essential to ensure
that recovery strategies integrate all three pillars of
climate action: mitigation, adaptation and resilience.
The pandemic should not reduce the attention we pay to
the climate crisis, which continues to be one of the most
serious global emergencies.
26/31

11/09/2020

Finally, the Holy See reiterates, in line with its
reservation expressed at the international conferences
held in Beijing and Cairo, that it considers the phrase
“reproductive health and related terms” as applying to
a holistic concept of health that embraces the person in
the entirety of his or her personality, mind and body.
In particular, the Holy See rejects the interpretation
that considers abortion or access to abortion, sexselective abortion, abortion of fetuses diagnosed with
health challenges, maternal surrogacy and sterilization
as dimensions of “reproductive health,” or as part of
universal health coverage.
Ms. Raz (Afghanistan): I have the honour to speak
in my national capacity as well as in my capacity as
one of the General Assembly coordinators on initiatives
relating to coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
First, I would like to express Afghanistan’s
solidarity with States Members of the United Nations
that are fighting COVID-19. We extend our sincere
sympathy and condolences to those who have lost
loved ones.
Resolution 74/306, on the comprehensive and
coordinated response to the coronavirus disease
pandemic, not only serves to coordinate our response
to COVID-19, but is also a tribute to the victims of the
pandemic. I reiterate my admiration for the leadership
and vision of the President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Muhammad-Bande. His support for and trust in
the coordinators, Afghanistan and Croatia, have been
instrumental to the success of the resolution. Throughout
the process, his team helped us with their expertise, for
which we are very grateful. We are also thankful for the
leadership of the Secretary-General and his Office, and
for the knowledge that the Secretariat experts shared in
terms of technical assistance and essential advice.
During the past six months, the General Assembly
has shown incredible commitment to formulating
a comprehensive, coordinated and action-oriented
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. I believe that
resolution 74/306 very much responds to the moment.
As we meet today, more than 900,000 have died from
COVID-19, and more than 25 million people have been
infected with the virus. The world is experiencing the
worst economic recession since the Second World War.
Inequality and poverty are increasing, and more people
are experiencing hunger. We are indeed facing the most
significant global catastrophe since the founding of this
important Organization, the United Nations.
20-23461

11/09/2020

Today, we have seen that the General Assembly is
ready to respond. Although we would like to have seen
a resolution adopted by consensus, we nevertheless
do see that the General Assembly can be united in
supporting solidarity and cooperation among States,
generations and institutions. Working together, we
resolve to serve the most vulnerable among us, and we
have made a united commitment to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development as the blueprint for building
back better after the pandemic.
The resolution adopted today formalizes our
agreement and harmony. It provides the Assembly
with the support it needs for the critical work of the
Secretary-General, and it encourages further action by
Governments, civil society organizations, international
organizations and the private sector. The strong
message from the General Assembly today is important
at this time. I wholeheartedly believe that the resolution
will make a real difference on the ground and will set
the stage for a better world for the next generation.
In conclusion, I reiterate my appreciation as well
as that of my fellow coordinator, Ambassador Ivan
Šimonović, to all States Members of the United Nations
for their constructive and meaningful engagement
throughout the process. Thanks to the flexibility they
have shown and to their dedication to the bigger and
greater good of all, the adoption of resolution 74/306
is their success and a testament to their hard work and
their efforts.
The President: I would like to express my
appreciation to the entire membership of the General
Assembly for their patience and engagement in the
process that got us here. Obviously, the really important
work of Ambassadors Raz and Šimonović and their
teams is outstanding. They have done the very best
under difficult circumstances, but they have done
the hard work needed. They have listened and done
everything they could to engage the Secretariat and
whomever could help us get to where we are today. I
have no speech to make other than to thank them on
behalf of the General Assembly for the outstanding
work they have done.
The meaning of resolution 74/306 is well known to
us. All the statements made have made reference to the
importance of this resolution. Of course, others have
also mentioned the need not just for the resolution, but
to see that we live up to the commitments we have made.

A/74/PV.64

By way of conclusion, I would simply say that the
adoption of resolution 74/306 is an outstanding step for
the General Assembly, which I thank on behalf of the
facilitators, who worked so diligently with my Office.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
14 and 120?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(i) Appointment of members of the Board of
the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on
Sustainable Consumption and Production
Patterns
The President: The General Assembly will now
turn to the appointment of members of the Board of
the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable
Consumption and Production Patterns, in order to
replace those members whose term of office expired on
15 September 2019.
Members will recall that by its resolution 67/203, of
21 December 2012, the Assembly decided to establish
the 10-member Board, consisting of two members from
each United Nations regional group. Members will also
recall that by its resolution 69/214, of 19 December
2014, the Assembly decided that the duration of
subsequent terms for members of the Board shall
continue to be two years, starting on 16 September of
every second year, and that United Nations regional
groups may renominate one of their existing two
members of the Board for one consecutive term, while
ensuring that no Member State is eligible to serve more
than two consecutive terms and taking into account the
importance of ensuring continuity and rotation in the
work of the Board. In that regard, the Secretariat has
received the nomination of Bhutan.
I would like to note that Bhutan has already served
one term, from 2017 to 2019, and that it has been
renominated by the Group of Asia-Pacific States for
another term, from 2019 to 2021. In that connection,
may I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
appoint Bhutan as a member of the Board of the 10-Year
Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption
and Production Patterns for a term beginning on
11 September 2020 and ending on 15 September 2021?

20-2346127/31

A/74/PV.64

It was so decided (decision 74/414 B).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (i)
of agenda item 115 and of agenda item 115 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/74/L.57)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia to introduce draft
resolution A/74/L.57.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke
in Arabic): First of all, allow me to express my
appreciation and gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
your exceptional leadership of the General Assembly
during your presidency, above all during the difficult
times that we have been going through owing to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). You have played a
personal role in ensuring that we remain steady and
balanced as we proceed on the path of the work of
the Assembly and of the United Nations in general.
Indeed, you have been essential in maintaining and
preserving the effectiveness of the Organization in
these difficult times.
We are meeting at a time when we are facing
one of the greatest public health challenges ever, the
COVID-19 pandemic. With more than a million victims
in less than nine months and with 24 million people
infected worldwide, it is a threat to public health. It
has also brought with it economic damage, causing life
itself to grind to a halt and forcing many people into
unwanted isolation.
This ferocious pandemic does not discriminate
between men or women, young or old. Therefore, I
would like, at this juncture, to express my condolences
to the people all over the world, wherever they may be,
who have lost those who were close to them. We wish a
swift recovery to all those who are ill and express our
gratitude to all of those who are working on the front
lines of the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic with
which the entire world is grappling.
As we face this unprecedented pandemic, which
has demonstrated to us the global system’s fragility in
tackling a virus that we cannot see with our eyes and
yet has yet caused catastrophic damage, it is a warning
28/31

11/09/2020

for us to be better prepared to address such scourges in
future. We are better aware now of the importance of
cooperation and coordination and the need to set aside
our differences in order to identify a transparent and
global approach. Before it is too late, we must establish
a firm, balanced and comprehensive foundation for
sustainable development that will allow the United
Nations to lead cooperation around the world and
successfully address this threat.
From the beginning of the crisis, together with
Bahrain, Canada, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco,
Oman, Singapore and the United Arab Emirates, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Arab Republic of
Egypt has taken the initiative of drawing up a draft
resolution, under agenda item 123, calling for greater
cooperation in developing tangible and robust methods
for combating COVID-19 (A/74/L.57). The draft
resolution is entitled “United response against global
health threats: combating COVID-19”.
We have based our work on the conclusions of
the Group of Twenty summit, held in March 2020,
which called for the participation of a large number of
States and international organizations to come up with
joint measures to combat this scourge with a view to
alleviating its impact in the economic, social and public
health spheres and to coordinating efforts around
the world.
From the outset of the drafting process, we have
worked with every regional group, making sure to
include the concerns of all States. Indeed, we have
made every effort to ensure that the draft resolution
would, in its final form, be balanced, in line with the
interests of all Member States, and capable of assisting
all developing countries without discrimination or
exclusion and in a timely fashion. Our purpose was
to address the crisis in a manner such that the draft
resolution could meet the needs of all Member States
and thereby enjoy consensus.
It is regrettable that the silence procedure was
broken. Nevertheless, in its final form the draft
resolution reflects the viewpoints of 120 States, and the
level of support it has received reflects its underlying
power to assist all States, in particular developing
States, as well as such marginalized groups as the
elderly and women, with a view to addressing the crisis.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, as well as Bahrain, Canada, Egypt, Oman,
Singapore and the United Arab Emirates, we hereby
20-23461

11/09/2020

submit draft resolution A/ 74/L.57, entitled “United
response against global health threats: combating
COVID-19”, in the hope that it will be adopted by
consensus so that, if all of our differences are set aside,
we can focus our efforts on the crisis. Cooperation and
understanding are the only way for us to overcome it
and achieve prosperity and development for all peoples
and societies, as well as humankind itself.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/74/L.57.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I have requested the floor to inquire about the
procedural rules governing the issue of the letter sent
by a number of Member States on the draft resolution
contained in document A/74/L.57, which, as you will
recall, Mr. President, the General Assembly did not
adopt by consensus once the silence procedure was
broken. We refer in this regard to the procedures on the
adoption of draft resolutions, as set forth in decision
74/544, dated 27 March 2020, entitled “Procedure for
taking decisions of the General Assembly during the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”, which
imposes the rule of consensus as a condition for the
adoption of such decisions. In that regard, I would like
to present our procedural and legal understanding of the
draft resolution entitled “United response against global
health threats: combating COVID-19”, co-sponsored
by the Permanent Missions of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, Canada, Lebanon, Bahrain, the Arab Republic
of Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Morocco, Oman, Singapore
and the United Arab Emirates, as well as a number of
other Member States. The draft resolution, contained in
document A/74/L.57, was submitted in April.
In terms of procedure and practice, requests of the
co-sponsors cannot be reconsidered, since copies of the
draft resolution have not been circulated to delegations
and we were not informed that the draft resolution
would be put to the vote or discussed not later than the
day preceding the meeting, in accordance with rule
120 of the rules of procedure. In terms of substance,
the letter dated 3 September from the co-sponsors
addressed to the President of the General Assembly
includes many major fallacies, including describing
the draft resolution, which was not adopted because the

A/74/PV.64

silence was broken, as one of the adopted resolutions of
which the General Assembly should take note at its first
plenary meeting, to be held as soon as circumstances
allow. That action is not in line with decision 74/544,
paragraph (b):
“Decided that, if the silence is not broken, the
decision should be considered adopted, and the
General Assembly should take note of the decision
at its first plenary meeting held after the cessation
of the precautionary measures as soon as the
circumstances allow”.
I would like to remind Member States of the
following facts.
First, as is known to all, draft resolution A/74/L.57
was not adopted because the silence was broken by a
number of States. In that regard, I would like to refer to
a letter dated 22 April 2020 from the President of the
General Assembly, in which he notifies Member States
that the silence was broken and that the draft resolution
has therefore not been adopted. The letter naturally did
not include any indication that any procedure would be
taken at a later stage or that the draft resolution would
be reconsidered once the plenary meetings resumed.
Secondly, as Member States are aware, there
are a number of other draft resolutions on which the
silence was broken during the period of precautionary
measures taken by the General Assembly to limit the
spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Those
draft resolutions, which were not adopted, were not
included for reconsideration once the plenary meetings
resumed. That affirms our correct understanding of the
substance of decision 74/544.
Thirdly, on 20 April, the President of the General
Assembly appointed the Permanent Representatives of
Afghanistan and Croatia as co-facilitators to work on
unifying and coordinating the initiatives on COVID-19
to enhance the international response to that challenge
and to take appropriate measures to deal with its
social, economic and health impacts. In that letter,
the President of the General Assembly referred to the
proliferation of COVID-19-related draft resolutions and
the need to agree on coordinated efforts and initiatives
in that regard. We still believe that we need to work
collectively and in a balanced and non-politicized
manner, without any impediments and discrimination.
We believe that we should not fall into the trap of the
proliferation of resolutions and overlapping mandates.
Only minutes ago, we adopted resolution 74/306, the

20-2346129/31

A/74/PV.64

omnibus resolution on combating the health, social and
economic impacts of COVID-19, which I just mentioned.
In conclusion, we are not discussing the substance
of the draft resolution contained in document
A/74/L.57. The substance of that draft resolution was
not the subject of negotiation, deliberation or any
transparent discussion. There has not been a single
meeting to discuss the substance of the draft resolution.
We are discussing the issue in terms of procedure and
legal understanding. We want realistic answers to be
provided by the President of the General Assembly and
a legal understanding based on the rules of procedure
that govern the work of the General Assembly.
The President: To explain that our understanding is
clear: the silence procedure was broken; it was not that
draft resolution A/74/L.57 was rejected. At the time,
the procedures were such that any objection, regardless
of number, meant that the silence was broken and the
matter was not rejected as such. It was simply that that
was the understanding.
We have heard the only speaker in explanation of
vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/74/L.57, entitled “United response against
global health threats: combating COVID-19”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become co-sponsors
of draft resolution A/74/L.57: Afghanistan, Antigua
and Barbuda, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Barbados, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, the
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Côte d’Ivoire, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India,
Ireland, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, New
Zealand, the Niger, Norway, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
30/31

11/09/2020

Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Sudan, Spain,
the State of Palestine, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Togo,
Tonga, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Albania,
Austria,
Belgium,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Eswatini, Finland, France,
Germany, Hungary, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia,
20-23461

11/09/2020

Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic
Draft
resolution
A/74/L.57
was
adopted
by 122 votes to none, with 31 abstentions
(resolution 74/307).

A/74/PV.64

The President: In view of the lateness of the
hour, we will hear the remaining speakers at 3 p.m. on
Monday, 14 September, in this Hall.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

20-2346131/31
