S/2016/242

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 March 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from
19 November 2015 to 29 February 2016
I. Introduction
1.
The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the past three months, pursuant to
the mandate contained in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and extended in
subsequent resolutions, most recently resolution 2257 (2015).

II. Situation in the area and activities of the Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was maintained, albeit in a continuously volatile environment attributable
to the ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and notwithstanding a number
of significant violations of the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and
Syrian Forces (Disengagement of Forces Agreement) of 1974, which are set out
below. The Syrian armed forces carried out military and security operations against
non-State armed opposition groups, often in response to offensives carried out by
armed groups in the area of separation and the area of limitation on the Bravo
(Syrian) side. Inside the area of separation, the presence of the Syrian armed forces
and military equipment, as well as any other armed personnel and military
equipment other than that of UNDOF, is in violatio n of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement. As underscored by the Security Council in its resolution 2257
(2015), there should be no military activity of any kind in the area of separation.
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and se e that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line. All incidents of firing into the
area of separation and across the ceasefire line, as well as the crossing of the
ceasefire line by individuals, are violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement. In his regular interactions with both sides, the Force Commander
continued to call upon both parties to exercise the utmost restraint and to prevent
any miscalculations that might lead to an escalation of the situation across the
ceasefire line.
4.
A number of incidents of note occurred across the ceasefire line in violation of
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. On 13 January, United Nations personnel
16-03647 (E)

170316

*1603647*

S/2016/242

at observation post 51 observed two Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers, who were
part of an IDF foot patrol in the vicinity of the ceasefire line, enter the area of
separation by about 75 metres and subsequently return to the Alpha side. On the
same day, UNDOF personnel observed five IDF soldiers enter the area of separation
by about 20 metres and shortly thereafter return to the Alpha side.
5.
Crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians, primarily shepherds, from the
Bravo side to the Alpha side was observed on an almost daily basis. On six separate
occasions, United Nations personnel at observation post 54 observed interaction
between IDF personnel and individuals from the Bravo side, some of whom were
armed. Of note, on 19 November, United Nations personnel at observ ation post 54
observed interaction between IDF personnel and three unidentified individuals at
the Israeli technical fence gate 200 metres from the post. On 21 December, United
Nations personnel at observation post 54 observed IDF personnel transfer packag es
to unidentified individuals from the Bravo side at the same Israeli technical fence
gate. On 17 January, UNDOF personnel at observation post 54 observed persons
from the Bravo side driving one vehicle across the ceasefire line to an Israeli
technical fence gate where an IDF soldier opened the gate. After 10 minutes at the
gate, the vehicle drove off towards Mu’allaq on the Bravo side. Also on 31 January,
UNDOF observed a truck being driven from the Bravo side through an Israeli
technical fence gate into an IDF position in the vicinity of observation post 54. On
3 February, a small truck was observed stopping at the same Israeli technical fence
gate for approximately 10 minutes and four individuals were observed loading it
with items, after which the truck drove off towards Brudjum/Ayn Qadi on the Bravo
side.
6.
In the context of the Syrian conflict, fighting continued in the areas of
separation and limitation on the Bravo side with varying degrees of intensity. Most
of the fighting occurred in the central and southern parts of the areas of separation
and limitation. The Syrian armed forces maintained their positions in the area of
separation, particularly around the urban centres of Ba’th and Khan Arnabah and
further consolidated their positions in the northern part around Hadar and the
tri-village area of Jubbata, Trunjah and Ufana. In recent months, fighting between
the Syrian armed forces and non-State armed opposition groups in the northern part
of the area of separation has reduced in intensity, although the exchange of fire has
continued, particularly in Hadar and the villages of Jubbata, Trunjah, Ufana and Ayn
al-Bayda villages. In January, Syrian authorities and open sources reported that a
local truce arrangement had been reached between the Syrian armed forces and
non-State armed opposition groups in Jubbata, Trunjah, Ufana and Ayn al -Bayda
villages and that the road linking these villages to Khan Arnabah had been
reopened. Notwithstanding the reported truce arrangement, the continued exchange
of fire demonstrates the volatility of the northern part of the area of separation and
continues to bring into question the reported truce arrangement.
7.
Further north, in the border area between the Syrian Arab Republic and
Lebanon, on nine separate occasions UNDOF observed and reported transborder
movements of unidentified individuals, some of whom were armed.
8.
The Syrian armed forces further reinforced their positions along the main road
connecting Qunaytirah to Damascus and generally deployed tanks at lo cations
immediately adjacent to the area of separation. UNDOF observed armed groups
using tanks in the area of separation. During recent periods of intense fighting,

2/9

16-03647

S/2016/242

UNDOF observed non-State armed opposition groups using tanks close to
Qahtaniyah, New Hamidah and Ruwayhinah. Additionally, heavy artillery was used
by non-State armed opposition groups in the vicinity of Ruwayhinah and close to
vacated United Nations position 60A.
9.
In the central part of the areas of separation and limitation, fighting betwe en
the Syrian armed forces and armed groups intensified, particularly towards the end
of December and in January. On 17 January, UNDOF observed tracers, airburst
rounds, multiple instances of small arms fire, dozens of heavy explosions and air
strikes in the eastern parts of the areas of separation and limitation. On 29 January,
non-State armed opposition groups launched an offensive with artillery, tanks and
heavy machine guns against Syrian armed forces positions in Tall al -Kurum in the
area of separation and in Jaba in the area of limitation. During the clashes,
approximately 17 air strikes and 1,000 heavy explosions were observed.
10. Throughout the reporting period, fighting between al Nusrah Front and the
Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade continued in the southern parts of the areas of separation
and limitation. Following the alleged killing of a Yarmourk Martyrs Brigade leader
and members in the town of Jamlah, intense clashes between the Yarmouk Martyrs
Brigade and al Nusrah Front were reported in the vicinity of Abu Hasar, Abdali, Ayn
Dhakrah, Abu Haratayn, Gadhir al-Bustan and Tasil in the area of limitation on the
Bravo side. On 30 November, likely vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices
were used against al Nusrah Front leadership figures in the village of Qahtaniyah,
600 metres from United Nations observation post 51. The Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade
continued to conduct military training activities close to vacated United Nations
observation post 80A.
11. UNDOF protested the presence of Syrian armed forces and equipment in the
area of separation and the firing into the area of separation and within it. The Force
Commander reiterated to the Syrian authorities the obligation of the Syrian armed
forces to halt military operations in the area of separation and t o cease firing from
the area of limitation, stressing the importance of abiding by the terms of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and of ensuring the safety and security of
United Nations personnel on the ground.
12. On three occasions in December (once on 2 December and twice on
15 December), UNDOF observed armed and unarmed persons digging out and
removing landmines in close proximity to United Nations position 80 near the
ceasefire line.
13. During the reporting period, UNDOF observed up to five d ifferent locations
where tents and other structures had been set up for internally displaced persons in
the area of separation. UNDOF observed approximately 70 tents north -west of
Ayshah village, straddling the ceasefire line close to United Nations positi on 80.
UNDOF observed water tanks and limited infrastructure in the vicinity of the tents
and also frequently observed small groups of civilians in the camp. In another tented
camp located in an area along the ceasefire line close to the village of Burayka h,
some 150 tents, wooden structures and containers were observed. Small numbers of
civilians were observed intermittently in the camp. In addition, UNDOF observed
approximately 130 tents and wooden structures along the access road leading to
United Nations observation post 53. UNDOF observed 15 tents at a location
straddling the Bravo line north-west of the village of Ayn Qadi and a reduction in
the number of tents from seven to one in the centre of Kudnah in the area of

16-03647

3/9

S/2016/242

limitation. Owing to the closure of the established crossing point between the Alpha
and Bravo sides since late August 2014, UNDOF is not currently in a position to
facilitate, in cooperation with the International Committee of the Red Cross,
humanitarian crossings, including a crossing for students, between the Alpha and the
Bravo sides.
14. Since the temporary relocation of UNDOF from a number of positions in
September 2014 and pending its full return to the area of separation, conditions
permitting, the operations of the Force in its current configuration have remained
the same. In that context, UNDOF has continued to maintain visibility, albeit in a
modified manner, of the area of separation and the ceasefire line from its positions
on Mount Hermon in the northern part of the area of sep aration and position 80 in
the southern part, as well as position 22 on the Alpha side. UNDOF operations
continued to be supported by the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO), who maintained five fixed and four temporary observation posts on the
Alpha side. The focus of the activities of Observer Group Golan remained on
around-the-clock static observation, investigations and situational analysis. Through
Observer Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly inspections of
equipment and force levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side. Liaison
officers from the Alpha side accompanied the inspection teams. Inspections and
mobile operations in the area of limitation on the Bravo side remained suspended
because of the security situation. As in the past, the Force faced restrictions on its
freedom of movement, and its inspection teams were denied access to some
positions on the Alpha side.
15. On a number of occasions during the reporting period, United Nations
personnel observed 155 mm artillery weapons on the Alpha side within 10 km of the
ceasefire line, in positions and on flatbed trucks. On 20 November, an anti -tank
missile-launching system was observed at an IDF position south of observation
post 73. On 12 January, UNDOF personnel observed six M109 (155 mm artillery)
self-propelled guns, and on 22 January five missile carriers 10 km from the
ceasefire line. UNDOF and Observer Group Golan members also continued to
experience some restrictions of movement on the Alpha side when entering and
exiting United Nations observation posts 54 and 73, which are located east of the
Israeli technical fence, as a result of delays by IDF in opening the technical fence
gate. At the time of writing, new arrangements were put in place with regard to
observation post 73, improving the situation in relation to the delays experienced by
UNDOF troops and Observer Group Golan military observers at the technical fence
gate. UNDOF troops continued to be deployed at United Nations observation posts
54 and 73, providing additional security and force protection to Observer Group
Golan military observers. The relocation of the UNDOF temporary headquarters
functions from the Sheraton Hotel in Damascus to the Yafour Hotel on the outskirts
of Damascus was completed in December.
16. UNDOF, in consultation with the parties, continued to review the situation in
the area of separation. The ultimate objective of the Force is to make a full return to
the area of separation, when conditions permit. In recent months, UND OF has
assessed that, although the situation in the northern part of the area of separation
remained volatile, the intensity in the fighting between the Syrian armed forces and
armed groups had eased. In this regard, UNDOF imitated on-the-ground
assessments of the conditions in the area of separation for a potential incremental
return to the area. On 19 January, an UNDOF team carried out a preliminary fact -

4/9

16-03647

S/2016/242

finding visit to the Bravo side, namely, Camp Faouar, in the area of limitation, Khan
Arnabah straddling the central part of the area of separation and position 32 in the
area of separation. The visit was facilitated by the Syrian authorities. There were no
security incidents along the route taken by the team from the temporary
headquarters of UNDOF at Yafour Hotel to Camp Faouar, position 32 and Khan
Aranabah. The team found Camp Faouar and position 32 guarded by the Syrian
armed forces and that the Camp had sustained significant damage, including fire
damage to many of its buildings, and there was evidence of looting having taken
place. The team also found that position 32 showed signs of looting and associated
destruction. The team did not find any visible indications of combat having occurred
at either Camp Faouar or position 32 and found that a number o f structures,
including the perimeter walls and bunkers, were intact at both locations. UNDOF
plans to conduct further fact-finding visits to the area of separation in order to
assess conditions for a potential return.
17. UNDOF also continued to engage with the parties on practical arrangements to
allow the Force to continue to maintain the ceasefire, monitor, verify and report on
violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement and exercise its critical
liaison functions with the parties in order to implement its mandate. In addition,
UNDOF continued to engage with the parties on the use of technology, including
technological enablers to enhance the observation and monitoring of the area of
separation and the ceasefire line and to offset the loss of sit uational awareness as a
result of its current configuration. The security conditions prevailing in the area of
separation and the area of limitation on the Bravo side, as well as the lack of
agreement on established crossing procedures on the Bravo side in the absence of
the Quneitra crossing and temporary observation posts for the Force on the Alpha
side, continue to hamper UNDOF operations.
18. UNDOF planning continued to focus on maintaining operational effectiveness
to support and maintain the Force in its current configuration and under the
prevailing conditions. The capabilities of UNDOF to carry out its mandate in a safe
and secure manner were assessed in the military capability study that was conducted
in October, with consultations and the corresponding report completed in
November. The findings of the study focused primarily on command and control,
force restructuring, observation capabilities and force protection. The key
recommendations in the study included the operational optimization and self sustainment of Mount Hermon positions and position 80; a reduction of some
70 troops from the logistics unit and the reconfiguration of the Force in order to
strengthen its positions in the area of separation; enhancement of medical facilities
at United Nations positions in the Mount Hermon area and at position 80; additional
observation systems and armoured personnel carriers; an explosive ordnance
disposal capability for Mount Hermon positions; and the optimization of the
deployment of Observer Group Golan military observers. The appropriate political,
security and Force conditions for a potential incremental return of UNDOF to the
area of separation were also considered in the study.
19. UNDOF has continued its efforts to strengthen its positions in the Mount
Hermon area, including upgrading communication services and accommodation and
force protection measures at positions 12 and 12A. The group of 50 peacekeepers
assigned to position 12A is fully operational. UNDOF completed the stocking of the
logistics requirements and necessary winterization preparations for the positions.

16-03647

5/9

S/2016/242

United Nations position 80 was developed further with additional force protection
measures and observation capabilities.
20. UNDOF continued to resupply its positions on Mount Hermon from
Damascus. UNDOF convoys between Damascus and the Mount Hermon positions
are conducted almost daily and with a Force security escort, accompanied by a
liaison officer from the office of the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate. UNDOF
continued to carry out contingency planning for the reinforcement and evacuation of
United Nations positions and observation posts and to update its contingency
planning for the relocation and evacuation of United Nations personnel on both the
Alpha and Bravo sides, as well as in Damascus. UNDOF, through its Force reserve
company, conducted regular rehearsals, exercises and training for all identified
contingencies.
21. The implementation of risk mitigation measures continued at observation
posts, positions, the operational base at Camp Ziouani, the UNDOF temporary
headquarters at Yafour Hotel, the administrative office in Mazzah and the
representational office in Damascus. Additional force protection measures have
been completed at United Nations positions on Mount Hermon and posit ion 80.
22. As at 26 February, UNDOF comprised 768 troops, including 23 women.
Troops are currently deployed from Bhutan (2), the Czech Republic (3), Fiji (300),
India (189), Ireland (151), Nepal (121) and the Netherlands (2). In addition, 77
military observers from UNTSO, including 3 women, assisted the Force in carrying
out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
23. The Security Council, when deciding in its resolution 2257 (2015) to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months, until 31 December 2015,
called upon the parties concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338
(1973) and requested the Secretary-General to submit, at the end of the period, a
report on developments in the situation and the measures taken to implement that
resolution. The search for a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, in particular the
efforts made at various levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was dealt with in
my report on the situation in the Middle East (A/70/353), submitted pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions 69/24, on Jerusalem, and 69/25, on the Syrian Golan.
24. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict is further reducing the
prospects for their resumption and for progress towards peace between Israel and
the Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in
the Syrian Arab Republic, in accordance with the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva Communiqué, as well as the
resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive, just and durable peace settlement in
the Middle East, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution 338 (1973)
and other relevant resolutions.

6/9

16-03647

S/2016/242

IV. Observations
25. I am deeply concerned about the violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that have taken place. The fighting between the Syrian armed force s and
armed groups, and between different armed groups in the area of separation and
limitation on the Bravo side jeopardize the long-term ceasefire between Israel and
the Syrian Arab Republic. It remains critical that the parties maintain liaison with
UNDOF in the first instance to prevent any escalation of the situation across the
ceasefire line. The mandate of UNDOF remains an important element in ensuring
the stability of the region. For its part, the United Nations will spare no effort in
ensuring that the long-held ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic
continues to hold.
26. I am gravely concerned about the continuing deterioration of the security
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, its impact on the Syrian population and its
potential implications for the stability of the region. These developments have
continued to significantly affect the UNDOF area of operations. The presence of the
Syrian armed forces and unauthorized military equipment in the area of separation
is in violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The increased use of
heavy weapons by the Syrian armed forces and non-State armed opposition groups,
as well as listed terrorist groups, in the continuing Syrian conflict, including air
power by government forces in the area of limitation on the Bravo side, is
disturbing. I note with concern the increasing presence and use of tanks and heavy
weapons by the Syrian armed forces and by non-State armed opposition and listed
terrorist groups in the area of separation. Non-State armed opposition groups and
listed groups continue to maintain control over significant sections of the areas of
separation and limitation in the southern part of the UNDOF area of operations and
remain present along the section of the main road connecting the two UNDOF
camps. The established crossing between the Alpha and Bravo sides remains closed.
27. There should be no military forces in the area of separation other than those of
UNDOF. I urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to stop t he use of air
strikes. I call upon all parties to the Syrian conflict to respect the nationwide
cessation of hostilities in accordance with Security Council resolution 2268 (2016),
cease military actions in the UNDOF area of operations and remove all milit ary
equipment and all armed personnel from the area of separation.
28. IDF should cease to deploy unauthorized weapons and equipment in the area
of limitation on the Alpha side. In addition, the breaches of the ceasefire line by IDF
soldiers have the potential to escalate tensions between the two sides.
29. I call upon countries with influence to strongly and urgently convey to the
armed groups in the UNDOF area of operations the need to cease any actions in
violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement between Israel and the Syrian
Arab Republic that jeopardize the safety and security of United Nations personnel,
and to accord United Nations personnel the freedom to carry out their mandate
safely and securely. I remain concerned about the several incid ents that have
jeopardized United National personnel and facilities. Any hostile act against United
Nations personnel, including threatening their physical safety, restricting their
movement and direct and indirect firing at United Nations personnel and fa cilities
by anyone, is unacceptable. The safety and security of United Nations personnel
must be ensured. I reiterate that all military activities in the area of separation

16-03647

7/9

S/2016/242

carried out by any actor pose a risk to the ceasefire and to the local civilian
population, in addition to United Nations personnel on the ground. I call upon all
parties to take all measures necessary to protect civilians.
30. The primary responsibility for the safety and security of United Nations
personnel in the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side rests with the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.
31. The continued presence of UNDOF in the area remains essential. Both Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated their continued commitment to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and the presence of UNDOF. I call upon both
parties to assist UNDOF in achieving its interim configuration and deployment as
quickly as possible to ensure that the mission is in a position to implement its
mandate effectively, until such time as conditions allow it to make a full return to
the area of separation. I note the assistance provided by the Governments of Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic in facilitating the provision of essential supplies in
support of the Force. I also call upon the parties to continue supporting UNDOF in
its reconfiguration efforts and to address the pending administrative, logistic and
operational aspects, including the established efficient temporary procedures for the
crossing between the Alpha and Bravo sides by mission personnel in the absence of
the crossing at Qunaytirah. It remains critical for UNDOF to have the necessary
technology and equipment to enhance its observation of the area of separation and
the ceasefire line, and to improve force protection. The full return of UNDOF to the
area of separation remains a priority for the mission. In planning and preparing for
such a return, the safety and security of United Nations personnel remains the
primary consideration in determining the exact modalities.
32. It is equally critical that the Security Council continue to bring its influence to
bear on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to
operate in a safe and secure manner, and freely. It is essential that UNDOF continue
to have at its disposal all means and resources necessary to enable it to make a full
return to the area of separation as the situation permits. The implementation of the
recommendations contained in the military capability study of UNDOF will enable
UNDOF to maximize its operational effectiveness in its current configuration and
contribute to the mission’s efforts in assessing the conditions for potential return to
the area of separation.
33. The confidence and commitment of troop-contributing countries with regard to
UNDOF remain a key factor for the mission’s ability to continue to carry out its
mandate. I am grateful to the Governments of Bhutan, the Czech Republic, Fiji,
India, Ireland, Nepal and the Netherlands for their contributions, their commitmen t
and their resolve. I am also thankful to the Member States contributing military
observers to UNTSO.
34. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to Lieutenant General Purna
Chandra Thapa, who completed his tour of duty with UNDOF on 7 February, for his
dedicated leadership and commitment during his tenure as UNDOF Head of Mission
and Force Commander. I also wish to express my gratitude to the military and
civilian personnel serving in UNDOF, who continue to perform the important tasks
assigned to them by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment under
challenging circumstances. I have full confidence that UNDOF will continue to use
its best efforts to carry out its mission.

8/9

16-03647

S/2016/242

Annex

16-03647

9/9
