S/2018/1042

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 November 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary General on trafficking in persons in
armed conflict pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2388 (2017)
I. Introduction
1.
In its resolution 2388 (2017), the Security Council reiterated its deep concern
that, despite its condemnation of acts of trafficking in persons in areas affected by
armed conflict, such acts continued to occur. The Council also expressed grave
concern over the high number of women and children subjected to trafficking in areas
affected by armed conflict and the abduction of children in conflict situations. In the
resolution, the Council called upon Member States to, among other things, improve
their implementation of applicable legal obligations to criminalize, prevent and
otherwise combat trafficking in persons and to step up their efforts to investigate,
disrupt and dismantle networks engaging in trafficking in persons in areas affected
by armed conflict. The Council also called on Member States to combat related
crimes, such as money-laundering, corruption, the smuggling of migrants and other
forms of organized crime and encouraged relevant United Nations agencies and
entities to develop, in accordance with their mandates, their capability to assess and
respond to situations of trafficking in persons in armed conflict.
2.
The present report follows up on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2388 (2017) and on the progress made in the past 12 months. It is based on
information provided by Member States, United Nations entities and relevant
international and regional bodies.

II. Recent developments concerning trafficking in persons in
areas affected by armed conflict
3.
Since the debate at the Security Council on trafficking in persons that was held
on 21 November 2017, the severity of human trafficking in conflict and post -conflict
situations, as well as the nexus between terrorism and trafficking in persons, has been
examined on a number of occasions by the Council. The issue was discussed during
several Security Council debates, including the debate on the maintenance of
international peace and security held on 28 November 2017 (see S/PV.8114) and the
debate on children and armed conflict held on 9 July 2018 (se e S/PV.8305). I have
also recently reported on instances of conflict-related sexual violence that encompass
trafficking in persons when committed in situations of conflict for the purpose of
sexual violence or exploitation (see S/2018/250).

18-17756 (E)

271118

*1817756*

S/2018/1042

Overview and state of play of trafficking acts carried out by armed groups
4.
Trafficking in persons continues to be increasingly identified as a feature of
armed conflict. The cycles of violence that animate conflict often enable abuse,
exploitation and crime to thrive, providing the base conditions under which
trafficking in persons can flourish. Instances of forced marriage, sexual slavery and
forced prostitution, which have long been a feature of many conflict situations, may
at the same time qualify as forms of trafficking in persons.
5.
The severe acts of trafficking in persons occurring in Libya against migrants,
discussed by the Security Council on 28 November 2017, raised public awareness of
the risks facing people on the move. In my report on making migration work for all
(A/72/643), I underlined the risks and vulnerability of persons fleeing conflicts or on
the move, especially those travelling through territories marked by insecurity and
fragility. Political fragmentation and the proliferation of arms and armed groups in
Libya have allowed trafficking networks to thrive and perpetrate sexual violence
against migrants, refugees and asylum seekers (see S/2018/250). In my report of
12 February 2018 (S/2018/140), I encouraged the Libyan authorities to spare no effort
to identify and prosecute those responsible for such heinous crimes, and called on all
actors to cooperate with and support the efforts of the Libyan authorities to bring
perpetrators to justice.
6.
A task force on the situation of stranded migrants in Libya was formally
launched in December 2017 by the African Union, the European Union and the United
Nations, who agreed to coordinate positions to promote African, European and
international initiatives aimed at reducing demand, disrupting the supply chain and
bringing migrant smugglers and human traffickers to justice. As at August 2018, the
task force had facilitated 26,000 voluntary humanitarian returns through the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the evacuation by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) of 1,600 persons in
need of international protection.
7.
Boko Haram continues to abduct young girls for exploitative purposes. 1 In
addition, the growing use of young women and girls as suicide bombers has created
an atmosphere of suspicion towards them and made them targets of harassment,
stigmatization and arbitrary arrest by security forces, raising concerns about the
reintegration of surrendered Boko Haram fighters (see S/2018/521).
8.
Similar patterns have also been detected in the Horn of Africa. Al -Shabaab, for
instance, abducted over 1,600 children from January to December 2017, which points
to a sustained reliance on children for combat and support duties (see A/72/865–
S/2018/465). Women and girls are also reportedly trafficked by Al-Shabaab from the
coastal regions of Kenya to Somalia, where they are forced into sexual slavery, after
being deceived by false promises of work abroad. Some of those women were
reportedly held as sex slaves, while others were forced to become the “wives” of
insurgents (see S/2018/250).
9.
The activities of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, also known as
Daesh) also continue to raise grave concern, despite its decline on the ground.
Thousands of Iraqi Yazidi women and girls, captured since Au gust 2014, continued
in 2018 to be trafficked into and across the Syrian Arab Republic — some forcibly
transferred — where they have been used as sex slaves as part of the ongoing
campaign of ISIL of targeting members of minority groups . In this context, I
particularly welcome the award of the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize to Nadia Murad,
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) Goodwill Ambassador for the
__________________
1

2/17

See Security Council press statement of 2 March 2018. Available at
www.un.org/press/en/2018/sc13233.doc.htm.
18-17756

S/2018/1042

Dignity of Survivors of Human Trafficking, herself a member of the Yazidi
community and survivor of human trafficking in conflict situations.
10. The Security Council, in its resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388 (2017),
underscored that certain acts or offences associated with trafficking in the context of
armed conflict might constitute war crimes. At the same time, effective prosecution
of offenders requires the collection of solid and reliable evidence during the
investigation, which presents serious challenges in areas where armed and terrorist
groups operate. In order to respond, at least in part, to such situations and pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2379 (2017), I appointed in May 2018 a Special Adviser
and head of an investigative team to support domestic efforts to hold ISIL accountable
by collecting, preserving and storing evidence in Iraq of acts committed by this
terrorist group that may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and ge nocide.
I call upon all States to fully support and cooperate with the investigative team. I also
welcome the ongoing work of the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
11. In Myanmar, reports have indicated that Rohingya women and girls who fled
violence from Rakhine State to Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh, confront risks of
trafficking, in addition to forced marriage and sexual exploitation. Women and girls
in the Kachin and northern Shan states of Myanmar also face serious risks of
trafficking and sexual slavery (see S/2018/250). According to testimonial evidence
collected by the Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar, rape
and other forms of sexual violence were perpetrated on a massive scale and formed
part of a deliberate strategy to intimidate, terrorize or punish a civilian population
(see A/HRC/39/64).
Linkages between trafficking and grave violations against children affected by
armed conflict
12. Armed conflict has an impact on the lives of children and makes them vulnerable
to trafficking in persons and other forms of exploitation. Trafficking in persons is
closely linked to the six grave violations affecting children in situations of armed
conflict. In this context, the recruitment and use of children nearly always constitutes
trafficking, as the two required elements of the offence of trafficking in persons that
affect children, namely the action (recruitment) and purpose (exploitation), are
intrinsic elements of this grave violation. Rape and other forms of sexual violence are
also clearly linked to trafficking, as armed groups often traffic children for sexual
purposes and sometimes to financially sustain their activities. Abduction can also
amount to trafficking when it occurs for exploitative purposes, as is often the case in
conflict situations. The Security Council, in its resolution 2427 (2018), recognized
the links between abductions, recruitment and trafficking in persons and encouraged
relevant parts of the United Nations System, within their respective mandates, to work
to address this issue.
13. While these grave violations have a clear and direct link to trafficking in
persons, other grave violations are linked in less intuitive ways. For example, attacks
on schools and hospitals can be used to abduct children, but these violations can also
make children more vulnerable to additional abuses and violations. Destroying
schools and hospitals and preventing educational opportunities leaves children more
vulnerable to trafficking, as they will be forced to seek education, care or even
employment elsewhere. Moreover, the denial of humanitarian access may also leave
children more vulnerable to trafficking as they are forced to find ways to leave areas
where insufficient aid is getting through.

18-17756

3/17

S/2018/1042

14. In the past 12 months, I have submitted to the Security Council country -specific
reports on children and armed conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2018/502), Mali (S/2018/136) and Myanmar (S/2017/1099), all of which
addressed acts closely linked to human trafficking, such as the abduction of children.
15. In my report on children and armed conflict of May 2018 ( A/72/865–
S/2018/465), I noted that the United Nations continued to document the recrui tment
and use of children by armed groups, including three verified cases of boys recruited
by ISIL in and around Tripoli for trafficking into the Syrian Arab Republic . 2 In its
2018 report (S/2018/594), the Panel of Experts on Yemen reported investigations of
individuals and networks engaging in child recruitment and the use of children in
conflict. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, armed groups and community
defence groups engaged in the forced recruitment and use of children, exposing them
to other grave violations, including sexual violence. At least 56 per cent of the newly
recruited girls reported rape, sexual slavery or forced marriage by armed groups (see
S/2018/502).
Arrest and detention of persons released from the captivity of armed groups
16. Identification of victims of trafficking is essential to ensure that they receive
protection and assistance in accordance with applicable international lega l
instruments and domestic legislation. Routinely assessing the individual situation of
persons, including children, released from the captivity of armed and terrorist groups
facilitates an active determination of whether they have been trafficked. Such
assessments also facilitate, in line with domestic legislation, non -prosecution or
punishment of victims of trafficking for unlawful activities they may have committed
as a direct result of having been subjected to trafficking.
17. Recent country-specific reports on children and armed conflict note instances
of children being arrested and detained for their alleged association with armed
groups. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, at least 95 children were detained
on such grounds for periods ranging between 30 days and one year. Children reported
poor detention conditions and, in some cases, inhumane treatment, including torture
(see S/2018/502). In Mali, 72 boys who were arrested and detained by the
Government for their alleged association with armed groups were released, but other
children remain in custody (see S/2018/136).
18. Women and children formerly associated with violent extremist groups are often
seen by societies as “affiliates” rather than victims, and, in some cases, actions by the
authorities have reinforced those views. Local-level officials in Iraq have reportedly
designated children as “ISIL terrorists” on their birth certificates. Women and girls
forcibly married to ISIL fighters often face a presumption of “guilt by association”.
In some cases, women and girls have been held arbitrarily, without judicial review
following their release from ISIL captivity (see ( S/2018/250). As at July 2018, over
1,300 children were reportedly being held by parties in the north -eastern part of the
Syrian Arab Republic. Of those reported cases, the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on grave violations against children in situations of armed conflict,
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612 (2005), could verify only
seven cases since the beginning of 2018, owing to a lack of access (see A/73/278 and
S/PV.8320).
__________________
2

4/17

In the Syrian Arab Republic itself, from January to December 2017, the United Nations verified
24 cases of rape and other forms of sexual violence (23 girls and 1 boy). Cases included gang
rape, forced marriage to armed group fighters, trafficking an d sexual enslavement. Of the
24 cases, 18 were attributed to ISIL, 4 to Government forces and 2 to Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham. I
have expressed concern over reports of trafficking of children in Libya.
18-17756

S/2018/1042

Other developments
19. In the follow-up to the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, 3
Member States negotiated the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration. The non-binding but intergovernmentally negotiated and agreed outcome
was published on 13 July 2018. 4 In that document, Member States commit to take
legislative or other measures to prevent, combat and eradicate trafficking in persons
in the context of international migration. I welcome this commitment, which is
essential to addressing the risks of human rights violations and abuse faced by
refugees and migrants, especially female migrants and separated and/or
unaccompanied children.
20. The Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, has stressed how Somali and Sudanese refugees and asylum seekers fleeing
conflict have been kidnapped or lured from refugee camps or while travelling, sold
and subsequently held captive in Libya or in the Sinai desert for the purpose of
exploitation through extortion (see A/HRC/38/45). She has also highlighted the
challenges faced by refugees and migrants exploited in the course of their journeys,
including a reluctance to self-report exploitation and the de-prioritization of
identification efforts by relevant stakeholders.
21. The Security Council requested me to ensure that the thematic p aper on
countering trafficking in persons in conflict situations, prepared by UNODC, was
disseminated within the United Nations system. On 17 October 2018, my office
disseminated the thematic paper to all missions, as well as to the funds, programmes
and agencies operating in conflict-affected settings for which the thematic paper was
most relevant. They were encouraged to use it as a basis for developing tools, good
practices and guidance on addressing trafficking in persons within their respective
mandates. I also welcome the study prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate aimed at identifying and exploring the nexus between human
trafficking, acts of terrorism and terrorism financing.

III. Measures reported by Member States
A.

Ratification and implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the Trafficking in
Persons Protocol
22. The United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
together with its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, continues to offer a framework for States to
reinforce international cooperation in criminal matters and facilitate the exchange of
information relating to trafficking offences perpetrated by armed and terrorist groups.
During the reporting period, the State of Palestine deposited its instrument of
accession to the Protocol on 29 December 2017; the Protocol entered into force in the
State of Palestine on 28 January 2018. As at 30 September 2018, there were 189 States
parties to the Convention and 173 States parties to the Protocol. On 19 October 2018,
at the most recent session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, held in Vienna, Member States
agreed to establish a peer review mechanism to enhance the implementation of the
Convention, including the Trafficking in Persons Protocol.

__________________
3
4

18-17756

General Assembly resolution 71/1.
www.un.org/pga/72/wp-content/uploads/sites/51/2018/07/180713_Agreed-Outcome_GlobalCompact-for-Migration.pdf.
5/17

S/2018/1042

23. In their contributions to the present report, a number of States noted that there
was no armed conflict in their territories and that they had not identified victims of
trafficking coming from conflict-affected areas or trafficked by terrorist or armed
groups. Nevertheless, the measures these States presented in their inputs related to
identifying and protecting victims of trafficking remain relevant to the overall
purpose of the Convention and Protocol, which is to ensure that all victims of
trafficking are identified and protected, and trafficker s prosecuted and convicted. I
encourage them to continue such efforts, as they clearly contribute to a more
comprehensive response internationally.
24. The majority of Member States had adopted legislation criminalizing trafficking
in persons, in line with the Trafficking in Persons Protocol. Several States noted that
their anti-trafficking laws, which covered various forms of exploitation, applied to
trafficking in times of peace, as well as in times of conflict. Some States stressed that
certain related conduct might be covered by provisions other than those specifically
criminalizing trafficking in persons. That was the case, for instance, with regard to
the recruitment of children by armed groups, which in some States had been
established as a distinct criminal offence. Other States stressed that trafficking in
persons constituted a violation of human rights and possibly also a war crime, a crime
against humanity or even genocide.
25. One State questioned the competence of the Security Council to address
trafficking in persons, arguing that trafficking fell within the purview of other United
Nations bodies.

B.

Implementation of applicable legal obligations to prevent,
criminalize, investigate and prosecute trafficking in
conflict situations
26. Many States highlighted the challenges associated with the investigation and
prosecution of human trafficking in the context of armed conflict, and reported
various measures that they had undertaken to address such challenges.
27. The utilization of officers with a specialization in investigating human
trafficking and other complex crimes was highlighted as a key objective and good
practice. Similarly, several States reported efforts to provide adequate training in
combating trafficking in persons, in all its manifestations, to criminal justice actors
and consular staff, including through specialized courses throughout their training
curricula.
28. States continued to report successful initiatives to enhance information
exchange and joint operations relating to trafficking cases. I welcome the setting up
of a joint investigation team involving France, the Niger and Spain to fight against
criminal networks linked to trafficking in persons, and invite other States to join or
support similar initiatives. Other positive developments include the conduct of
regionally coordinated investigations and the conclusion of memorandums of
understanding and agreements between countries of origin, transit and destination of
specific trafficking flows.
29. Measures targeting the capacity of international peacekeepers in active duty or
when stationed in areas affected by armed conflict are particularly crucial in
addressing trafficking in such areas. States reported the integration of specialized
training on trafficking in persons, the criminal structures involved and their modi
operandi as part of regular predeployment training. Another good practice that was
noted concerned the issuance of guidelines for the identification and referral of
trafficking victims to competent authorities, and for the utilization of these guidelines

6/17

18-17756

S/2018/1042

by military police officers deployed on the ground and tasked with investigating
offences committed by troops. I invite States to follow these approaches and continue
to enhance the training of military and police personnel to provide them with skills to
address human trafficking in conflict and post-conflict situations.
30. Some States indicated that they had established jurisdiction over trafficking
offences committed outside of their territory in accordance with article 15 of the
Organized Crime Convention. I am pleased to note that other States reported the
establishment of extraterritorial jurisdiction without a requirement of dual
criminality. For instance, one State reported that its anti -trafficking law had an
extraterritorial reach, which provided jurisdiction over its nationals, who might be
prosecuted for trafficking offences committed abroad, including in areas affected by
armed conflict. I invite Member States to consider these approaches, which facilitate
international cooperation and curtail impunity.
31. Prevention of trafficking in persons is also key, especial ly considering that
vulnerability increases in areas affected by conflict or hosting persons fleeing
conflict. Joint efforts between government agencies and civil society organizations
constitute a good method of sensitizing and raising awareness about hum an
trafficking among internally displaced persons, as well as other persons involved. A
State directly affected by internal armed conflict reported the establishment of a
specialized State entity, which developed advocacy materials and organized
specialized training for frontline officers assisting children in situations of armed
conflict. I invite States to pursue such efforts and extend them to other settings and
audiences, such as refugee camps and reception centres.
32. A number of States reported the establishment of national strategies and action
plans. Many national action plans foresaw a comprehensive approach, encompassing
the prevention of trafficking, the protection of victims and the prosecution of
perpetrators. Some expressly referred to trafficking related to armed conflict. One
State, for instance, reported that its national action plan included targets that
specifically took into consideration the circumstances in areas affected by armed
conflict, such as research on trafficking in zones of armed conflict and the
development of specific prevention programmes, community educational activities
and campaigns.
33. I welcome the development by several States of a multidimensional approach
that includes the incorporation of information on the risks of trafficking in persons
into school curricula and training programmes. National educational institutions have
integrated information on this issue into class materials, as well as information on
children who are vulnerable as a result of armed conflict, and held discussion sessions
at all levels of education. I invite States to further continue these efforts and to
consider integrating the topic of trafficking in persons into the teaching modules of
educational institutions.

C.

Improving the identification of victims or persons vulnerable to
trafficking, including by enhancing the capacity of professionals
interacting with persons forcibly displaced by armed conflict
34. Many States underlined early identification as a crucial measure for the
provision of adequate protection to victims of trafficking, including victims in areas
affected by conflicts or coming from such areas. Several States, especially those
facing mixed migration flows as transit or destination countries, reported advancing
significant efforts to that end.

18-17756

7/17

S/2018/1042

35. Several States reported the development of inclusive identification regimes,
which enhanced the capabilities of public and private professionals to detect and
identify victims or persons vulnerable to trafficking as early as possible. The
involvement of a broad range of professionals in the process for screening,
identification and registration of refugees and migrants was particularly prevalent in
hotspots, first reception centres, accommodation centres and shelters for asylum
seekers and migrants. Those included asylum professionals, border guards, labour
inspectors, health professionals (including mental health practitioners and
paramedics) and the authorities of local administrations. Collaboration with civil
society organizations in identification efforts has also been reported, notably in the
setting up of mobile teams and in the development of international training
programmes. I invite States to support such activities, which directly contribute to the
development of early-screening frameworks critical to assisting, supporting and
protecting victims in a timely manner.
36. States stressed that the involvement of a broader group of stakeholders was best
accompanied by the development of specific training courses, booklets and
guidelines. I welcome the fact that States have developed training courses addressing
the identification of trafficking victims among foreign citizens and stateless persons
and the need for trauma-informed interviewing techniques for vulnerable persons
coming from conflict zones. One State reported the adoption of an inter -institutional
training plan with a mandatory training requirement for all professionals at local,
central and regional authorities. Other States had developed unified vulnerability
assessments that were carried out by medical doctors and psychosocial professionals
and produced booklets for migration and asylum authorities providing a
comprehensive overview of trafficking, as well as standard operating procedures for
the identification and referral of victims of trafficking, including specific provisions
for unaccompanied minors. Some States also provided specialized assistance and
shelters for victims of trafficking identified among refugees and reported
rehabilitation programmes for victims in areas affected by conflict and camps for
internally displaced persons, such as vocational training, in dedicated skill acquisition
centres. I encourage States to adopt and support similar approaches that contribute to
the identification of, and the provision of assistance and support to, trafficking
victims.
37. Unaccompanied children forcibly displaced by armed conflict are particularly
vulnerable to traffickers and to being recruited for combat. I am pleased to highlight
that, in addition to criminalizing the forced recruitment of children in hostilities,
many States have implemented specific activities to identify such children and
rehabilitate them. With regard to the general protection of children, many States
reported specific measures to identify vulnerable children, ensure their timely
registration and consider their particular protection needs. It was noted that child
victims of, or children vulnerable to, trafficking received protection and assistance
from relevant government agencies in camps hosting internally displaced persons.
States reported that national authorities arranged for the hosting of unaccompanied or
separated children by foster families within the refugee community to reduce
isolation. To ensure the protection of such children, other States provided for the
appointment of guardians to cater for the needs of children and address whether they
had been victims of trafficking, as well as for the placement of children in foster care

8/17

18-17756

S/2018/1042

rather than in detention. The use of foster care is in line with recommendations of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. 5
38. Non-punishment of victims of trafficking for offences committed during their
trafficking experience remains closely connected to their prompt identification, with
a number of States noting that their domestic legislation provided for the exoneration
of such persons from criminal liability in specific circumstances, including when
persons were prosecuted for infringement of migration law. The principle of
non-punishment is also particularly relevant when persons are released from the
captivity of armed and terrorist groups.

D.

Strengthening compliance with international standards on
combating money-laundering and the financing of terrorism
39. States continued their efforts to disrupt human trafficking activities through the
conduct of financial investigations and the analysis of financial flows associated with
human trafficking. At the same time, however, information on trafficking in persons
to finance terrorism remains limited.
40. States have reported on the development of the capabilities of their financial
intelligence units and their work in conducting financial investigations in cases of
human trafficking. In some cases, these activities led to the recovery of several
million dollars. Some States stressed in that regard the usefulness of innovative
approaches, such as training offered by providers of financial transfer services t o
criminal justice practitioners. Collaboration between State authorities and money service providers also proved useful by increasing awareness and detection of
trafficking-related suspicious transaction reports. In addition, the fruitful
collaboration between States, the Financial Action Task Force and the Asia/Pacific
Group on Money Laundering led to the publication in July 2018 of an updated report
on financial flows from human trafficking, 6 which focused on the laundering of
proceeds of human trafficking. I invite States to take into account the risk indicators
and the good practices mentioned in that report, which contribute to reinforcing the
efficiency of systems in detecting and combating money-laundering and the financing
of terrorism from human trafficking.
41. Regarding cooperation and partnerships for the disruption of financial activity
and flows associated with trafficking, States reported various regional and multi stakeholder initiatives, involving experts from the financial sector, law enfo rcement
officers and financial intelligence units. These initiatives are essential to analyse
trends and share information on methods used to launder the proceeds of human
trafficking. Some regional initiatives go beyond training and the sharing of
information to include the carrying out of joint investigations to dismantle the
financial business models of criminals.

__________________

See UNHCR, Division of International Protection, “UNHCR’s position regarding the detention
of refugee and migrant children in the migration context ” (January 2017), available at
www.refworld.org/pdfid/5885c2434.pdf; and UNHCR, “Beyond detention: a global strategy to
support governments to end the detention of asylum-seekers and refugees (2014–2019)”,
revision 1 (Geneva, 2014), available at www.unhcr.org/53aa929f6.pdf.
6
Financial Action Task Force and Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering, Financial Flows
from Human Trafficking (Paris, 2018). Available at www.fatf-gafi.org/media/fatf/content/images/
Human-Trafficking-2018.pdf.
5

18-17756

9/17

S/2018/1042

IV. Response of the United Nations system and other
international and regional bodies
A.

Support provided by United Nations entities to Member States to
prevent and respond to trafficking in persons in conflict situations
42. The United Nations system has continued to provide support to Member States
to prevent and respond to trafficking in persons in conflict situations. UNODC is
working with national authorities to assist them in implementing the Trafficking in
Persons Protocol. UNODC provides joint training sessions for investigators and
prosecutors, integrating specific modules on trafficking in persons into the curricula
of national training institutes, and develops standard operating procedures for
investigating and prosecuting trafficking in persons offences. These constitute good
practices for increasing the capacities of criminal justice practitioners. Moreover, the
assistance provided by UNODC to States in building databases to collect and analyse
data on trafficking in persons also serves to help practitioners design effective policies
to counter trafficking.
43. Support provided by UNODC to counter human trafficking in relati on to armed
conflict includes: technical round tables in territories where armed groups are
operating, to strengthen capacities in the identification of and response to risk factors
related to trafficking in persons; legislative assistance to incorporate t he Trafficking
in Persons Protocol into national law in countries affected by conflict; training
workshops for criminal justice officers on the nexus between terrorism and human
trafficking, with specific regard paid to the investigation and prosecution of cases of
sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict; provision of support for the
deployment of liaison magistrates from origin countries to destination countries, to
facilitate international judicial cooperation in criminal matters; capacity -building
activities to address the phenomenon of children associated with terrorist groups; and
a regional workshop for countries in East Africa on children on the move recruited
and exploited by armed and terrorist groups.
44. Moreover, UNODC, in cooperation with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, has developed a training module on trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of migrants for the in-mission training of police personnel deployed in the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA). The module will be used to deliver a training -of-trainers session to
MINUSMA police officers. The latter will subsequently roll out the training to their
peers.
45. UNODC, in partnership with the Office of the United Nations Hig h
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and in consultation with the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women)
and the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, is
implementing capacity-building activities to integrate a gender lens into criminal
justice responses to terrorism, including in cases of trafficking in persons to finance
terrorism. Such cooperation efforts are commendable and I encourage all entities of
the United Nations system to proactively explore opportunities to join forces in
addressing manifestations of human trafficking in conflict settings.
46. The United Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, managed by UNODC, selected 26 projects of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) for the receipt of $1.4 million in funding as
part of its third grant cycle. At least half of these projects explicitly provide direct
protection and assistance to victims trafficked in a situat ion of armed conflict or
identified within mass refugee and migration movements. Humanitarian, legal and

10/17

18-17756

S/2018/1042

financial aid to victims is provided to victims through existing channels of assistance,
including NGO partners in various conflict-affected countries.
47. UNHCR is addressing trafficking in persons in areas affected by armed conflict
in the context of the sexual and gender-based violence and child protection areas of
responsibility of the Global Protection Cluster. UNHCR focuses on developing
targeted information campaigns in source countries of mixed migration flows, aimed
at informing people about the dangers related to specific countries affected by
conflict. UNHCR is also engaged in joint capacity development for improving the
identification of and provision of assistance, protection and solutions to trafficking
victims at the global, regional and field levels in areas affected by armed conflict.
48. IOM continues to work in partnership with Governments, other United Nations
agencies, international and non-governmental organizations, the private sector and
development partners on all aspects of counter-trafficking responses.
49. IOM is strengthening referral mechanisms for trafficked persons, particularly
for sexual and labour exploitation, through capacity-building activities, victim
identification and direct assistance in countries hosting large numbers of persons
displaced by conflict. To reinforce referral mechanisms and coordination, IOM has
been strengthening the roles of and cooperation between development and
humanitarian stakeholders through the establishment of inter-agency countertrafficking working groups in conflict-affected settings. IOM also conducts
information campaigns targeting conflict affected -populations to raise awareness of
recruitment strategies deployed by traffickers and to link them with appropriate
humanitarian services.
50. The Office of Counter-Terrorism, together with OHCHR and with the support
of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, is developing a human rights
training module for frontline border officials which addresses the identification of
possible victims of trafficking.
51. The Office of Counter-Terrorism Working Group on Supporting and
Highlighting Victims of Terrorism has developed a project on mapping the
rehabilitation and reintegration needs of women and girls abducted by Boko Haram.
The project maps the services and mechanisms established by government and United
Nations entities to support such women and girls.
52. In January 2018, the Office on Genocide Prevention and Responsibility to
Protect organized the fourth annual symposium on the role of religion and faith -based
organizations in international affairs, which examined, among other topics, human
rights issues linked to forced migration, including human trafficking and the related
risk of atrocity crimes in conflict situations.
53. Given the close link between grave violations against children, such as
abduction, recruitment and sexual violence, and trafficking in persons, measures
taken to address the six grave violations affecting children in situations of armed
conflict often have a preventative effect on trafficking of children. My Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict plays a key role in the drafting,
signing and implementation of action plans for government forces and armed groups
aimed at ending and preventing these grave violations. Action plans also serve as tools
to address the trafficking of boys and girls for specific exploitative purp oses. Fourteen
action plans, six with government forces and eight with armed groups, were being
implemented as at August 2018.
54. Throughout 2017, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and child
protection partners supported the reintegration of over 12,000 children released from
armed forces and groups, which often directly benefited child victims of trafficking.
The formulation of standard operating procedures for the release and handover of
18-17756

11/17

S/2018/1042

children associated with armed groups has proven to be a n effective response tool to
ensure that affected boys and girls are handed over to child protection actors and
reunified with their families or caregivers. Two Governments have signed handover
protocols for children since February 2017. Similarly, in Augu st 2017, the Chief of
Defence Forces of the Somali National Army issued a general command order to
enhance the application of its 2014 standard operating procedures for the reception
and handover of children separated from armed groups to the United Nation s. My
Special Representative on Children and Armed Conflict has taken a lead role in
advocating for the adoption and implementation of these agreements.
55. My Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict is also playing a lead
role in ensuring commitments from Governments and armed groups to address
conflict-related sexual violence by signing joint communiqués and frameworks of
cooperation. The most recent framework of cooperation with Bangladesh, signed in
September 2018, covers the prevention of trafficking in persons. Also, the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict has been supporting the
Government of Iraq in its effort to address crimes of sexual violence committed by
ISIL, including those associated with human trafficking.
56. The Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, in her latest report to the General Assembly ( A/73/171), addresses the
gender dimension of human trafficking in conflict and post-conflict settings. The
report focuses on the protection of victims and potential victims of trafficking for
sexual exploitation and on the prevention of trafficking of women and girls in the
aftermath of conflicts through the participation and empowerment of women. The
report further explains that vulnerabilities deriving from conflicts are highly
gendered, thus requiring the integration of a human rights -based and gender-sensitive
approach to trafficking in persons into all pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda.
57. The Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes
and consequences, in her 2018 reports on domestic servitude of migrant women and
girls and on the gender dimensions of contemporary forms of slavery, discussed
armed conflict among the risk factors that can lead to situations of vulnerability and
trafficking in persons.
58. In addition to the support provided by entities of the United Nations system, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is also supporting its
participating States that have large migratory groups from conflict and post -conflict
areas. Through its project on combating human trafficking along migration routes,
OSCE assisted States in enhancing criminal justice responses and prosecution of
human traffickers operating along migration routes, and in better equipping frontline
operators to identify and protect potential victims. In addition, since 2017, the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) has carried out initiatives to
develop law enforcement capacity, information sharing and identification of
trafficking victims to counter the trafficking of members of vulnerable communities,
including in the context of conflict, along the Sahel migration route and in North
Africa.

B.

Efforts to increase knowledge on financial flows associated with
trafficking in persons, including those which finance terrorism
59. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, within the framework
of its assessment visits conducted on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
raised awareness of human trafficking as both a tactic of terrorism and a means of
raising funds for terrorist purposes.

12/17

18-17756

S/2018/1042

60. The Directorate is developing a study aimed at further exploring the nexus
between human trafficking, terrorism and the financing of terrorism. Preliminary
information gathered by the Directorate thus far indicates that only a fe w States have
been able to provide concrete instances pertaining to this nexus. The study will also
reflect how other factors, notably armed conflict situations, forced displacements and
irregular migration flows, have an impact on vulnerability to traffic king in persons.
61. As noted above, the Financial Action Task Force and the Asia/Pacific Group on
Money Laundering issued a typology report on financial flows from human
trafficking, which was adopted by the Task Force in June 2018. The report provides,
inter alia, an overview of recent developments in the nature and scope of financial
flows associated with human trafficking, including proceeds contributing to terrorist
organizations and their activities.
62. The United Nations University and two Member States have developed a global,
multi-stakeholder financial sector commission 7 to accelerate the financial sector’s
engagement in the fight against human trafficking, including by tackling drivers of
human trafficking related to countering the financing of terrorism.

C.

Integration of trafficking in persons into the work of
sanctions Committees
63. The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team continued to include
the issue of trafficking in persons in its discussions with Member States. In its twentyfirst report to the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities
(S/2018/14/Rev.1), the Monitoring Team noted the patterns of human trafficking in
Libya and the fact that ISIL in Libya continued to “tax” networks involved in human
trafficking. In its twenty-second report to the Committee (S/2018/705), the
Monitoring Team noted that it had received limited information from Member States
on linkages between human trafficking and terrorist financing. In a bid to facilitate
the future systematic collection of data on these issues, the Monitoring Team has
encouraged its interlocutors to be alert to the opportunity to acquire such information
presented by foreign terrorist fighters leaving conflict zones and entering the
jurisdiction of Member States. Accordingly, I encourage Member States to provide
the Monitoring Team with information that could help identify persons and entities
involved in terrorist financing through trafficking in persons.
64. Relevant sanctions committees have integrated the issue of human trafficking
into the implementation of sanctions measures. On 7 June 2018, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
designated six individuals as subject to sanctions measures as a result of their
involvement in transnational trafficking networks in Libya. In addition, relevant
sanctions committees have also considered the findings and recommendations of
expert groups concerning human trafficking. Those have included, among others, the
report of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan (S/2017/1125), the report of the Panel of
Experts on Libya concerning trafficking in Libya and the surrounding region
(S/2018/812) and the report of the Panel of Experts on Mali (S/2018/581), which was
established in September 2017 and explicitly mandated by the Security Council in its
resolution 2374 (2017) to track activities related to trafficking in persons.
65. Since 2015, the Department of Political Affairs has held an annual workshop on
investigative interview techniques for groups and panels of experts, including

__________________
7

18-17756

See www.financialsectorcommission.org.
13/17

S/2018/1042

humanitarian experts. In addition, during the annual inter-panel workshop held in
December 2017, the Department introduced a module on women, peace and security
and on sexual violence in conflict. Moreover, the Department has developed a training
course to strengthen its own understanding of the nexus between conflict and
transnational organized crime, including human trafficking networks.

D.

Efforts to enhance transparency in the procurement and supply
chains of the United Nations system organizations
66. The United Nations Supplier Code of Conduct and the United Nations General
Conditions of Contract clearly articulate that any supplier providing products or
services to the United Nations is expected to adhere to the values of the Charter of
the United Nations and to the International Labour Standards, and that contractors
shall take all appropriate measures to prevent sexual exploitation or abuse by its
employees or any other person they have engaged and prohibit forced or compulsory
labour in all its forms. The text in the Supplier Code of Cond uct on measures
addressing human trafficking will be further explored within the Procurement
Network of the High-level Committee on Management.

E.

Improving data collection, analysis and research
67. UNODC has pursued its work on research and analysis related to trafficking in
conflict situations. In partnership with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
UNODC has interviewed police and justice experts from peacekeeping operations,
focusing on the experiences and perceptions of the experts to identify the forms of
exploitation, the profiles of victims and modi operandi. Cases from the international
criminal tribunals have also been examined to identify how forced marriage, sexual
slavery and recruitment of children have occurred in armed conflict, which may
include aspects of trafficking in persons. The result of the research will be presented
in the 2018 UNODC Global Report on Trafficking in Persons, which will be released
in December 2018.
68. In the area of data collection and research, IOM is collecting baseline data on
human trafficking and migrant exploitation, abuse and vulnerability in situations of
crisis, displacement and large-scale migration. IOM continued using the
Displacement Tracking Matrix to produce baseline data to inform responses aimed at
countering trafficking in complex crisis situations and large -scale, cross-border
migration flows.
69. The Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict helped
to ensure that information collected from areas of conflict through the monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence encompasses
trafficking in persons, as per resolution 2388 (2017). This enabled me to address
trafficking in persons in my annual report on conflict -related sexual violence, when
relevant.
70. In June 2017, the Office of the OSCE Special Representative and Coordinator
for Combating Trafficking in Human Beings launched a research project to study the
links between human trafficking and terrorism by collecting and analysing cases of
forced and deceptive recruitment, and the transfer and harbouring of adults and
children for the purpose of exploitation. The research e xamines the vulnerability
factors that are exploited by terrorist groups in order to lure individuals into conflict
areas, and is aimed at refining our understanding of how persons are coerced,
deceived, threatened or kidnapped into terrorist networks.

14/17

18-17756

S/2018/1042

71. United Nations University has launched an online knowledge platform (Delta
8.7) that brings together data, evidence and analysis related to target 8.7 of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The platform includes the latest research on
conflict situations, organized crime and migration, and their connection to human
trafficking and other forms of exploitation.

F.

Efforts to develop coordinated responses to trafficking in persons
in conflict situations
72. I am pleased to report that United Nations entities and international and regional
organizations have stepped up their coordination efforts within the Inter -Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons. Since November 2017, four
entities with important mandates in conflict-related areas, namely the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Department of Political Affairs, the
Office on Genocide Prevention and Responsibility to Protect and the Office of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, joined th e Group, which
currently consists of 22 members and 1 partner organization. On 2 May 2018,
members of the Group met for the first time at the principals level and took important
strategic decisions to advance its work, including to develop guidance materia ls on
anti-trafficking responses, increase joint advocacy efforts and establish an
administrative secretariat for the Group, led by UNODC. The Group remains the main
United Nations inter-agency mechanism to address human trafficking.
73. The thematic paper on countering trafficking in persons in conflict situations,
prepared by UNODC following consultations with a broad range of United Nations
entities, is a tool to foster more consistent and coordinated responses to human
trafficking by the United Nations system. Through contributing to a common and
better understanding of human trafficking in the context of conflict, it is aimed at
supporting collaborative efforts to prevent and counter conflict -related human
trafficking.
74. The task team on anti-trafficking in humanitarian action of the Global Protection
Cluster continued to develop a common position on interventions to counter
trafficking as part of humanitarian responses and to provide recommendations and
guidance on how best to integrate such interventions systematically into Cluster
mechanisms. Between October 2017 and June 2018, the task team carried out a
stocktaking exercise in the humanitarian response mechanisms on trafficking in
persons. Through semi-structured interviews with Protection Cluster Coordinators
and other actors in 29 humanitarian settings, the task team assessed if and how human
trafficking was being addressed by Cluster coordination mechanisms, identified gaps
and recurring challenges and explored opportunities related to addressin g human
trafficking in the humanitarian response. The report of this exercise was released in
September 2018. 8

V. Observations and recommendations
75. During the reporting period, the international community has sustained and
enhanced its efforts to respond to trafficking in persons in conflict situations. I
particularly welcome the efforts undertaken by States and other stakeholders to better
identify, among persons affected by conflict, those who have been trafficked, or who
are at risk of being trafficked. I urge Member States to consider replicating the good
__________________
8

18-17756

Available at www.globalprotectioncluster.org/_assets/files/anti-trafficking-in-humanitarianresponses.pdf.
15/17

S/2018/1042

practices mentioned in the present report, such as the competences conferred to a wide
range of public and private actors to detect trafficking victims, or persons at risk, in
camps hosting refugees and/or internally displaced persons, in reception centres for
migrants and during asylum proceedings. I urge States to expedite the rescue of those
held in captivity by terrorist groups, including women and children trafficked and/or
held as sex slaves. I invite States to ensure that victims of trafficking for the purpose
of sexual violence or sexual exploitation perpetrated by terrorist groups are
recognized as legitimate victims of terrorism and receive reparations. I also call upon
States to train peacekeeping personnel on identifying and responding to indicators of
conflict-related trafficking in persons, as a mandatory component of predeployment
training. United Nations system entities have also become better equipped to address
the challenges posed by trafficking in persons in conflict situations. I welcome in
particular increased joint action and coordination among United Nations entities and
note that coordinated responses allow for the efficient leveraging of institutional
strengths and multiply the impact on the ground.
76. Combating trafficking in persons requires a comprehensive response, involving
all States and stakeholders, not only those directly affected by armed conflict and
post-conflict situations. Such a response must include mutually reinforcing efforts to
prevent and resolve armed conflicts, on the one hand, and to prevent and combat
trafficking in persons on the other. As highlighted in the global compact on refugees,
conflict is among the root causes of large refugee situations a nd contributes to
increasing the risk of trafficking of individuals among vulnerable populations.
77. The Trafficking in Persons Protocol and the Organized Crime Convention
remain the basis for a common understanding of trafficking in persons and provide a
widely accepted legal framework for enhancing cooperation between States in this
area. The almost universal ratification of the Trafficking in Persons Protocol is to be
welcomed and I strongly encourage Member States that have not yet done so to ratify
or accede to the Protocol and its parent Convention. The effective and full
implementation of international obligations remains at the core of the international
response to human trafficking, and I urge Member States to redouble their efforts to
criminalize all forms of trafficking in persons in their domestic legislation, provide
adequate protection and assistance to trafficking victims, bring perpetrators to justice
and strengthen international cooperation. I am confident that the recently established
Mechanism for the Review of Implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto will be instrumental
in making progress towards fully implementing their provisions. I hereby invite States
to consider making use of technical assistance and support made available by the
United Nations system.
78. Victims of trafficking suffer traumatic experiences that add to those experienced
in armed conflict and post-conflict situations. Trafficking victims must receive
adequate protection and assistance, notably to overcome their trauma and to facilitate
their reintegration and rehabilitation. In that regard, their prompt identification is
essential.
79. The collection of solid and reliable evidence during investigations is of
paramount importance to ending the impunity of traffickers. I encourage Member
States, whenever possible, to collect, preserve and store evidence, including
electronic evidence, and to cooperate among themselves and with relevant
international entities such as UNODC, to strengthen their capacities with regard to
evidence collection, in full respect of international human rights law and standards.
80. Trafficking in persons is perceived by perpetrators, including armed groups and
terrorists, as a high-profit and low-risk criminal activity; tracing illicit profits deriving
from such activity contributes to diminishing this perception and reducing the
16/17

18-17756

S/2018/1042

attractiveness of the crime. I welcome the efforts undertaken by international actors,
such as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Financial Action
Task Force and the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering, to improve knowledge
concerning illicit financial flows associated with human trafficking, including its
linkages with terrorist financing. I invite Member States to pursue their efforts to
strengthen compliance with international standards related to countering moneylaundering and combating the financing of terrorism, conduct proactive investigations
to track and disrupt criminal proceeds and financial flows associated with human
trafficking and reinforce regional and international operational cooperation in this
field. I also invite member States to provide to the relevant sanctions committees
through the Monitoring Team and other relevant groups and panels of experts, as well
as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, all information they
possess on individuals that may fulfil the listing criteria and on terrorist financing
through trafficking in persons.
81. Trafficking in persons can amount to conflict-related sexual violence when
committed in situations of conflict for the purpose of sexual violence or exploitation;
as such, it is also addressed within the context of the women and peace and security
agenda of the Security Council. I would therefore encourage States to design and
implement results-oriented national action plans on women, peace and security which
include comprehensive measures aimed at preventing and responding to trafficking
in persons at the national level and allocate sufficient human and financial resources
for the effective implementation of such action plans.
82. I welcome the expansion of membership in the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons to United Nations actors handling issues relating
to human trafficking in conflict situations. I also note the advances the Group has
made in facilitating the United Nations speaking with one voice on trafficking in
persons, including through the provision of guidance for improved systemwide
analysis and programming. I encourage Member States to support the secretariat
functions of the Group and invite all members of the Group to build on these recent
developments and continue to devote attention to the intersections between human
trafficking and conflict.
83. Finally, I encourage them to use the thematic paper on countering tra fficking in
persons in conflict situations developed by UNODC in consultation with United
Nations entities.

18-17756

17/17
