s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/25545
7 April 1993

ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3196th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 April 1993, in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item "Admission of new
Members", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the members:
"The Security Council has just recommended that the State whose
application is in document S/25147 be admitted to membership in the United
Nations.
It is with great pleasure that, on behalf of the members of the
Council, I congratulate the State concerned on this historic occasion. The
members of the Council look forward to its early admission to the United
Nations.
"The Council welcomes the initiative taken by the Co-Chairmen of the
Steering Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia, at the request of the Secretary-General, in order to set up a
mechanism to settle the difference which has arisen over the name of the
State, and to promote confidence-building measures among the two parties.
The Council attaches the highest importance to implementing as soon as
possible the confidence-building measures referred to in the resolution
which has just been adopted. The Council expresses the hope that the
initiative of the Co-Chairmen will be pursued expeditiously, that both
sides will fully cooperate with the Co-Chairmen, that both sides, and all
others concerned, will avoid taking steps that would render a solution more
difficult, and that both will accept and implement the outcome. A mutually
acceptable solution to these matters would be a major contribution to the
maintenance of peaceful and good-neighbourly relations in the region.
"The Council is clear that the reference in the resolution that has
just been adopted to "the former Yugoslav Republ.i.c" carries no implication
whatsoever that the State concerned has any connection with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
It merely reflects the
historic fact that the State recommended for admission to the United
Nations in the present resolution was in the past a republic of the former
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia."

93-20368

(E)

070493

070493
