United Nations

A/RES/65/173

General Assembly

Distr.: General
24 January 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 24

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2010
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/65/440)]

65/173. Promotion of ecotourism for poverty eradication and
environment protection
The General Assembly,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 1
0F

Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 2 the Monterrey
Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development, 3 the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development, 4 the Plan of Implementation of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 5
the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the
Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, 6 the Outcome of the Conference on
the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development 7 and the
outcome document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on
the Millennium Development Goals, 8
1F

2F

3F

4F

5F

6F

7F

Recalling further its resolution 53/200 of 15 December 1998 entitled
“Proclamation of 2002 as the International Year of Ecotourism”,
Stressing that poverty is a multifaceted problem that requires a multifaceted
and integrated approach in addressing its economic, political, social, environmental
and institutional dimensions at all levels,
_______________
1

See resolution 60/1.
See resolution 55/2.
3
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
5
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
6
Resolution 63/239, annex.
7
Resolution 63/303, annex.
8
See resolution 65/1.
2

10-52292

*1052292*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/173

Stressing also that ecotourism can, within the framework of sustainable
tourism, contribute to the fight against poverty, the protection of the environment
and the promotion of sustainable development,
Welcoming the efforts of the World Tourism Organization, the United Nations
Environment Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
and the Convention on Biological Diversity to promote ecotourism and sustainable
tourism worldwide,
Welcoming also the efforts of the Marrakech Process on sustainable
consumption and production, and in particular its task force on sustainable tourism
development, as a cross-sectoral example of more sustainable consumption and
production practices,
Noting the initiatives launched and the events organized at the subregional,
regional and international levels in the field of ecotourism and sustainable
development,
Recognizes that the development of ecotourism, within the framework of
1.
sustainable tourism, can have a positive impact on income generation, job creation
and education, and thus on the fight against poverty and hunger, and can contribute
directly to achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals;
Emphasizes the need to maximize the economic, social and
2.
environmental benefits stemming from ecotourism activities in all countries,
particularly developing countries, including African countries, the least developed
countries and small island developing States;
Also emphasizes that ecotourism can contribute to sustainable
3.
development, in particular environment protection, and improve the well-being of
local and indigenous communities;
Recognizes that ecotourism creates significant opportunities for the
4.
conservation, protection and sustainable use of natural areas by encouraging local
and indigenous communities in host countries and tourists alike to preserve and
respect the natural and cultural heritage;
Also recognizes the potential of ecotourism to reduce poverty by
5.
improving individual livelihoods in local communities and to generate resources for
community development projects;
Underlines, in this regard, the importance of establishing, at the national
6.
level and in accordance with national priorities, appropriate guidelines and
regulations for promoting and supporting ecotourism and minimizing its potential
negative impact, and encourages Member States to promote investment in
ecotourism, in accordance with their national legislation, which may include
creating small- and medium-sized enterprises and facilitating access to finance,
including through microcredit initiatives for the poor, local and indigenous
communities in areas with high ecotourism potential, including rural areas;
Also underlines the importance of conducting an environmental impact
7.
assessment, in accordance with national legislation, for the development of
ecotourism opportunities;
Stresses that indigenous cultures, traditions and knowledge, in all their
8.
aspects, are to be fully considered, respected and promoted in ecotourism policy
2

A/RES/65/173

development, and underlines the importance of promoting the full participation and
involvement of local and indigenous communities in decisions that affect them and
of integrating indigenous and local knowledge, heritage and values in ecotourism
initiatives, as appropriate;
Emphasizes the need for effective measures in the context of ecotourism
9.
initiatives to ensure the full empowerment of women, including equal participation
of women and men at all levels and in decision-making processes in all areas;
10. Calls upon the United Nations system, in the context of the global
campaign for the Millennium Development Goals, to promote ecotourism as an
instrument that can contribute to achieving those Goals, in particular the Goals of
eradicating extreme poverty and of ensuring environmental sustainability, and to
support the efforts and policies of developing countries in this field;
11. Encourages the regional and international financial institutions to
provide adequate support to programmes and projects related to ecotourism, taking
into account the economic and environmental benefits of such activities;
12. Recognizes the role of North-South cooperation in promoting ecotourism
as a means to achieve economic growth, to reduce inequalities and to improve living
standards in developing countries, and also recognizes that South-South and
triangular cooperation, as complements to North-South cooperation, have potential
for promoting ecotourism;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-seventh session, in collaboration with the World Tourism Organization and
other relevant United Nations agencies and programmes, a report on the
implementation of the present resolution, including recommendations on ways and
means to promote ecotourism as a tool for fighting poverty and promoting
sustainable development.
69th plenary meeting
20 December 2010

3
