S/PV.7455

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7455th meeting

Wednesday, 3 June 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim/Mrs. Adnin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mrs. Alingue
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Li Yongsheng
Mr. Stehelin
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Laro
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Ms. Mulvein
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 15 May 2015 from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2015/340)
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-16543 (E)
*1516543*

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

03/06/2015

Letter dated 15 May 2015 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2015/341)
Letter dated 15 May 2015 from the President of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2015/342)

2/31

15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Council for the month of June, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Her Excellency Ms. Raimonda Murmokaitė,
Permanent Representative of Lithuania, for her service
as President of the Council for the month of May. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Murmokaitė and her
delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 15 May 2015 from the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2015/340)
Letter dated 15 May 2015 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/341)
Letter dated 15 May 2015 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991, addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/342)
The President: In accordance with 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the

S/PV.7455

representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals;
Judge Vagn Joensen, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda; Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2015/340 and S/2015/342, respectively
containing letters dated 15 May 2015 from the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/341, which contains a letter dated
15 May 2015 from the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: I am grateful for this opportunity
to appear before the Council to report on the work of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the Mechanism for International Criminal
Tribunals. My remarks supplement the written reports
that the ICTY and the Mechanism recently submitted
(S/2015/342 and S/2015/341, respectively), and I hope
they will serve to further elucidate both the successes
and challenges these institutions have faced over the
past half year.
However, before turning to these points, I would
like to congratulate Malaysia on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. I also wish
to underscore my gratitude to the Security Council’s
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
and especially to Chile for its role in leading the Group.
Last, but certainly not least, I am grateful for the crucial

15-165433/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

assistance provided to the ICTY and the Mechanism
by the Office of Legal Affairs. The Legal Counsel,
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares, is an outstanding leader in
the cause of international justice; he is ably supported
by the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs,
Mr. Stephen Mathias.
I first turn to the ICTY. The Tribunal has faced
a number of challenges that, to my great regret, have
caused delays in cases. The specific lengths and causes
of these delays are outlined in the completion strategy
report submitted in May (S/2015/340, enclosure).
Certain of these changes to previous forecasts are
caused by factors outside our control, such as the
health of accused individuals and the discovery of new
evidence. In particular, the trial of Mr. Goran Hadžić
has been temporarily adjourned for reasons relating to
his health. In addition, the trial of Mr. Ratko Mladić
has been reduced to four sitting-days a week, following
medical advice, and the Prosecution case in that trial
has been reopened following the discovery of new
evidence. Finally, I note that Mr. Vojislav Šešelj’s
health continues to be of great concern to the Tribunal.
Adverse health developments concerning accused
persons and the discovery of new evidence are, by
their nature, factors that are very difficult to predict
or, when they arise, to ignore. I can assure members
of the Council, however, that the Judges sitting on the
benches in the affected cases make every effort to limit
delays linked to these factors, while ensuring that the
Tribunal meets its obligation to provide detainees with
appropriate medical care and allow relevant evidence to
be presented in court.
Perhaps the most widespread cause of delays to
particular cases is, however, staff attrition, particularly
among mid-level and senior-level members of the
legal drafting teams assigned to support the work
of the Judges. As those Council members who have
followed our reports over the past years are no doubt
aware, the Tribunal has long warned of the problems
that such attrition can cause. We have taken all steps
we were permitted in order to address this problem,
including obtaining waivers to particular staff rules
and undertaking initiatives to improve staff morale.
These efforts have been effective up to a point, but
they have not been enough. In the last reporting period,
a number of mid-level and senior-level staff members
with extensive case-specific experience have accepted
positions at other institutions able to guarantee longerterm employment. The Tribunal acted swiftly to
4/31

03/06/2015

replace them as soon as possible, but inevitably new
staff members are not able to immediately match the
extensive case-specific knowledge of those who depart
after spending years immersed in the evidentiary
context and procedural history of individual cases.
In conjunction with the Council’s Working Group
and the Office of Human Resources Management, the
Tribunal continues to examine all steps we are able
to take in order to curtial attrition in these critically
important final years of the Tribunal’s life. On a
personal level, from the moment I realized the potential
for delays in cases, I have led efforts to identify problems
and potential means of resolving them or minimizing
their impact. In particular, I insisted that the Registrar
provide key drafting teams with all possible resources;
for example, in the Prlić appeal, which is forecast to
be completed in the latter part of 2017, I doubled the
membership of the drafting team.
I very much regret the fact that I am not in a position
to provide only positive news today. As the President
of the Tribunal, I accept full responsibility for these
delays. I urge the Council, however, to consider the
delays I have just discussed in their broader context.
Of course, it is absolutely clear that the Tribunal must
continue and redouble its efforts to adopt strategies
that reduce any delays in ongoing cases to a minimum;
this obligation implicates both the rights of defendants
and the resources of the international community.
I can assure members that the Judges and staff are
working diligently to complete judicial work as rapidly
as possible, while maintaining our commitment to
procedurally just trials and appeals.
At the same time, however, considered through
broader lenses, the Tribunal continues to make
significant progress. During the reporting period,
the ICTY rendered two major appeal judgements in
the large, multi-accused Popović et al. case, and in
the complex Tolimir case. By the end of this year, the
forecasts provided by presiding Judges indicate that the
ICTY will have completed its work on all but two trials
and two appeals. While various cases have suffered
delays, these can each be counted as a matter of months,
and the last cases are still expected to be completed in
2017, as predicted in the ICTY’s previous forecasts.
Even more significantly, the Tribunal’s contributions
to ending impunity for international crimes continue
to serve as a momentous symbol of the international
community’s commitment to rendering justice for
crimes committed in the Yugoslav wars, and to the
15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

S/PV.7455

laudable aim of preventing grave crimes like those that
hang so heavily over any historical account of the past
century from being committed again.

rosters and procedures that will allow us to adjudicate
upcoming trial and appeal work both efficiently and in a
manner that respects the highest procedural safeguards.

I will soon be travelling to the former Yugoslavia
to join commemorations of atrocities committed in
Srebrenica and elsewhere. I recognize that the work
of the ICTY can only ever offer a small measure of
solace to the individuals and broader communities
most affected by these heinous acts. But even as all
acknowledge the limitations of international criminal
tribunals, we must also appreciate the ground-breaking
nature of courts like the ICTY. The fact that the ICTY
has accounted for every single individual it has indicted
is a testament to the power of the rule of law. Indeed,
I am convinced that the international community’s
increasing condemnation of grave breaches, as
expressed through the establishment and ongoing
support of international criminal tribunals, has had
a material impact on the conduct of war everywhere
and — it is my sincere hope — reduced the suffering
of those affected by conflict. When the history of the
ICTY is written, it is this legacy, not limited delays in
projected delivery dates, that will be remembered and,
I believe, celebrated.

In addition to addressing ongoing work, the
judges of the Mechanism adopted a code of judicial
conduct last month. This code sets out core principles
that will guide Mechanism judges on such issues as
independence, integrity, confidentiality and outside
activities. Adoption of the code is a reflection of the
Mechanism judges’ commitment to the highest ethical
standards.

I will now turn to the Mechanism. I am very pleased
to confirm that, as set out in its May progress report,
the Mechanism continues to serve as an example of best
practices, completing its judicial and administrative
work to a high standard and in an efficient manner.
In these efforts, the Mechanism has been fortunate to
receive excellent cooperation from the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the ICTY,
as it increasingly assumes responsibility for functions
once carried out by these Tribunals.
With respect to judicial work, I can report that in
December I presided over the panel that rendered the
Ngirabatware appeal judgement. This was the first
judgement of the Mechanism and was delivered with
no delays to the ambitious schedule previously reported
to the Security Council. The Mechanism’s judges have
also issued a number of decisions and orders on motions
addressing a variety of issues, including matters related
to enforcement of sentences, variation of confidentiality
measures, requests for review of judgements and
cooperation with national jurisdictions. I have every
expectation that the Mechanism’s judges and small
supporting legal team in Chambers will continue to
efficiently process ongoing judicial work. In addition,
the Chambers of the Mechanism have established

The Mechanism has also been making great
progress in assuming responsibility for other ICTR
and ICTY functions. Most notably, the Mechanism
has made steady progress in creating a small, selfstanding administrative capacity in the light of the
ICTR’s imminent closure and the ICTY’s continued
efforts to transfer responsibilities. These efforts are
complemented by the signing of a host State agreement
with the Netherlands and the continued implementation
of the parallel agreement concluded earlier with
Tanzania. Both these countries and Rwanda have
offered important assistance to Mechanism offices
based in their respective territories.
In addition, the Mechanism has made significant
progress in a number of other areas. Construction of
our new Arusha building is continuing and on schedule,
with our move there planned for next year. Our archives
section is assuming responsibility for an increasing
percentage of the ICTR’s and ICTY’s materials, and our
monitoring of cases referred to national jurisdictions
was recently strengthened when the Kenya branch
of the International Commission of Jurists assumed
responsibility for monitoring cases referred to Rwanda.
As I have stated before, two key challenges continue
to face the Mechanism. The first involves the outstanding
arrest warrants for the remaining ICTR indictees who
have yet to be apprehended, including three who are
expected to be tried by the Mechanism. The fact that
the ICTY was able to account for all its indictees is
a powerful symbol of the international community’s
determination to end impunity. It is imperative that all
members of the international community continue and
indeed increase their efforts to apprehend the remaining
ICTR fugitives. The Council’s leadership in this regard
remains essential.
The second challenge facing the Mechanism is
posed by persons acquitted by the ICTR or who have

15-165435/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

completed the sentences imposed by the Tribunal. The
Mechanism assumed responsibility for outstanding
relocation issues on 1 January 2015. We have adopted
a strategic plan that sets out ways to address the
challenges posed by the issues of relocation in relation
to this group of individuals. Our planning focuses on
concrete steps that can promote resettlement and also
reduce costs to the international community, in keeping
with the Mechanism’s commitment to efficiency and
cost savings. However, we continue to rely on the
good efforts of the international community to provide
appropriate opportunities for relocation. As I have
stated before, it is a fundamental responsibility and a
humanitarian imperative to resettle the small number
of individuals who have been acquitted by the ICTR or
completed the sentences imposed on them. Once again,
the continued leadership of the Council on this issue is
very important.
I cannot conclude my report on the Mechanism
without underscoring again the gratitude of its judges
and staff for the enormous support we have received
from the ICTR, the ICTY, the Office of Legal Affairs
and other United Nations agencies, as well as from
national Governments. As we rise to the challenge of
serving as an example of best practices in international
criminal justice, we recognize that our efforts are
successful only because of this continuing support.
As always, my report today contains descriptions
of both progress and challenges. It is perhaps inevitable
that institutions with mandates as audacious as those
of the international criminal tribunals will never be
able to comprehensively meet all the high aspirations
of our many stakeholders. But I can assure the Security
Council that the judges and staff of the ICTY and the
Mechanism strive every day to make progress on the
inspiring mission we have been assigned. Together with
our partners from all over the globe, the ICTY and the
Mechanism are committed to continuing the fight to
end impunity and, through our work, to supporting the
strengthening of the rule of law at the international
level and around the world.
The President: I thank Judge Meron for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Joensen.
Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by extending
my congratulations to the representative of Malaysia,
His Excellency Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, whose country’s
delegation is presiding over the Security Council

6/31

03/06/2015

in June. I also seize this opportunity to welcome the
representatives of Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and Venezuela, which have joined the Council
since my last briefing in December 2014 (see
S/PV.7332). I wish them all the best for a successful
term of duty. On behalf of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), I would also like to
express the gratitude of the entire Tribunal to all of the
Governments of the Council for the support they have
provided as we approach the completion of our mandate
and closure of the Tribunal.
Please allow me to once again express my sincere
appreciation to the United Nations Legal Counsel,
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares; the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias; and
the staff of the Office of the Legal Counsel for the
continued support they provide as a liaison between the
Tribunal and the Security Council.
It remains an immense honour for me to provide
the members of the Security Council with an update on
the progress towards the completion of our mandate,
especially as it is expected that this may be my
penultimate briefing before the Council.
First, I will provide an update on the progress of
the judicial work. I am happy to report that the Appeals
Chamber has now completed its work with respect
to all appeals from Tribunal trial judgements, with
the exception of one case, the Nyiramasuhuko et al.
(Butare) case concerning six persons.
Following the oral hearings that took place in April,
the Butare case is now in its final stage, judgement
drafting. As previously reported, the scope and
complexity of the appeals in the Butare case combined
with the continued departures of experienced staff and
the need to rule on voluminous pre-appeal litigation
prior to the oral hearings has plagued the appeals team
and caused considerable strain on their workload.
Nonetheless, the delivery of the Butare appeal
judgement remains projected for later this year, and
more precisely, we expect the judgement to be delivered
in the fourth quarter of 2015. The formal closure of
the Tribunal is still expected to occur before the end
of 2015, following the rendering of the judgement. I
commend the judges and all of their support staff for
the tremendous work that they continue to do to ensure
that the extremely large and complex Butare appeal is
completed as projected.

15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

I would also like to note that in December 2014,
in light of the projected time line for the completion of
the Butare appeal and considering the current Judges’
involvement in cases before the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, I requested that the
Secretary-General convey my request for the extension
of the terms of office of the ICTR Judges to the Council.
On behalf of the Tribunal and my fellow Judges, please
allow me to express our gratitude for the support shown
by Member States in resolution 2194 (2014), which
granted the requested extensions.
Considering the significant work that the Appeals
Chamber continues to undertake and bearing in mind
their commitment to finalizing our sole remaining
appeals case without delay, I feel that it is important for
me and for the Council to acknowledge the dedication
and commitment demonstrated by all the Judges and
staff of the Tribunal in The Hague and in Arusha, who
work under extremely tight deadlines to ensure that
we meet our completion strategy goals. I would also
like to commend President Meron for his leadership of
the ICTR Appeals Chamber and to thank him for the
assistance he provides with respect to the transition
of functions to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals and to me in my role as Duty
Judge of the Arusha branch of the Mechanism. It is also
important to recognize the work of Prosecutor Jallow
and Registrars Mr. Majola and Mr. Hocking as well as
the work of their respective Offices, all of which have
been instrumental in our progress towards completion
and the transition to the Mechanism.
As I have done in the past, I would now like to
briefly update the Council on the issue of reparations
for victims. As previously reported to the Council,
the International Organization for Migration has
completed and submitted a draft assessment study to
the Government of Rwanda on the issue of reparations
and possible ways forward. Once the report is finalized,
which should occur in the coming months, it shall be
transmitted to relevant stakeholders and follow-up
activities will be planned. I should like to take this
opportunity to renew my praise for the efforts being
undertaken to ensure that the project continues to move
forward.
I now return to the very troubling issue of relocating
those persons who were acquitted or convicted and
released who are still residing in Arusha. The issue of
relocation remains a daunting one, and the challenges
that the ICTR have faced with relocating these persons,

S/PV.7455

some of whom have been residing in a United Nations
safe house for over a decade, have been brought to
the Council’s attention on numerous occasions. As
the ICTR makes preparations to close its doors, it is
only appropriate that it passes that important duty onto
the Mechanism, which has assumed responsibility for
the relocation and care of the acquitted and released
persons in Arusha on 1 January. However, until its
closure, the ICTR remains committed to providing any
support and assistance that the Mechanism requests. In
that regard, we once again call for the urgent assistance
of the Security Council to find a sustainable solution to
the issue.
I now turn to the subject of the transition to the
Mechanism. 1 am proud to report that reliance by
the Mechanism on the ICTR for administrative and
other services has been significantly reduced, and
the Mechanism continues to assume responsibilities,
pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010) and in line with the
transitional arrangements. The monitoring of all ICTR
cases referred to national jurisdictions is now fully the
responsibility of the Mechanism; however, the ICTR
continues to assist the Mechanism by providing interim
monitors in the French cases.
I would also like to draw the attention of the Council
and the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals to several cases of contempt/false testimony
before the Tribunal. In May, as part of an exhaustive
review of judicial work being in transition to the
Mechanism, it was determined that there were, in
fact, four cases of contempt/false testimony before
the Tribunal. Those indictments were confirmed
prior to 1 July 2012 and, pursuant to the transitional
arrangements in annex 2 of resolution 1966 (2010),
remain the responsibility of the ICTR. Considering
that all of the suspects remain at large and that even
if the trials were to commence today, the ICTR would
likely be unable to complete them prior to closure, I
have assigned benches to review the indictments and
ascertain whether any action is necessary prior to
closure of the ICTR in order to preserve the possibility
of those cases being prosecuted by the Mechanism.
With respect to the Tribunal’s archives, the
ICTR remains devoted to ensuring that records are
prepared in a manner that will facilitate their effective
management after being transferred to the Mechanism.
I am pleased to report that as of 5 May, the Tribunal had
transferred to the Mechanism more than 1,700 linear
metres of records comprising more than 75 per cent

15-165437/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

of physical records anticipated for transfer. Judicial
records relating to the Butare case have been separated
for transfer following the appeals judgement, while all
other records have been transferred, or are scheduled
for transfer, before the Tribunal closes. Despite the
challenges presented by the volume and nature of the
records and the downsizing of human resources, the
Tribunal is hopeful that the preparation and transfer of
its records will be completed on time.
As I anticipate briefing the Council as President of
the ICTR only one more time after today, I would like
to conclude my remarks with a word on the Tribunal’s
legacy. Apart from the judicial work that continues to
consume most of our attention, the Tribunal has taken
its impending closure as an opportunity to ensure
that the lessons learned in the creation, operation and
closure of an ad hoc international criminal tribunal are
preserved for posterity and shared with those Courts,
both international and domestic, that will succeed the
ICTR.
The twentieth anniversary of the ICTR provided the
Tribunal with one such opportunity as representatives
from various Courts and academia travelled to Arusha,
The Hague and New York in November and December
2014 to reflect on the Tribunal’s impact on peace
and reconciliation in Rwanda. Those events allowed
for discussions on the initiatives that the ICTR has
created to share developed practices with continuing
judicial institutions, as well as other initiatives, such
as the best practices manuals created by the Office
of the Prosecutor, the aim of which is assisting other
international and national courts to build on the
experience of the ICTR.
Most recently, a workshop on the best practices and
lessons learnt in Chambers was held at the International
Criminal Court (ICC), where representatives from the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon, the ICC, the ICTR, the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the Mechanism engaged in discussions on the technical
aspects of providing legal assistance to the judiciary
during the pre-trial, trial and appellate phases. The
workshop also facilitated discussions about what
else can be done to ensure that the lessons learned in
managing trials at the ICTR are not lost with its closure.
I wish to commend all of those involved in organizing
those workshops, which I hope will continue, as they
provide an important forum to learn from the past by
examining what works, what needs improvement and
how judicial institutions can continue to evolve.
8/31

03/06/2015

It is, as always, a distinct privilege to address the
Council and on behalf of the Tribunal I wish to express
our gratitude for the support that the Governments of
Council members continue to provide. As we make
arrangements for closure, their continued assistance
remains crucial to the efforts that we are making
to ensure that the Tribunal closes its doors with its
mandate completed and its legacy secured.
The President: I thank Judge Joensen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to address the Council on the progress
of the Office of the Prosecutor towards the completion
of our mandate. In this reporting period, we moved
closer to finalizing our work in the Tribunal’s last trials
and appeals. As the Council has already heard, at the
end of the reporting period, four trials are ongoing.
In the Mladić case, the defence continued to present
its evidence. But as previously indicated, my Office
will, later this month, briefly reopen the Prosecution
case to present our recently-discovered evidence on
the Tomašica mass grave. We will use nine courtroom
hours to present our evidence.
In the Hadžić case, the trial was adjourned in
October 2014 due to the accused’s ill health and has
not yet resumed. In the Šešelj and Karadžić cases,
we continue to await the trial judgements, which are
estimated to be delivered later this year. During the
reporting period, appeal judgements were delivered in
the Popovic et al. and Tolimir cases, largely confirming
the genocide and other convictions we secured at trial.
Therefore only three appeal proceedings now remain.
The oral hearings in Stanišić and Simatović and Stanišić
and Župljanin are anticipated to be held later this year.
In the Prlić et al. appeal we successfully completed,
on schedule, our written arguments. It involved, among
other tasks, reviewing, researching and responding to
168 defence grounds of appeal spanning nearly 1,000
pages.
Our team completed that immense task in less than
four months by working around the clock. The Appeals
Division is now fully focused on preparing for the
presentation of oral arguments in the final three appeals.
The countries of the former Yugoslavia continue to
cooperate with my Office and respond, as required,
to our requests for assistance. State cooperation in
all aspects of our work remains mandatory and will
continue to be closely monitored.

15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

My Office recognizes the significant results
achieved during the reporting period in regional
cooperation on several high-profile cases. That regional
cooperation includes joint arrest operations conducted
by the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia. Those developments are positive signs that
national authorities are responding to the concerns
we have previously expressed. We call upon national
authorities to continue to tangibly demonstrate
their commitment to cooperation and increased
comprehensive accountability for war crimes.
Mrs. Adnin took the Chair.
At the same time, it is important to recognize that
only a very limited number of the outstanding cases at
the national level have been prosecuted to date. More
should also be done on the most complex and highestpriority cases, particularly those involving senior- and
mid-level officials. It has become clear that further
progress in effective national justice requires a more
strategic approach in the investigation and prosecution
of war crimes.
In my previous reports I noted the need for
improved management and leadership in the Office of
the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina. My Office
continues to discuss outstanding challenges with the
Prosecutor’s Office, including the practice of breaking
up comprehensive cases into separate trials. But my
report also highlights the successful results by the
Prosecutor’s Office regarding crimes related to the
Srebrenica genocide. We encourage the Prosecutor’s
Office to ensure that the strategic approach and
effective practices of its Srebrenica team are applied in
other investigations and prosecutions.
This brings me to the category II cases transferred
by my Office in the period from 2008 to 2010. During
my recent mission to Sarajevo, the Chief Prosecutor
could report only limited progress in those cases.
However, he gave strong assurances that prosecutorial
decisions will be taken in all remaining cases by the
end of the year. While similar commitments were made
previously, we trust that they will be honoured this
time.
We continue to believe that those and other
challenges can be successfully addressed if there
is national ownership of post-conflict justice,
appropriately supported by international assistance. My
Office will continue to engage directly with national
authorities and encourage full responsibility for the

S/PV.7455

accountability process, while assisting them to improve
their methods and implement lessons learned from our
experiences. In our meetings, victims from every group
are unanimous in their desire that the search for missing
persons continues to be a key priority. While there have
been significant results already, there are still too many
families that do not know the fate of their loved ones.
More can and needs to be done in that regard.
Authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina should give
serious consideration to the recommendations recently
issued by the International Commission on Missing
Persons. It is critical that the law on missing persons
be fully implemented and that national authorities
take full responsibility for that vital work. For our
part, my Office is participating in an intensive effort
with key partners to strengthen the search for missing
persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina by re-examining
available evidence and information. If that work proves
successful, we will consider how to expand it to other
States in the region.
In conclusion, the foremost objective of my Office is
to expeditiously complete our work in accordance with
the completion strategy. We will continue downsizing
staff in line with the completion of trials and appeals,
while also documenting and sharing our experiences.
Next month will mark the twentieth anniversary
of the Srebrenica genocide. It will be an opportunity
to remember all victims of the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia and to recognize that survivors are making
extraordinary efforts to build a more peaceful future. It
is also an opportunity for the international community
to reaffirm its commitment to ensuring justice for past
crimes and preventing their repetition.
The President: I thank Mr. Brammertz for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jallow.
Mr. Jallow: I feel greatly honoured to once more
present a progress report on the work of the Office
of the Prosecutor of both the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, this time
covering the six months since December 2014.
The ICTR has now reached a milestone in the
march to completion and closure. In 2015, the Office
of the Prosecutor presented its oral arguments in the
case of the Prosecutor vs Nyiramasuhuko and five
others, otherwise known as the Butare case. This is

15-165439/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

the last appeal and the last case of the ICTR. The oral
hearing that took place in April is therefore significant
in bringing to a close a very important chapter in the
life of the Tribunal and the mandate of the Office of
the Prosecutor. We expect that the Security Council’s
request that all cases pending at the ICTR be completed
by end of 2015 will be fulfilled by delivery of the final
judgement in the Butare case before the end of 2015.
In that regard, I would like to thank all the staff of the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTR, and indeed of the
whole Tribunal, who have for several years devoted their
time, talent and energies to the execution of the ICTR
mandate and generally to the cause of international
justice.
Accordingly, a sizeable number of appeal staff,
including some members of the Butare appeal team,
among them secretarial, language and administrative
staff who worked tirelessly over the years in the appeals
division of the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTR,
were separated from the Tribunal in May 2015 following
the conclusion of the oral hearing in the Butare case. A
small number of staff has been retained in the Appeals
Division in order to complete outstanding pre- and postappeal proceedings in the Butare case, as well as other
ongoing closure- and legacy-related activities. The
Council will recall that earlier on, with the conclusion
of trials and the establishment of the Mechanism’s
Arusha branch, the Investigations and Trial Divisions
of the Office of the Prosecutor had been abolished.
The Office of the Prosecutor continues to focus on
and make progress in other areas such as archiving,
disclosures and legacy projects. In the past six months
since November 2014, some 1,100 boxes of material
linked to active cases, particularly related to the
three Mechanism fugitives, Félicien Kabuga, Protais
Mpiranya and Augustin Bizimana, have been cleaned,
processed, classified and transferred to the Office
of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism. A significant
amount of material in closed cases has already been
handed over to the Mechanism Registry and that
process will continue to the end of 2015. However, staff
separation and attrition continue to hamper efforts
towards timely completion of the remaining archival
work of the Office of the Prosecutor, and current staff
have been consistently urged to double their efforts.
Notwithstanding those contraries, we shall continue to
work towards concluding the remaining archiving work
of the Office of the Prosecutor by the end of 2015.

10/31

03/06/2015

The completion of legacy and best practices
projects, including the writing of the genocide narrative
based on facts judicially established by the Tribunal,
remains on course for conclusion by the end of the
year. In January 2015, the Office of the Prosecutor
completed and published in the ICTR and Mechanism
websites its report on the Tribunal’s experience in the
referral of cases to national jurisdictions, highlighting
the challenges of empowering national jurisdictions to
discharge their primary responsibility to investigate
and prosecute international crimes, as well as ways
to address some of those challenges. We believe that
the ICTR experience carries useful lessons for the
implementation of the principle of complementarity,
the bedrock of international criminal justice.
Turning now to the Mechanism, I wish to report
that the Office of The Prosecutor continues to take
over functions from the Offices of the Prosecutors
of the ICTR and the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), as mandated by
the Mechanism Statute. A few months ago, in April,
during the period of remembrance of the 1994 Rwandan
genocide, I visited Rwanda and met with various
Rwandan Government officials to discuss various issues
of mutual interest, particularly in respect to tracking
fugitives and management of the cases referred by
the ICTR to Rwanda for trial. The Mechanism Office
of the Prosecutor continues to intensify its efforts in
tracking the three top fugitives earmarked for trial by
the Mechanism. We remain fully committed to their
arrest and trial.
We continue to work closely with our partners in
the Government of Rwanda, particularly the National
Public Prosecution Authority, with INTERPOL and
with and the United States War Crimes Rewards
Program under the State Department’s Office for
Global Criminal Justice. The Investigations Section
of the Office of the Prosecutor has been strengthened
with new and additional staff, fresh initiatives have
been taken and new working methods have been put in
place to locate the fugitives and bring them to justice. I
must stress however, that those internal measures need
to be supported by the full cooperation of all States,
particularly those where indictees are suspected to
reside, if the tracking efforts are to be successful.
With regard to judicial activities, judgment in the
Ngirabatware appeal case, the only Arusha branch
appeal case, was delivered on 18 December 2014, with

15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

his convictions for genocide affirmed by the Appeals
Chamber. Following the delivery of that judgement, the
staff members of the ad hoc appeals teams handling
that case have now been separated from the Mechanism
in accordance with the policy to keep the staff size of
the Mechanism at a low level. Meanwhile, the core
staff, with assistance from appeal staff of the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICTR, continues to deal with
post-appeal review litigation arising from requests
filed by persons convicted by the ICTR. The Office
also continues to make preparations, including the
creation of rosters, for the speedy recruitment of staff
to manage the trials of the three Mechanism fugitives
for the Arusha branch, and the possible appeals in
the Šešelj, Karadžić and Hadžić cases, which are
anticipated during the next 12 months. As a matter of
fact, recruitment has already commenced in order to
manage those three possible appeals.
We will continue our policy of active engagement
with the countries in the former Yugoslavia in order to
strengthen the close collaboration with them that has so
far yielded good results in the arrest and prosecution
of persons responsible for crimes committed in
those territories. I anticipate that the forthcoming
international conference scheduled for Sarajevo and the
Brijuni meeting of regional prosecutors this month will
both provide opportunities for further consultations
with our regional partners on the intensification
of cooperation with and assistance to the national
jurisdictions of the former Yugoslavia in their efforts to
ensure accountability for the serious crimes committed
in that region during the conflict.
The Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism
continues to provide assistance to national authorities
and international organizations in the investigation
and prosecution of crimes committed in Rwanda and
in the States of the former Yugoslavia. In the past six
months, the Office has serviced a total of 208 requests
for assistance from 10 countries and international
organizations. As countries increasingly take over
the functions of investigating and prosecuting those
crimes, we anticipate an increase in the number of such
requests for assistance from States and institutes.
I wish to thank the members of the Council, the
Member States, the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Secretariat for their very strong support to the
ICTR over the years, which has enabled the Tribunal to
now reach this momentous stage in its mandate. Their
unflinching commitment to the cause of international

S/PV.7455

criminal justice has also enabled the Mechanism to
take off and begin to execute its functions effectively
in a very short period.
The President: I thank Mr. Jallow for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Since
this is the first time I am taking the floor in the Chamber
this month, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and to assure you of Chile’s full support this
month. Moreover, I would like to congratulate the
delegation of Lithuania, in particular its Ambassador,
on its outstanding work last month.
My delegation thanks the Presidents of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, as well as the Prosecutors, for their briefings
on the implementation of the completion strategy for
both ad hoc Tribunals during the period from November
2014 through last May, in accordance with resolution
1534 (2004), as well as with respect to the operations
of the Residual Mechanism during the transition phase,
covering the same period and in accordance with
resolution 1966 (2010).
Their reports show the progress that has been
made by the Tribunals and the Mechanism in the
implementation of their judicial and administrative
tasks in The Hague and in Arusha. In this context, and
in the framework of the implementation of resolution
2194 (2014), we would like to acknowledge the work
carried out by Judge Sekule of Tanzania, Güney of
Turkey and Robinson of Jamaica, who have completed
their respective terms of office.
In particular, we welcome the fact that the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
handed down appeals judgements in the cases of Vujadin
Popović and Zdravko Tolimir in January and April,
respectively. We also welcome the fact that in April
the Appeals Chamber of the Rwanda Tribunal heard
oral arguments in the Butare case, the only remaining
case, in which a decision is expected during the last
quarter of this year, and that the Mechanism handed
down its first decision in the Ngirabatware appeal last
December.
With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, my delegation welcomes the fact that the

15-1654311/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

transition to the Residual Mechanism is to be concluded
shortly and that the completion strategy for the Tribunal
is proceeding in keeping with set timelines.
Chile reiterates its concern that a swift resolution
be found to both the situation pertaining to the 11
people in Tanzania who must be relocated and who are
living in a safe house in Arusha, with due consideration
being given to the humanitarian aspects of this case,
as well as to that of the nine people indicted by the
Rwanda Tribunal who remain at large, six of whom
fall under its jurisdiction and three under that of the
Residual Mechanism. International cooperation must
be intensified in both cases so as to ensure proper
accountability and to fully comply with the resolutions
adopted by the Council.
Almost 20 years on from the genocide in Srebrenica,
we recognize the contribution made by the Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the need to continue to
support its work until its envisaged completion date, in
2017. The debate on the closure of the Tribunals gives
us another opportunity to reflect on the ethical and
legal responsibilities undertaken by the international
community in the face of the most serious crimes,
which cannot go unpunished.
These bodies, through their judicial activities,
have made an effective contribution to reweaving
the social fabric, which is essential to comprehensive
national processes of post-conflict rehabilitation. They
have also, and this is the central point, contributed
to the progressive development of international
criminal law, providing the impetus for the creation
of the International Criminal Court as an independent
permanent criminal court linked to the United Nations
system, with jurisdiction over the most serious crimes
of major importance to the international community as
a whole.
In this context, and as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, I would like
once again to express the commitment of my country
to the work of the Tribunals and to the Mechanism.
We are convinced that cooperation in the completion
strategy represents one of the most direct ways for the
Council to contribute to the effectiveness of these legal
mechanisms.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I wish at the
outset to congratulate Malaysia on its assumption of the
presidency and thank the Ambassador of Lithuania for
their very effective conduct of our business last month.

12/31

03/06/2015

New Zealand reaffirms its strong support for the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) as well as for the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and we
thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their briefings.
New Zealand was on the Council more than
20 years ago, when the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda were established. When the ICTY
resolution was adopted, we stressed the importance of
the Tribunal operating independently and impartially.
We also emphasized the need for it to be enabled to
carry out its work until it had discharged its mandate or
the Council had decided its work should end.
We took the same stance with the ICTR and worked
hard to ensure that the provisions of its Statute were
both consistent with that of the ICTY and suitable to
the circumstances of Rwanda and acceptable to the
Government of Rwanda, despite the differences of view
between Rwanda and the rest of the Council over the
applicability of the death penalty.
It is fair to say that I did not expect the Tribunals
to still be on the Council’s agenda when I returned
here 20 years later. But that should not be seen as a
failure. During that period, both Tribunals have
managed complex criminal proceedings. Both have
added breadth and depth to international criminal
jurisprudence in relation to some of the most horrific
crimes in recent history. These proceedings have
taken time, partly because of the challenges associated
with locating those charged. While the ICTY has now
achieved this, several ICTR fugitives remain at large
who, once apprehended, will need to be prosecuted
through the Residual Mechanism or by the Rwandan
Government.
The ICTY’s recent experience has demonstrated
the central role that States can play in apprehending
fugitives, and we encourage similar cooperation in
relation to the ICTR’s work. New Zealand acknowledges
both Tribunals’ efforts to implement their completion
strategies. The Residual Mechanism has now assumed
responsibility for many functions. While the transition
appears to be going well, some critical work remains
to be done. But we are pleased to see that the formal
closure of the ICTR is still on track for the end of
2015, with only liquidation activities remaining. We

15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

encourage the ICTY to step up its efforts to ensure that
its proceedings are completed by 2017.
The ICTY and ICTR also engage in wider activities
that contribute to the advancement of international
criminal justice. Both have a mandate to share
information as part of broader reconciliation processes.
They, of course, deal only with the most serious
offenders. National courts have a role in continuing
their legacy through prosecutions, as do other bodies
that allow relevant crimes to be acknowledged in some
way. This is necessary if the communities affected are
to move on.
New Zealand has consistently drawn attention to the
need to ensure that the Tribunals enjoy the same levels
of support at their closure as they did at inception. This
is also true for other similar current and future judicial
institutions. It is not credible for the Council to wash its
hands of these bodies after their establishment. Rather,
we as the Council have an ongoing responsibility to
continue providing the support necessary — in terms
of resources as well as political support — for the
Tribunals to complete their mandates.
There are valuable lessons to be learned from
the Tribunals’ experiences in managing judicial,
administrative and prosecutorial functions that should
be shared. These include challenges associated with
winding up a Tribunal, such as problems with senior
staff retention and the impact on managing caseloads.
We thank Mr. Joensen for his assurances that the ICTR
is already addressing these lessons-learned issues.
While the Council has a responsibility to the
Tribunals, the Tribunals, in turn, have a responsibility
to work as effectively and efficiently as possible. This
responsibility is not only to meet Council deadlines
but, moreover, to meet the legitimate expectations of
victims, for whom these Tribunals were ultimately
established.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the heads of the Tribunals
and the Residual Mechanism for briefing us on the
judicial proceedings, the speed at which they are winding
up and the transition to the Residual Mechanism.
In resolutions 2193 (2014) and 2194 (2014), the
Security Council took a step in the direction of both
Tribunals by agreeing to an extension of their judges’
terms of office. Mindful of the serious problems facing
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the Council urgently called on this

S/PV.7455

body to step up its efforts to compress the timelines
for the completion of its cases. We take note of the
information in the ICTY’s current report (S/2015/342,
annex) on the steps that have been taken in that regard.
So far, however, they have not produced results. That
can only arouse serious concern. The staffing problems
that the ICTY report mentions can hardly represent an
adequate explanation of the situation. It would seem
that the Tribunal retains staffing resources sufficient to
organizing its proceedings without compromising the
speed of its work. Nor do the other reasons cited seem
overwhelming.
Apart from that, we would like to comment on the
situation regarding those accused with serious health
problems. For example, the report says that the trial
of Goran Hadžić was suspended as early as October
2014 owing to the state of his health. In our view, the
ICTY Trial Chamber and Prosecutor could analyse how
best to deal with getting on with the proceedings while
taking the humanitarian considerations into account.
Delays in the Tribunal will result in unprecedentedly
long pre-trial detention periods for the accused. Such
practices, by raising questions related to the right to
a fair trial, can hardly serve as examples for national
or international courts in the future. We believe the
Tribunal leadership can rectify the situation, shorten
the projected time frames for completing proceedings
and ensure the Tribunal’s speedy transfer of its duties,
in accordance with the Security Council’s requests. We
call on it to take all necessary measures and expect to
see results by the end of the year.
We welcome the information from the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda confirming that it will
complete the closure of its activities this current year.
We note the important role that States in both the
regions concerned and other countries have played in
supporting the Tribunals and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. According to the
ICTY Prosecutor’s report, they have demonstrated a
high level of cooperation, particularly Serbia, whose
efforts have made a major contribution to completing a
number of the Tribunal’s judicial proceedings.
The Residual Mechanism has rendered its first
judgement, and progress is being made in carrying
out other uncompleted functions of the Tribunals. We
expect the Mechanism’s activities to be as effective as
possible, given the temporary nature of its mandate as
laid down in resolution 1966 (2010). In that context, we
recall that according to paragraph 17 of that resolution,

15-1654313/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

the initial four-year period for the Mechanism’s
operation will end a year from now, and that in order for
it to continue to operate, a review must be conducted of
its work during that period.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
this debate, and the Presidents and Prosecutors for
their thorough reports. Spain, of course, would like to
commend the Tribunals, their Presidents, Prosecutors
and all their staff for their work in combating impunity.
I would like to begin with the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
We are pleased to see that it is still committed to
completing its work by December 2017. With regard to
the four cases outstanding, we understand that there are
reasons for the recent delays, particularly the Tribunal’s
staffing reductions and the health problems of the
accused. However, we agree with the Prosecutor that as
time goes on, the risk increases that delays in bringing
justice will eventually become a denial of justice. We
urge the Tribunal and its staff to spare no effort to
conclude the four proceedings as quickly as possible.
Concerning the Šešelj case, we note the recent
decision of the Appeal Chamber, on 30 March, to revoke
the accused’s provisional release in view of his conduct,
and we condemn the expression of any revisionist
views that would offend the memory of the victims
and undermine the foundations for reconciliation. With
regard to the appeals proceedings, we welcome the two
judgements handed down in January and April. There
are now three cases outstanding and we once again
urge the Tribunal to minimize delays and expedite their
conclusion. We are worried about the slow pace of the
activities of the national authorities, particularly in the
referrals of mid-level and high-profile cases, and about
the politicization of the proceedings. We call for respect
for judicial independence as an essential foundation for
the rule of law, and for intensifying efforts to exercise
true national justice in the wake of conflict.
However, we welcome the progress that has been
made in regional cooperation, including the arrest
of eight people suspected of participating in crimes
related to the genocide in Srebrenica, whose twentieth
anniversary is next month, in July. For the Tribunal to
carry on with its work and complete it successfully, it is
essential that all of us — every State in the international
community as well as international organizations,
including the United Nations and particularly the
Security Council — continue to support it to the
14/31

03/06/2015

very end. The support of regional organizations is
also vital, especially the European Union, NATO, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Council of Europe. Finally, we call on the
Tribunal to continue to transfer its responsibilities to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals in order to ensure a smooth, problem-free
transition.
Turning to the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, we are pleased with the information provided
and hope that the conclusion of the work on firstinstance judgements for the last remaining case on
appeal, Nyiramasuhuko et al. (Butare), will continue to
make progress, as it has done in the past few months,
and that it can be concluded by the fourth quarter of this
year, which will make it possible to close the Tribunal’s
doors in December.
It is worrying that nine of the accused indicted by
the Tribunal for their participation in the genocide in
Rwanda — three of them senior officials — remain at
large. We call on the Rwandan authorities and those
responsible for the Residual Mechanism to ensure that
they locate them and bring them to justice, whether
before the Mechanism, for the three aforementioned
officials, or before the Rwandan judicial authorities for
the remaining six. We also call for the cooperation of
those States where they may be found.
We commend the staff of the Tribunal and the
Mechanism for the exemplary manner in which the
transfer of the Tribunal’s functions is being carried out
and for the information on the progress of the transfer
in every area: administrative, judicial and archival. We
are aware that there continue to be humanitarian issues
for people who have been acquitted by the Tribunal or
who have completed their sentences, and we would like
solutions to be found as soon as possible in order to
enable them to find somewhere to live in safety and
dignity.
Finally, I should like to comment about the
importance of publicizing the work of the Tribunals. As
their work comes to an end, it will be more important than
ever to ensure that their work is adequately publicized
in order to raise people’s awareness of such situations,
especially young people, and to help to increase the
effectiveness of the work of other international courts
and tribunals, including the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and national courts, which I am sure can
benefit from the lessons learned and best practices that
both Tribunals have developed over more than two
15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

decades. We cannot underestimate the value of such
experience in raising awareness, among young people,
as well as professionals in other courts and the ICC,
through, for example, the workshops organized by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to explain
gender-related crimes and the use of multidisciplinary
expert teams and lessons learned in locating fugitives,
which, along with the work of the current Prosecutor of
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia,
are very valuable and deserve our support.
In conclusion, although we are convinced that
the conclusion of the process will be in everyone’s
interest, especially that of the victims and above
all that of justice, we must agree with Judge Meron
that the delays in the completion of the completion
strategy must in no way impede the overall work of the
Tribunals. All those who, in one way or another, have
served the Tribunals should be rightly proud; they have
participated in an admirable, very difficult endeavour
that has finally reached a successful conclusion that
is important for international criminal law and for the
hopes of the victims who merely wish to obtain justice.
That work has contributed in a decisive manner to the
re-establishment of the rule of law in Rwanda and in the
States of the former Yugoslavia.
In one month, we shall commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre — an
appropriate time to remember the victims and to entrench
reconciliation, supported by an understanding of
the facts and the need to hold those responsible
accountable. In 1993 and 1994, the Council adopted
resolutions 827 (1993) and 955 (1994), establishing the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and
demonstrated the strength of its commitment to the
fight against impunity.
We must recognize that this is not sufficient. New
atrocities are being committed every day in Syria,
Libya, South Sudan and elsewhere in the world. Our
work is therefore far from over. We must reaffirm our
commitment and ensure that those who are responsible
for the most serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights receive the clear
and unequivocal message that their acts will not go
unpunished. It is our duty to do this, and it will be the
best tribute that we can pay to victims and to the men
and women who work every day to provide justice in
bodies such as those bodies represented here today.

S/PV.7455

Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank our briefers, Presidents
Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors Brammertz and
Jallow, for their informative briefings.
Nigeria commends the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for the steady process
it has made towards completing its work. We note
that that Tribunal has concluded proceedings against
147 out of 161 persons indicted. We also note that
there are no ICTY fugitives. We acknowledge the
constraints faced by the ICTY, which made it difficult
to complete some trials and appeals by the target date
of 31 December 2014. We encourage the Tribunal to
continue to work efficiently to complete outstanding
judicial proceedings.
We note that the ICTY has been experiencing
difficulties with the recruitment and retention of staff.
It is a matter of concern to us that this situation is
impeding the work of the Tribunal. We commend the
Tribunal for its efforts to improve the retention and
recruitment of staff in its challenging circumstances
and hope that those efforts will yield positive outcomes.
In terms of communications and outreach, we commend
the ICTY Media Office for facilitating the work of
journalists covering the activities of the Tribunal.
This has indeed helped to promote transparency in the
work of the Tribunal. We acknowledge the significant
contributions of the ICTY outreach programme to the
debate on transitional justice and post-conflict recovery
in the former Yugoslavia.
Concerning the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), Nigeria welcomes the progress made
in implementing its completion strategy. The successful
handover of most judicial and prosecutoral functions
to the Residual Mechanism is an important indication
of that progress. In terms of best practices and lessons
learned, we commend the ICTR for its cooperation with
other tribunals and the International Criminal Court in
sharing perspectives. We also commend the prosecutor
of the ICTR for producing a manual on best practices for
the referral of international criminal cases to national
jurisdictions for trial.
We note the staffing problems that the ICTR is
experiencing, which are similar to those faced by the
ICTY. We hope that sustainable solutions will be found
in an expedient manner in order to facilitate the work
of the Tribunal. We encourage all States to cooperate
with the Residual Mechanism to ensure that the nine
people indicted by the ICTR who remain at large are

15-1654315/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

apprehended. They are fugitives from the law and must
face justice for their participation in the genocide in
Rwanda.
Finally, we commend Judge Meron and Judge
Joensen for their astute leadership and assure them of
our continued support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their reports and, as always,
for their steadfast dedication to advancing global justice.
At this time, I would like to express particular gratitude
and thanks to President Meron in his last briefing
before the Council as President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). We greatly
appreciate his dedicated service as President of both the
ICTY and the Residual Mechanism. He has tirelessly
dedicated much of his professional life to international
justice and contributed immensely to the jurisprudence
of international criminal law. International justice has
been well served and continues to be well served by his
leadership.
The seeds of international criminal justice were
planted 70 years ago with the drafting of the Charter
of the International Military Tribunal. The Nuremberg
Charter provided for a fair judicial process for leaders
of the Nazi regime who would face trial in Nuremberg.
The Charter and the ensuing trials ensured that those
accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity
would face justice before the world. Indeed, while the
world faces the continued horrors of mass atrocities
in Syria, South Sudan, the Sudan, the Central African
Republic and elsewhere, the ICTY, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals stand
as examples and important reminders that where there
is will, perpetrators of mass atrocities can indeed be
brought to justice.
As always, the United States supports the ongoing
efforts of the ICTY to complete its remaining trials and
appeals expeditiously, efficiently and thoroughly, while
pressing international justice forward and ensuring
that the accused are given a fair trial. We note that
appeals judgements have been rendered in the Popović
and Tolomir cases, and we await judgement this year
in the trial of Radovan Karadžić. Together with Ratko
Mladić, Karadžić stands accused of crimes that include

16/31

03/06/2015

responsibly for the Srebrenica massacre, the twentieth
anniversary of which falls on 11 July. Srebrenica, of
course, was the single worst crime committed in Europe
since the Second World War. It is hoped that the victims
and survivors of Srebrenica will have an outcome that
can help bring closure to that most disturbing and
painful chapter in the history of the former Yugoslavia.
We also await judgement in the trial of Vojislav
Šešelj for crimes against humanity and violations of the
laws and customs of war. The United States once again
condemns his incendiary public rhetoric — rhetoric
that challenges regional reconciliation and threatens to
open tragic wounds of the past, since his provisional
release by the Court on humanitarian grounds last
November. We continue to urge all Governments and
leaders of the region to cooperate with the Court’s
orders, to continue working towards reconciliation and
to avoid inflammatory statements.
Last year, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda completed all of its trials of first instance
as the world marked two decades since the Rwandan
genocide. We recognize and appreciate the ICTR’s
continuing efforts to finish appeals in a timely manner.
We also continue to commend the ongoing efforts of
the Presidents and Prosecutors to efficiently transfer
the remaining functions to the Residual Mechanism,
while at the same time preserving the fairness and
impartiality of the judicial process.
The effort to ensure that those accused by the
ICTY — all 161 out of 161 — were brought to justice was
unprecedented in the history of international justice. It
required the international community to use the full
range of resources and tools at our disposal: legal,
financial and political. This included the conditioning
of bilateral economic assistance on a State’s compliance
with its obligations under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations to enforce arrest warrants issued
by judges of the ICTY. Most significant in terms of its
impact, as implemented by the European Union (EU),
with the steadfast support of EU member States, was
the requirement of full and complete cooperation with
the ICTY before a country could be considered for
accession to the EU.
United Nations peacekeeping missions and
multinational NATO forces worked with the Tribunals,
international law enforcement and national authorities
to assist in apprehending fugitives. INTERPOL shared
information, and training programmes strengthened
the capacity for national police authorities to locate and
15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

arrest war crimes fugitives. The United States offered
rewards of up to $5 million for information leading to
their arrest and, following those arrests, paid significant
rewards in a number of cases.
To achieve the same success for the ICTR and
ensure that the nine remaining ICTR fugitives, who
are mass murderers, are brought to justice, we have
been working closely with the same organizations:
the United Nations, national authorities, international
law enforcement and, most importantly, the ICTR and
the Residual Mechanism. As with the ICTY fugitives,
the United States continues to offer up to $5 million
in rewards for information leading to the arrest of the
nine ICTR fugitives, whether they will be prosecuted
in the Residual Mechanism or in Rwandan courts. We
call for full international cooperation in tracking and
arresting these men. We remain deeply committed to
apprehending those nine fugitives, who include three
leaders believed to have carried out key roles in the
Rwandan genocide: Félicien Kabuga, alleged to have
financed atrocities; Augustin Bizimana, the Minister
of Defence, alleged to have ordered his subordinates
to carry out horrific crimes; Protais Mpiranya, the
Commander of the Presidential Guard, alleged to have
carried out targeted assassinations from the moment
the genocide began. These men have not escaped our
continued attention and our steadfast determination to
see each of them face justice. If we forget them, we fail
their victims and the survivors, and we will not and
cannot fail them.
Justice and accountability for the victims and
survivors of mass atrocities and accountability for the
perpetrators remain a critical requirement of any real
peace. The ICTY and ICTR have ensured justice for
the victims of some of the worst mass murderers and
criminals in the history of the world. They have made
immeasurable contributions to ensuring accountability,
advancing peace and reconciliation and promoting
truth and justice. Their work and legacy should serve
as a reminder of what is possible when the world is
committed to responding to crimes that shock the
conscience, and they should serve as a cold rebuke to
those who continue to commit such crimes under the
mistaken belief that somehow we will just give up on
accountability and move on from the push for justice.
At the very least, the ICTY and ICTR are a reminder
that we will not do so, and a reminder that we will fulfil
our commitment to the victims of these atrocities and
their survivors because we cannot and will not forget.

S/PV.7455

Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Jallow and Brammertz for their reports and their very
comprehensive briefings. France reiterates its thanks to
all the staff of the Tribunals for the work carried out to
complete the pending proceedings.
We also welcome the transition that has been
taking place since 1 January 2012 in accordance with
resolution 1966 (2010) to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) branches of
the Residual Mechanism in order to allow the work of
justice to continue and run its course. We note in this
regard that 76 per cent of those recruited were from
the Tribunals’ teams, which should contribute to the
effectiveness of the work and to support provided for
the completion of the Tribunals’ work.
France pays close attention to the Tribunals as
they strive to reach their goal of delivering justice
in the context of the completion strategy and in full
respect for procedural safeguards. It is to that end that
the Council adopted resolutions 2193 (2014) and 2194
(2014) on 18 December 2014.
Regarding the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, difficulties arising from
the departure of key personnel and the advanced age
of some of the accused are all factors that help to
explain the delay in meeting the deadlines established.
This delay makes resolute measures for an optimal
allocation of resources all the more necessary in order
to prevent gaps. As stated in resolution 2193 (2014) of
18 December 2014, the ICTY must continue its efforts
to complete its work as quickly as possible and facilitate
the earliest possible end closure in order to wrap up the
transition to the Mechanism. France welcomes in this
regard the transfer of ICTY records to the Mechanism,
which began in January 2015.
With respect to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, France wishes to acknowledge the
importance of the closure of the Tribunal by the end of
2015, according to the timetable contained in resolution
2194 (2014). The continued downsizing of staff charged
with administrative and judicial activities is a positive
sign of a transfer of powers to the Mechanism, which
has already shouldered its responsibility to handle the
first appeal of a Tribunal judgment on 18 December
2014.

15-1654317/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

The arrest and transfer of the remaining fugitives
and the relocation of the 11 persons released after
acquittal or completion of sentence, who are still in
Arusha, will remain priorities for the Mechanism.
France reiterates that it will provide the same support
to the Mechanism as that given to the ICTR and calls
on all States to cooperate in this regard. Furthermore,
I would reiterate that France will spare no effort, in
particular as regards the two cases referred by the ICTR
to the French courts.
The twentieth anniversary of the Srebrenica
massacre, which has been described as genocide by both
the ICTY and the International Court of Justice, will
be commemorated this year. On that occasion, we must
welcome the important work carried out by the ICTY.
The Tribunal is the guarantor of the right to truth, the
exposure of facts, the fight against impunity and the
duty to remember. Through its judgements, its decisive
role in cooperation and mutual assistance between
various State prosecutors to prosecute so-called
intermediary criminals and its scope, it has played a
central role in national and regional reconciliation and
in reconstruction.
We continue to believe that regional and national
cooperation is the heart of an effective transition.
It is now up to the countries concerned to continue
to build States in which the rule of law prevails and
the independence of the judiciary is ensured. The
prosecution of so-called mid-level criminals must
remain a priority in that respect. Progress made in the
Štrpci case, with the arrest by the Serbian authorities in
March of eight persons suspected of involvement in the
Srebrenica massacre, is an encouraging example but
must be part of an ongoing strategy.
The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda are a major step in the fight against impunity.
While the Tribunals are implementing their completion
strategies, we need to recognize their work in terms
of jurisprudence, which must be kept alive. Archive
management, the dissemination of this work and
capacity-building are an essential link for the victims
and the international community as a whole.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of June and assure you that you
can count on our support. I would also like to extend
our thanks to the Lithuanian delegation for the work
18/31

03/06/2015

carried out during the month of May. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank Presidents Meron and
Joensen and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for the
reports they presented and to recognize the leadership
of Chile at the head the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports the
arduous work of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in prosecuting
and sentencing those responsible for crimes against
humanity and war crimes that shocked the conscience
of humankind. The work of the Tribunals has bolstered
the international community’s resolve to guarantee that
those responsible for such abominable acts will not
enjoy impunity. We hope that the efforts of Member
States will be consistent in ensuring that acts as horrific
as those that occurred in those countries will not be
repeated.
Now, as we approach the closure of these Tribunals
and the transfer to the International Residual Mechanism
of their archives on the cases of the fugitives, cases of
contempt or of perjury, and on the protection of victims
and witnesses, we consider it important to highlight the
need for cooperation from States to ensure compliance
with all the mandates set forth in resolution 1966
(2010). Without such support, the Mechanism will fail
to achieve its goals.
In relation to the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, it is important to note that final
verdicts have been handed down in 147 of the 161
individual cases assigned to it. To date, the Tribunal has
not had before it a single case involving a fugitive from
justice, but we observe with great concern that although
over two decades have elapsed since the creation of the
Tribunal, several proceedings at the trial level remain
ongoing, due to procedural delays on various grounds
that we believe could be effectively resolved so that the
trials could be completed within an established time
frame while guaranteeing the principles of due process
and judicial impartiality. It is not enough for judges
to act independently and impartially; they should also
conduct proceedings and issue their judgements in a
timely manner because justice delayed is justice denied.
Our delegation acknowledges the work undertaken
by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
to complete the cases of 93 defendants, leaving only
one case pending in the Appeals Chamber — the
Nyiramasuhuko et al. (Butare) case — which involves
15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

S/PV.7455

six accused, the completion of which is expected at the
end of this year. With respect to the nine cases of fugitives
from justice that were referred to the jurisdiction of the
national courts of Rwanda and the other three cases
transferred to the Residual Mechanism, we encourage
the authorities to locate, apprehend and prosecute those
charged to as soon as possible. As long as that has
not occurred, we cannot speak of justice having been
served.

to benefit from its technical and administrative
support. Given that this transition is nearly completed,
there remains one trial on appeal before the
Tribunal — namely, the Nyiramasuhuko et al. (Butare)
case — before its completion scheduled for this year.
The Tribunal nevertheless continues the reduction of its
staff while providing assistance to Rwandan national
courts in the context of cases that are being transferred
to them.

With regard to those who have completed their
sentences or have been acquitted, the ICTR has
transferred these cases to the Residual Mechanism
to assist in their relocation in view of the fact that it
is a humanitarian issue requiring the international
community’s cooperation. Only then will these people
be able to reintegrate into society. In this regard, we
support the strategic plan adopted by the Residual
Mechanism consisting of expanding efforts to find
suitable places for relocation and thereby providing
them with appropriate humanitarian assistance that
would help limit the financial costs of their upkeep.

We also take due note of the activities carried out
during the last six months and encourage all teams to
complete their work on time. However, we regret that
the six fugitives have not yet been found. In this regard,
we call on the countries where they are supposedly
located to show solidarity with the Republic of Rwanda
which must rebuild its nation scarred by genocide by
having the fugitives tried by the Residual Mechanism
and, in particular, by its own national courts.

Finally, we appeal to the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia to continue to take all measures
necessary to complete its work expeditiously and ensure
that all cases still in proceedings be completed in 2017,
as has been planned. In this way, the commitment it
made to the international community to promote the
rule of law and end impunity would be fulfilled.
Mrs. Alingue (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate the delegation of Malaysia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and wish you, Madam President, every success — for
yourself and for your team — in taking on your mission;
Chad assures you of its support. I would also like to
acknowledge the excellent Lithuanian presidency
for the month of May and personally congratulate
Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaitė and her team for
that success. I also thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
their respective briefings and reports.
We take due note of the significant efforts made
by the Tribunals to complete their work in spite of the
obstacles that remain as the completion date of ICTY
approaches. In the six months elapsed, the judicial and
legal activity of the ICTR essentially brought about the
completion of the appeals pending and the transition
towards the Residual Mechanism, which continued

Regarding the ICTY, it is also actively working
to wrap up its mission, particularly in the context
of its completion strategy. With the passing of two
important rulings during the period covered by the
reports, there remain seven judgements and orders to
be made. We should acknowledge in this regard that
of the 161 accused 147 have received final verdicts.
The ICTY’s communication activities and efforts to
heighten awareness continue to develop. However, the
European Union funding for this purpose will end in
August, which suggests that there will be difficulties in
pursuing these efforts.
Delays in keeping on schedule remain for various
reasons. Many postponements of judgements and
appeals will be logged in spite of the predictions made
in the latest report. The health of some defendants, the
slow pace of the process, among other things, have
delayed the Tribunal’s work during this period, but the
great challenge remains the departure of staff. Although
these problems are known, they could not be avoided
despite the warning by the Tribunal, which came up
with solutions that unfortunately did not receive the
necessary support of the competent United Nations
entities. In this context, we encourage the Tribunal to
continue implementing its strategy to completion while
continuing to consider appropriate diligent steps that it
intends to take to achieve that end. That having been
said, we believe it is also important that the Tribunal
further streamlines the judicial activities in order to
avoid the accumulation of delays.
Mr. Ibrahim returned to the Chair.

15-1654319/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

03/06/2015

In conclusion, we regret the lack of progress in the
cooperation between the Tribunal and some States of
the region to try alleged perpetrators. In this regard we
encourage States to make every effort to see that these
judgements take place as soon as possible.

breaching the time lines of the National War Crimes
Strategy. We are concerned that only a fraction of
cases have been prosecuted at the national level and
that regional war crimes prosecution continue to face
systemic and persistent challenges.

Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I thank the
Tribunal and Mechanism Presidents and Prosecutors
for their briefings and their reports.

Turning to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), we are pleased that the Tribunal
remains on track to complete its one remaining case,
Nyiramasuhuko et al. (Butare), at the end of 2015, with
the formal closure of the ICTR by the end of this year.
But the failure to apprehend the nine fugitives remains
a cause for concern. We encourage all States to provide
their full support to Rwanda and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to ensure
their arrests. The work of ensuring accountability
cannot be completed until those individuals have
been brought to justice. We thank the ICTR for their
efforts in trying to resolve the problem of relocating
the individuals in Arusha, and we are pleased that the
Mechanism has adopted a strategic plan for that. We
also welcome discussions on reparations for victims.
As the Rwandan Government remains in consultation
with the International Organization for Migration on
the draft assessment study with recommendations, we
would be grateful for a progress update.

I would like to begin by emphasizing the United
Kingdom’s continued support for the important work
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. Through their efforts, we will hold
to account the perpetrators of some of the most heinous
crimes of the twentieth century.
On the ICTY, we are pleased that the appeals of
the Popović et al. and Tolimir cases have now been
completed. We hope that the timetable for the Karadžić,
trial is maintained and that a means can be found to
complete Hadžić trial. Now that the Office of the
Prosecutor has filed a motion to proceed in Hadžić, we
look forward to hearing the trial chamber’s decision on
the case soon. On the Mladić case, we recognize the
importance of new evidence presented in that trial and
we now look forward to the case’s timely resolution.
We note that the set-out judgement is due at the end
of 2015 and we also understand the complexities with
the defendant’s revoked provisional release. We hope
that the remaining three appeals can also be completed
within the timetable set forth in the ICTY report. We
encourage the Tribunal to continue with its efforts to
conclude its work in an expeditious and timely manner.
It is encouraging that the Office of the Prosecutor
for the ICTY remains satisfied with the cooperation
it has received from the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia, and the United
Kingdom welcomes their continued cooperation. It is
also positive that the search for missing persons has
been reinvigorated in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
support the Prosecutor’s call for accelerated searches
for and exhumation of mass graves and identification
of remains, and we urge the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Governments at the State and entity levels to support
those efforts. However, the Prosecutor again raises
concerns about the significant challenges that remain
with respect to regional prosecutions of war crimes,
particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That risks

20/31

In regard to the Mechanism, we welcome the news
that it has delivered its first appeal judgement and is
now reviewing referred cases. We also commend the
significant progress on administrative issues, including
the staff at work on the permanent premises in Arusha.
We commend both Tribunals for the ongoing transition
of activities to the Mechanism. A smooth transition
is a priority, and we encourage the Tribunals and the
Mechanism to continue to work together to meet the
joint aims of the completion strategies.
Let me close by echoing Prosecutor Brammetz’s
call for the international community to use the twentieth
anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide to reaffirm its
commitment to achieving justice. The anniversary
should be foremost a time to pay respects to the victims
and their families as well as to all innocent victims of
the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, Mr. President,
let me express our congratulations to your delegation,
Malaysia, on presiding over the Security Council for the
month of June. I also commend the work performed by
the Lithuanian presidency during the previous month
of May.

15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

We thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
the briefings they have provided the Council, and we
assure them of Angola’s full support.
By establishing the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the Security Council responded
to the universal plea for the global strengthening of
the rule of the law and the end of impunity. Over the
past 20 years, the ICTY and the ICTR have played a
crucial role in promoting the rule of law by making a
meaningful contribution to ending impunity for those
responsible for committing war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity. On the eve of their closure,
we recognize the remarkable achievements of the
International Criminal Tribunals and their contribution
to international justice and the rule of law.
The ICTY has now concluded proceedings against
147 out of 161 indicted individuals, including two
important appeals cases. Seven trials and appeals,
involving the last 14 of the 161 indicted, remain
outstanding. The Tribunal is making efforts to meet
the targets for its completion strategy and to ensure a
smooth transition to the Mechanism in compliance with
resolution 1966 (2010). We welcome the non-existence
of ICTY fugitives and the Tribunal’s commitment to
the expeditious completion of its work while ensuring
that the trials and appeals are conducted in a manner
consistent with the fundamental principles of due
process and equity.
Despite the continued challenges, such as delays in
trials and appeals, we are reassured that steps are being
taken for the completion of all judicial proceedings
by 2017. We note with satisfaction that the Office of
the Prosecutor remains focused on completing the
remaining trials and appeals while reducing costs
and downsizing staff. With respect to the regional
prosecution of war crimes, we support the efforts of the
Office of the Prosecutor to encourage the improvement
of regional cooperation concerning war crimes.
In regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, while the formal closure of the Tribunal is
planned to occur by the end of 2015, we commend the
work it has accomplished by concluding the trials of
all 93 indicted individuals. We are concerned that nine
of those indicted by the ICTR for their participation
in the genocide in Rwanda remain at large with three

S/PV.7455

of the fugitives being underthe jurisdiction of the
Mechanism and the remaining six referred to the
Rwandan authorities. Thus, pursuant to resolution 1966
(2010), the responsibility for tracking and trying them
remains with the Republic of Rwanda and the Residual
Mechanism, which will require the cooperation of all
States to ensure that there will be no impunity for the
perpetrators of the genocide in Rwanda.
We note with satisfaction that the transition to the
Residual Mechanism is close to completion, most judicial
and prosecutorial functions have already been handed
over and administrative arrangements have been put in
place. We value the sharing of lessons learned by the
Tribunals in the management of judicial, administrative
and prosecutorial functions with other international
and national jurisdictions as well as with the public.
Important challenges remain, including reparations
for victims and the relocation of the acquitted and the
convicted by the Tribunal. Those are tasks that must
be carefully addressed so that the work of the Tribunal
fully impacts on peace and reconciliation in Rwanda.
Concerning the Residual Mechanism, we would
like to underscore the relevance of working closely
with the Tribunal principals and staff members to
ensure a smooth transition of the remaining functions
and services and the examination and adoption of
best practices. The communication and cooperation
with the States of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda
by keeping them updated on the activities of the
Mechanism and the transition of responsibilities, as
well as the assistance to national jurisdictions, are
most welcome. We greatly value the support afforded
to the Mechanism by the ICTR, the ICTY, the Office
of Legal Affairs, the Department of Management of the
Secretariat, and concerned States, which will be crucial
to ensuring the success of the Mechanism. We are
encouraged by the fact that the arrests and surrender
of the remaining fugitives have been set as priorities by
the Residual Mechanism, taking into account that the
ongoing operations on tracking renegades, conducted
by the Prosecutor, require the full cooperation of the
States.
Finally, we would like to highlight that the
principles of international criminal justice embodied in
the Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
for Rwanda have been crucial in the recovery processes
of those countries, following the horrific events that
took place in their territories. It is expected that the
international community will continue supporting

15-1654321/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

the Tribunals in their remaining work, including by
ensuring adequate resources to permit their achievement
of the goals set by the Security Council with a view to
securing lasting peace and the Tribunals’ legacy.
At a time of widespread atrocities, the international
community is challenged to take stock of the legacy of
the ICTY, the ICTR, the Residual Mechanism and the
other international tribunals, as a concrete expression
of its commitment to end impunity and its pledge to a
world where the rule of law prevails.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset I would like to welcome Judges Meron and
Joensen and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow and
thank them for their outstanding achievements and the
exceptional work carried out by the Tribunals.
The Council established both the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
in response to crimes against humanity, war crimes
and genocide and in order to ensure the prosecution
of the perpetrators of such crimes, the fight against
impunity and the promotion of the rule of law. Over
the years, the Tribunals have made positive progress
towards achieving their fundamental goals through
the significant number of cases adjudicated and the
few remaining cases, which together provide the best
evidence of that progress.

03/06/2015

affecting the work of the Tribunals in order to ensure
the effective completion of their work.
We are concerned about the remaining fugitives
indicted by the ICTR and call on the relevant
stakeholders to hand over those persons for whom
arrest warrants remain outstanding.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to start
by thanking you, Mr. President, for the very kind words
addressed to my delegation and by wishing you all
the very best during the month of May. I would like
to thank Judges Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their extensive briefings
today. Lithuania also reiterates its thanks to all of the
staff of the Tribunals for their work.
The upcoming commemoration of the twentieth
anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide is a sad reminder
of that massive human tragedy and the dramatic
failure to implement the responsibility to protect the
population from genocide and crimes against humanity.
At the same time, the anniversary once again recalls
the importance of upholding and actively pursuing the
accountability of those responsible for the most serious
crimes.

Despite the challenges and financial costs of the
investigations and trials, the Tribunals’ accomplishments
confirm the sound decision to establish them and
to ensure their success. The Tribunals have played a
crucial role in developing principles of international
criminal law that are invoked today by the International
Criminal Court and numerous international courts in
rendering their decisions and judgements. We therefore
encourage all international judicial institutions and
national courts to make the best use of the Tribunals’
judicial and administrative experience.

Through its jurisprudence, the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has significantly
contributed to international criminal law and continues
to do so. Both Tribunals have played a historic role in
the prosecution of wartime crimes of sexual violence,
thereby paving the way for the adjudication of such
crimes worldwide. Both have championed respect for
the rule of law and have contributed to the necessary
process of truth-seeking and reconciliation. The reports
presented today clearly indicate that both Tribunals
are moving steadily towards the completion of their
mandates. We welcome the steps that they have taken to
expedite their work and effectively conclude the cases
still under consideration, while referring outstanding
tasks to the Residual Mechanism.

Achieving the fundamental goals of the Tribunals
will require constructive cooperation and strong
support, which Jordan continues to offer. The Tribunals
must be supported by all available means to complete
their work within the timeline set by their respective
Presidents. At the same time, we stress the importance
of a smooth transition to the Residual Mechanism and
the implementation of the completion strategy after
all trials have been finalized. In the current phase we
must focus on the technical and administrative issues

With regard to the ICTY, the Tribunal made
substantial progress during the most recent reporting
period. Two appeal judgements were rendered,
including the Vujadin Popović et al. case regarding five
individuals convicted at trial. Only seven trials and
appeals currently remain, involving the last 14 accused
individuals and appellants. We are looking forward to
the trial judgements in the Vojislav Šešelj, Radovan
Karadžić and Ratko Mladić cases, involving three of
the most important indictees, and encourage the ICTY

22/31

15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

S/PV.7455

to take all appropriate measures to expedite decisions
in those cases.

to cooperate, with a view to resolving the matter as
quickly as possible.

We note the concern over the high staff attrition
rates expressed by the President of ICTY in his report
(S/2015/342, annexes) and acknowledge the steps taken
by the Tribunal to tackle that concern. Challenging
circumstances and delays in judgements can jeopardize
the course of justice. We acknowledge the challenges
that the ICTY is facing in meeting the deadlines set for
the remaining seven trials and encourage it to continue
taking all measures necessary to minimize the delays.

While the ICTY and ICTR have dealt with some
of the most gruesome crimes, mass atrocities continue
to be committed in other parts of the world, and
impunity continues to prevail. The legacy of both
Tribunals has taken concrete form in the establishment
of a permanent international criminal tribunal — the
International Criminal Court (ICC) — which today lies
at the heart of the entire criminal justice system of the
international community. In that regard, support for the
ICC is essential in order to ensure its ability to deliver
justice to the numerous victims.

Accountability for war crimes and crimes against
humanity depends on the timely completion of the
remaining proceedings by the Tribunals and the Residual
Mechanism. As the ICTY nears the completion of its
mandate, accountability at the national level is of utmost
importance. We welcome cooperation between the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTY and the authorities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia. At
the same time, we would like to share the concerns
expressed by Prosecutor Brammertz with regard to
improper attempts to influence independent judicial
authorities and to politicize war-crimes prosecutions.
We urge concerned States to overcome the most serious
barriers to national justice and to properly investigate
and prosecute war crimes under their own jurisdiction.
With regard to the ICTR, we would like to commend
the tireless work and dedication of the staff and judges
in the continuing judicial and legal activities aimed at
completing the work of the Tribunal. We welcome the
fact that the transition to the Residual Mechanism is
close to completion and that the Tribunal plans to close
by the end of 2015. While the ICTR is completing its
mandate, nine fugitives under ICTR indictment remain
at large. We encourage all States to provide full support
to Rwanda and the Mechanism so as to achieve the
arrest and surrender of the fugitives.
We note that the Residual Mechanism, working
closely with both Tribunals, has assumed many of their
core functions, including with regard to the enforcement
of sentences, the protection of victims and witnesses,
the management of archives and the relocation of
acquitted and released persons.
We take note of the remaining challenges regarding
the relocation of acquitted individuals and those who
have served the sentence imposed by the ICTR. Greater
efforts are necessary to find a long-term solution to
that issue. In the meantime, we encourage all States

Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset I would like to thank President Meron,
Prosecutor Brammertz, President Joensen and
Prosecutor Jallow for their briefings on the work
of the two Tribunals and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
During the reporting period the two tribunals
have continued to overcome various difficulties, such
as the retention of staff, and have taken various steps
to advance their work. The International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) delivered judgements
on two appeal cases, and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda just heard oral arguments in the
last appeal case. The Residual Mechanism is up and
running, having delivered its first judgment. China
acknowledges the results of those efforts but notes, at
the same time, that, for various reasons, the ICTY has
once again deferred the judgment delivery dates for
certain cases.
With regard to the work of the two Tribunals and the
Mechanism, I would like to put forward the following
views. First, concerning the progress of the work of the
two Tribunals, both are organs of international criminal
justice established by the Council and in which the
international community places its hopes for judicial
justice. However, justice delayed is justice denied.
The repeated delay in the work is not in line with the
hopes of the Council and the regional countries. It is
estimated that the ICTR will conclude its work by the
end of 2015 and the ICTY by 2017. China hopes that,
while ensuring judicial justice, the two Tribunals will
organize their work properly, fully utilize available
resources, improve judicial efficiency, expedite their
work so as to avoid further delays and complete their
work in 2015 and 2017, respectively.

15-1654323/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

Secondly, regarding cooperation with States,
cooperation with States is crucial to the effective
functioning of the two Tribunals and the Residual
Mechanism. The arrest and transfer of fugitives,
the collection of evidence and the enforcement of
judgements are not possible without the cooperation
of countries, especially those within the region. China
has noted with appreciation that the Prosecutors of
the two Tribunals and the Mechanism have expressed
satisfaction with the cooperation received from Serbia,
Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Rwanda.
At present, the ICTR and the Mechanism face two
challenges. One is the relocation of persons released
and acquitted, and the second is the fact that nine of the
indicted persons still remain at large. China appreciates
the steps taken by the ICTR and the Mechanism to seek
relocation for those released and acquitted. At the same
time, we call on the countries concerned to demonstrate
the political will to render further help to the ICTR
and the Mechanism. On that issue, the ICTR and the
Mechanism should also listen to the views of Rwanda
and other countries. On the question of the tracking
of fugitives, we hope that the ICTR, the Mechanism
and the regional countries will devote more resources
and enhance information-sharing, so as to arrest those
criminals at an early date.
Thirdly, with regard to the transition to the
Residual Mechanism, the ICTR and the ICTR branches
of the Mechanism started their work in July 2012
and July 2013, respectively. At present, the ICTR’s
transition to the Mechanism is close to completion
and the transition of the ICTY is progressing well. We
hope that the two Tribunals will organize their work
properly and enhance communication and coordination
with the Mechanism in order to ensure the successful
completion of the transition. In addition, before the
final conclusion of their work, the two Tribunals should
sum up lessons learned so as to assist the international
community in combating impunity and in addressing
the relationship between the maintenance of regional
peace, the achievement of national reconciliation and
the pursuit of judicial justice.
In conclusion, I would like to thank Chile, as
the Chair of the Working Group on the International
Tribunals, and the United Nations Office of Legal
Affairs for their work.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.

24/31

03/06/2015

I wish to express my appreciation to Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; Judge
Vagn Joensen, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR); Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor of the ICTY; and Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, Prosecutor of the ICTR, for their reports.
More than 20 years ago, the world was shocked and
horrified by reports regarding violations of international
humanitarian law and the commission of atrocities
such as war crimes, genocide and crimes against
humanity in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. The
establishment of the respective International Criminal
Tribunals — namely, the ICTY and the ICTR — was
the international community’s firm response aimed at
ensuring that the perpetrators of such atrocities would
be held accountable for their acts.
As was the case last year, when we marked the
twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide, we
are mindful that this year will mark the twentieth
anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide. The anniversary
serves as a recognition of the suffering of the victims
and their families, and also as a painful reminder to all
of us of our responsibility to ensure that such atrocities
should not be repeated. We need to send a strong and
unequivocal message that impunity will not be tolerated
or allowed to stand.
Malaysia remains resolute that the perpetrators of
such crimes must and will be brought to justice and that
they will be held accountable. However painful that
may be, we also believe that it is part of the healing,
truth and reconciliation process that communities and
States must undergo in order to seek and uphold justice.
In that regard, Malaysia highly values and underscores
its support for the work of the ICTY and the ICTR
in upholding the rule of law and justice. We deeply
acknowledge their contributions to the international
justice system and to international peace and security
and the rule of law.
Concerning the implementation of the completion
strategy, we note the commitments made by their
respective Presidents to ensuring that both Tribunals
are on track to meet their respective completion
deadlines, namely the end of this year for the ICTR and
2017 for the ICTY. We acknowledge the efforts that the
Presidents of both Tribunals have undertaken to ensure
the efficient transfer and transition of cases to the

15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

Mechanism or to the national courts, where relevant.
With respect to the ICTR, we note that its judicial and
prosecutorial functions have already been handed over
to the Residual Mechanism. The only pending case is
the Butare appeal. Of the nine remaining fugitives,
six will be referred to Rwanda, while the Residual
Mechanism will try the remaining three top-priority
fugitives. We highly encourage all States to extend
their fullest cooperation to the ICTR so as to ensure the
apprehension of all nine remaining fugitives.
With respect to the ICTY, we note that several
factors, including the health of the accused, which
has affected their ability to stand trial, as well as
high staff attrition rates have resulted in requests for
extensions of its mandate. We are especially mindful
of the continuing risk that justice may be denied due
to the medical conditions of several of the accused,
which may prevent the completion of their trials and the
determination of their guilt or innocence. While such
consequences would be unfortunate, we believe that the
factors involved were unavoidable and unintended. In
that regard, we commend the President of the ICTY for
taking the initiative to recruit personnel to fill existing
staffing gaps in order to expedite the completion of
cases.
We also acknowledge the Tribunals’ continuing
efforts to ensure that the lessons learned in managing
the judicial, prosecutorial and administrative functions
of an international tribunal are shared with other
international and national jurisdictions and the public.
It is important to encourage the sharing of best practices
and lessons learned, for example by holding workshops
with the participation of legal officers from the various
international tribunals.

S/PV.7455

some flexibility in this regard. We are assured of the
commitment shown by the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the Tribunals in carrying out their obligations and to
meet their respective deadlines.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): First of
all, my delegation wishes the Malaysian delegation a
very successful presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am sure it will head our work in the very
best way possible.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of both Tribunals and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their
reports (S/2015/340, S/2015/341 and S/2015/342) and
for today’s informative briefings. This year we will
celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations, mark 70 years since the Holocaust and
10 years since the establishment of the responsibility to
protect, and remember the twentieth anniversary of the
Srebrenica genocide.
A little over 20 years ago, the Security Council
established the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), which was the first war crimes court
created by the United Nations and the first international
war tribunal since the Nuremberg and Tokyo tribunals.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has continuously supported
the work of the ICTY and the ICTR and the contribution
of the Tribunals to international criminal law, the rule
of law and justice.

We further wish to highly commend the cooperation
of the States concerned and regional States with the
Tribunals. It would not have been possible for the
ICTR and ICTY to fulfil their obligations and mandate
without the full cooperation of the respective States.

We emphasize the importance of the successful
completion of the work of the ICTY. The Tribunal’s
achievement will serve as a reminder to future
generations that there is no impunity for genocide,
crimes against humanity or violations of the laws or
customs of war, with the hope that such crimes will be
prevented in future. At the same time, we are concerned
that the successful completion of the Tribunal’s mandate
is being jeopardized by the health conditions of several
detainees as well as by Tribunal staff attrition. The
current situation is causing significant delays in the
judicial proceedings.

In conclusion, while we understand the concern
at the delays in meeting the previous completion
deadlines, we also understand the need to exercise

Furthermore, we are deeply concerned about the
possibility that years-long judicial proceedings could
end without final judgements having been passed. We

We are encouraged to see the relatively smooth
transition of the two Tribunals to the Residual
Mechanism, as demonstrated by the transfer of some
judicial and administrative functions. We are confident
that the Tribunals will carry out their work efficiently
in accordance with the Security Council’s resolutions.

15-1654325/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

once again stress the importance of fair and expeditious
judicial proceedings. Therefore, we encourage the
ICTY to undertake all possible measures to implement
the best judicial praxis in order to avoid further delays.
The victims and their families have waited long enough.
We underline the vital role of justice in the building
of sustainable peace in post-conflict societies. In this
regard, regional cooperation remains essential to the
process of reconciliation within the country as well as
the region as a whole.
Bosnia and Herzegovina signed the protocols
on cooperation in the prosecution of war crimes
with neighbouring countries, with the intention of
intensifying cooperation in the investigation of war
crimes and the protection of witnesses. Valuable results
have been achieved. In March, the prosecutors of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia cooperated in the
arrests of eight persons accused of carrying out killings
in Srebrenica in 1995.
The cooperation of witnesses, particularly
victim-witnesses, is crucial to successful war crimes
prosecutions, not only before the ICTY but also
before the courts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Victimwitnesses often testify about very traumatic events.
During their testimony, they frequently relive their
traumas repeatedly. Furthermore, the same victimwitness might often testify in different processes
against different persons accused of war crimes. We
underline that all who deal with victim-witnesses
should have a high degree of sensitivity for them and
should treat them with humanity and respect for their
dignity and human rights.
The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
continued fully to cooperate with the ICTY during
the reporting period, particularly in terms of allowing
access to documents and archives and in witnessprotection matters. We have continuously increased our
level of cooperation with the ICTY and will continue to
do so with the Mechanism.
Our commitment to exercise our obligation to
investigate and prosecute persons responsible for war
crimes remains unquestionable. Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to strengthen the national justice system at all
levels so as to create the legal and political framework
necessary to bring to justice persons responsible for the
most serious crimes. We welcome the support of the
European Union in the strengthening of the capacity
of the judicial system in my country as well as in the

26/31

03/06/2015

achievement of the goals of the national strategy for
war crimes processing.
The tracing of missing persons, exhumation and
the exchange of information about the victims have
constituted a valuable part of the cooperation between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the ICTY. After the
war, Bosnia and Herzegovina had the largest number
of missing persons compared with other countries in
the region. Around two thirds of the estimated 30,000
missing persons have been found and identified; we
still have about 8,000 missing persons.
The trilateral meeting of the Chief Prosecutors of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia held in
February this year is a step in the right direction to
strengthen regional cooperation in the process of the
tracing and identification of missing persons. This
meeting was organized with the support of the United
Nations Development Programme mission to Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and we would like to thank all of
those who helped the families of missing persons obtain
information about their missing relatives.
We welcome the progress made in the establishment
of information and documentation centres in Sarajevo
and Srebrenica to provide public access to copies of
public records of the archives of the ICTY and the
Mechanism. The centres have a deeply symbolic
significance in terms of serving as a constant reminder
to future generations that violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law should never be
repeated. We would like to encourage other countries
as well as organizations and non-governmental
organizations to support the project. The legacy of the
ICTY does not belong only to the countries concerned
but to all of humankind as a reminder of and testimony
to the fight against impunity.
Finally, we would like to emphasize that if the
Council is committed to ensuring that the victims and
survivors of the tragedies in the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda get the justice they deserve, it must continue
to provide all the support that the Tribunals and the
Residual Mechanism need to enable them to complete
their work and conclude this important chapter in
international criminal justice, which will leave a lasting
and vital legacy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to welcome
the Presidents of the International Tribunal for the
15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Judges Meron
and Joensen, as well as Prosecutors Brammertz and
Jallow. We commend their work and continued efforts
to ensure accountability and promote international
criminal justice, and we thank them for today’s
briefings and their comprehensive reports.
Those reports, though they register progress, also
testify to the fact that international justice can be
a frustratingly slow and incomprehensible process.
It is certainly so for many of the victims and their
families, who are still waiting for justice to be done. It
is beyond their understanding that, 22 years after the
establishment of the ICTY and 20 since the end of the
wars in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, some of
those with the greatest responsibility for the heinous
crimes committed during those wars, including the
genocide in Srebrenica, have yet to receive their longoverdue sentences.
The trials have frequently been prolonged due to
the ill health of the accused. Such has been the case
with Goran Hadžić, charged with war crimes against
Croats and other non-Serbs in Croatia and whose trial
has been suspended since October 2014 owing to his
ill health. A few days ago he was again granted a
provisional release on account of his health. In that
particular context, the case of Slobodan Milošević
comes to mind. Although he masterminded the terrible
events in the former Yugoslavia and was responsible for
so much human suffering, his trial lasted so long that he
died before a verdict could be rendered. We encourage
the Tribunal to take all appropriate and necessary steps
to ensure that Goran Hadžić’s trial recommences as
soon as possible and is duly completed and brought
to its final judicial conclusion. It is also extremely
important that the judgements in the Tribunal’s two
other pivotal cases — those of Ratko Mladić and
Radovan Karadžić — be delayed no further. We are of
the opinion that the Tribunal has sufficient resources to
accomplish that.
I would like to reiterate once again that in our
view a speedy trial resulting in a court decision,
whether a conviction or an acquittal, represents not
only one of the most essential rights of the accused
but an equally essential right of the victim. The trial of
Vojislav Šešelj, indicted in 2003 for war crimes, crimes
against humanity and making inflammatory speeches
fomenting hatred, has been anything but speedy and
efficient. In my statement to the Council six months

S/PV.7455

ago (see S/PV.7332), I drew the Security Council’s
attention to the Šešelj case and the detrimental effect
of the Tribunal’s decision to allow his temporary
release on humanitarian grounds. We therefore heartily
commend Prosecutor Brammertz’s efforts to revoke his
provisional release and welcome the Appeals Chamber’s
decision of 30 March ordering the Trial Chamber to act
on that immediately.
We note with displeasure, however, that the Appeals
Chamber’s decision has not yet been carried out; we
expect the request for Šešelj’s return to custody to be
respected and implemented. It seems that the Tribunal
has intensified its efforts in that regard, and we hope
to see concrete results soon. In recent months, we have
again witnessed Vojislav Šešelj’s warmongering hate
speeches, his public burning of the Croatian flag and
his appalling mockery of victims. That toxic public
display was paired with the recent incomprehensible
decision to rehabilitate Šešelj’s infamous ideological
predecessor, a notorious war criminal in the Second
World War.
The recognition of victims’ suffering is an important
prerequisite for reconciliation, and we share the view
that reconciliation begins with the acceptance of
established facts. Revisionism and the denial of crimes,
including genocide, are unacceptable. The upcoming
commemoration of the genocide in Srebrenica, as well
as the commemoration later this year of the atrocities
committed in Vukovar and elsewhere, is indeed an
opportunity to send a clear message in that regard.
Croatia has used its comprehensive negotiations
over its accession to the European Union (EU), now
successfully crowned with Croatia’s membership
of the EU — we mark our second anniversary on
1 July — to fully develop its capacity for investigating
war crime cases and sending them to trial. In view of the
possibility of referrals by the ICTY of its proceedings,
we expect candidates and potential candidates for the
EU from south-eastern Europe to take advantage of the
same opportunity and to improve their capacities and
performance in that area.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Croatia’s
continuing and full support of the ICTY, despite any
criticism voiced today or on previous occasions. We
appreciate the Tribunal’s work, which has contributed
to ending impunity and advanced both the development
and implementation of international criminal law
and international humanitarian law, changing the
landscape of international justice profoundly. We

15-1654327/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

would particularly emphasize the contribution of both
the ICTY and the ICTR to international jurisprudence
on sexual violence.
Croatia hopes to contribute to the fight against
impunity for sexual crimes committed during conflicts
through our Parliament’s recent enactment of a law on
the rights of victims of sexual violence. Under the law,
Croatian citizens, women and men alike, who were
victims of rape and other forms of sexual violence during
the war in our homeland, will be entitled to financial
compensation and a permanent monthly allowance, as
well as the services and support they need to help them
heal after their trauma and rebuild their lives.
In conclusion, although the ICTY has done much,
its work is not finished yet. Thousands of victims
are still waiting for justice. Justice should be served
without any unnecessary delay. For our part, we will
continue to support and assist the Tribunal in its efforts
to complete its important work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Obradović (Serbia): It is an honour and a
privilege to speak to the Security Council, and to be doing
it for the first time only magnifies that. Before making
my statement, I would like to welcome the esteemed
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the Residual
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals, and
to thank them for their semi-annual reports.
As a country with a major stake in the ICTY’s
proceedings, Serbia has followed the Tribunal’s
activities related to implementing its completion
strategy and transitioning smoothly to the Residual
Mechanism with great attention and interest. We have
taken note of all the important elements of the report
of the ICTY President (S/2015/342, annex I) and that of
its Prosecutor, and we appreciate the acknowledgement
of Serbia’s important role in ensuring the successful
completion of the Tribunal’s remaining trials and
appeals, as reported by the Office of the Prosecutor. The
ICTY has, no doubt, made important pioneering efforts
in establishing and further developing the standards
of international criminal law, combating impunity and
attempting to bring a sense of justice to the victims of
obnoxious atrocities. That task has not been not easy.
Over the past 15 years, Serbia has made a
significant contribution to those endeavours. It has
28/31

03/06/2015

executed ICTY arrest warrants, including those against
its highest State and Government officials, to an
extent and in numbers never requested from any other
United Nations Member State either before or after
the establishment of the ICTY. It has provided reams
of evidence, including strictly confidential documents
and testimony of its highest officials to the ICTY and
judicial parties. Serbia has, moreover, achieved a level
of execution of requests for assistance issued by the
ICTY Trial Chambers and Prosecution that is much
more expeditious than the procedure between any two
European countries under bilateral treaties on mutual
assistance in criminal matters. That task — the task of
State cooperation — has not been easy either.
Nevertheless, the ICTY has rendered some
controversial decisions. In particular, we note with
dissatisfaction that in almost all major cases in which
the victims have been groups or individuals of Serb
ethnicity, the accused have been acquitted. Nevertheless,
the Government of the Republic of Serbia has never
stopped cooperating and has continued to fulfil its
international obligations in good faith. I can assure the
Council that this approach will be maintained and that
the Government of my country will exert its best efforts
to create a social milieu in which the legacy of the
Tribunal will be assessed objectively. Surely, time will
help too, as Mr. Brammertz suggested in his statement
to the Council at its previous meeting.
In its position on war crimes perpetrated in the
1990s, Serbia is not confined solely to the process
of cooperation with the ICTY. These crimes are
investigated and tried in my country, as reported
and welcomed by the Prosecutor. Going forward in
addressing those crimes, an action plan in line with
the European Union negotiating framework, on which
we reported in November 2014, is in the final stage
of preparation, while the Ministry of Justice has set
up a working group to draft an overarching national
strategy on war crimes, including many aspects of postconflict justice. That will be done in cooperation with
independent international experts, including the Office
of the ICTY Prosecutor, the International Commission
for Missing Persons and other relevant stakeholders.
All along, the Serbian judicial organs have continued to
investigate and prosecute war crimes.
So far, the Serbian War Crimes Prosecutor has
indicted 175 individuals, of whom 68 have been
convicted and 32 acquitted. Another 51 accused
persons are currently on trial in 16 cases. In addition,

15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

4 cases against 14 individuals are on appeal. The data
on the ethnic affiliations of the accused that I have
submitted to the Council for perusal and information
are illustrative of my country’s justice blindness in the
field of ethnicity. Out of 175 accused individuals, 2 are
Bosniacs, 2 ethnic Croats, one of whom is from Croatia
and the other from Bosnia and Herzegovina, 22 are
Albanians, of whom 17 have recently been acquitted,
and 149 are ethnic Serbs. The trials in those cases are
closely monitored by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission in Belgrade
and several domestic non-governmental organizations,
and the rulings by Serbia in these cases have never been
second-guessed as biased or unfair to defendants of
non-Serbian nationality or ethnic origin.
However, we are also well aware that some aspects
of the relevant domestic procedures need improvement.
We have therefore read the Prosecutor’s report
carefully and thank Prosecutor Brammertz and his
hard-working team for their continued assistance and
monitoring activities. In that context, I would like to
draw the Council’s attention to a glaring and hardly
comprehensible absurdity. When the ICTY Prosecutor
reports to the Council that
“Serbian judicial authorities [would] need to
process a large number of war crimes cases that
[would] predominantly, but not exclusively, involve
Serbian nationals” (S/2015/342, annex II, para. 52),
one European Union Member State called for the
cessation or limitation of the jurisdiction of the Serbian
judiciary for war crimes. And an action to that effect has
been brought before the European Parliament, contrary
to the main objectives of contemporary international
criminal law.
Our 2003 Law provides for Serbia’s jurisdiction
over the whole territory of the former Yugoslavia,
regardless of the citizenship of perpetrators or victims.
That provision was necessitated by the fact that, even
though the territory of Serbia was not engulfed by the
armed conflicts of 1991-1995, some among the refugees
who sought and found shelter in Serbia did commit war
crimes. The Serbian War Crimes Prosecutor has rarely
had an opportunity to prosecute the citizens of other
countries. There are no war crime trials in absentia in
Serbia. Only those nationals of other countries found
on Serbian territory and against whom no charges have
been brought in their countries are tried before the
Serbian War Crimes Chamber. Finally, the February
2015 report of the OSCE mission to Serbia confirms that

S/PV.7455

the exercise of jurisdiction in the case of one Croatian
citizen before the Serbian court is in accordance with
both the customary rules of international law and with
Serbian domestic law.
Yet, action continues to be taken in the European
Parliament. The new argument, proffered in a letter to
the Parliament dated 27 May, calls — in a pretty cavalier
manner, I might add — for the primacy of the principle
of the legal certainty of European citizens over the
war crimes prosecution that they may be subjected to
in Serbia. My Government is all for the legal certainty
of those citizens; yet, in the context of certainty, they
must be certain that there will be no impunity for
the crimes they have committed. War crimes, crimes
against humanity and the crime of genocide are never
under the exclusive jurisdiction of the State on whose
territory they were committed. Delicta contra juris
gentium — they are recognized as a concern of the
international community as a whole.
All countries created from the former Yugoslavia
have an obligation to investigate and prosecute those
who committed atrocities without discrimination on
the basis of the national or ethnic origin of either the
perpetrator or the victim. In that context, the serious
crimes of murder, inhuman acts and cruel treatment
committed by Croatian Government forces against
citizens of Serb ethnicity during Operation Storm in 1995
were recognized in the Judgment of the International
Court of Justice of 3 February. So far, however, Croatia
has had only one final conviction for the war crime
of murder committed during that Operation. That sad
fact should be taken into account by the European
Parliament, as well as by the Council. Accordingly,
further improvement of regional cooperation on war
crimes issues and the full implementation of bilateral
agreements, as requested in the Prosecutor’s report, are
a condition sine qua non for regional peace, stability
and reconciliation.
With your permission, Sir, I shall now address the
case of the Hague defendant Vojislav Šešelj. Serbia
joins all those frustrated by the long and ineffective
trial. We understand the emotions of the victims of the
crimes of which defendant Šešelj, the politician, has
been accused. We condemn those crimes, regret that
they were committed and sympathize profoundly with
the victims and their families. However, the criminal
responsibility of the Serbian national has not yet
been determined, and the presumption of innocence
in his case must be fully respected. The Serbian

15-1654329/31

S/PV.7455

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

Government is concerned about many aspects of this
odd case, particularly with regard to the respect for the
defendant’s rights.
Vojislav Šešelj surrendered to the Tribunal
voluntarily in February 2003, a week after the indictment
against him was publicly issued. He waited in detention
for the commencement of the trial for over four years.
He never made a request to the Trial Chamber for a
provisional release and declared his unwillingness to
accept the guarantees of the Government regarding such
a procedural treatment. His trial has been characterized
by many procedural dilemmas and general disorder.
The accused opted for self-representation. He had an
ongoing conflict with the organs of the Tribunal, which
culminated in a long hunger strike, during which his
life was in danger. He was convicted of contempt of
court three times. Finally, he refused to run the defence
case. The trial was closed on 20 March 2012, nine years
after his voluntary surrender. More than three years
later, he is still waiting for the trial judgement — a
situation without precedent in modern case law. If such
a situation appeared before a Serbian court, one can
only imagine the hue and cry that would be raised in the
European Court for Human Rights over the disrespect
of the rights of the accused.
In November 2014, at the time of defendant Šešelj’s
first provisional release, which was proprio motu, for
humanitarian reasons and without any specific duties
assigned to the Serbian Government, the Security
Council discussed the unacceptable political statements
he had made. My Government does not share Vojislav
Šešelj’s political ideas and repudiates his statements,
but it does urge the Tribunal to conclude his case.
The seriousness of the accusations cannot undermine
respect for the human rights of the defendant. I call on
the members of the Security Council to pay attention
also to the human rights aspect of this case, and not only
to the unacceptable political statements made by the
defendant, which are, incidentally, targeted more often
than not at the democratically elected Government of
Serbia and its pro-European orientation.
I would like to reiterate my country’s interest in
the future dialogue on questions related to the ICTY
archives. Also, we reaffirm our previous humanitarian
request with respect to the enforcement of sentences
and the possibility that convicted persons could serve
their sentences in Serbia as well, under international
monitoring.

30/31

03/06/2015

Instead of a conclusion, I take this opportunity
to commend all the hard-working officials and staff
of the Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism for the
relentless efforts they continue to invest despite all the
challenges and lack of resources they face. They can
always count on the full and unstinting support of the
Serbian Government.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Rwanda.
Mr. Maboneza (Rwanda): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on Malaysia’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June. Let me also congratulate the delegation of
Lithuania on the excellent work done during their
presidency in the month of May. I thank Judges Meron
and Joensen and Prosecutors Jallow and Brammetz for
their respective briefings.
The world commemorated the twentieth anniversary
of the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda last year,
in April 2014, and marked the twentieth anniversary
of the establishment of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in November of the same
year. As the Tribunal is winding down, we express our
belief that the ICTR has played an important role in
the fight against impunity for mass atrocities, but also
produced a substantial body of jurisprudence, including
definitions of the crime of genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and forms of responsibility,
such as superior responsibility. Most importantly, the
Tribunal established that the genocide that occurred
in Rwanda was against the Tutsi as a group, and also
ruled that acts of rape and sexual violence constitute
genocide if committed with the intent to destroy the
targeted group.
We note with satisfaction that, since the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2150 (2014) of 16 April 2014 on
the prevention and fight against genocide, reports on
the completion strategy of the ICTR use the correct
terminology, consistent with the ongoing jurisprudence
of the Tribunal, which refers to the specific ethnic
group that was the target of the genocide in Rwanda.
Indeed, as we have said and repeated in this Chamber,
the expressions “Rwandan genocide” and “genocide in
Rwanda”, used by many of those around this table, are
unfortunately misused by deniers of all kinds to try to
confuse the Council and the whole world as to which
group was targeted by the genocide.

15-16543

03/06/2015

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda/Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

As we look forward to the conclusion of the Butare
case by the Appeals Chamber, which was unnecessarily
delayed, we note that the 93 individuals indicted for
genocide were mainly the masterminds of that crime,
as well as national and local leaders who were out of
reach of Rwandan justice, as they were international
fugitives. We regret, however, that nine fugitives are
still at large and reiterate our call to Member States,
especially those in our region, to collaborate in arresting
all remaining genocide fugitives, as per resolution 2150
(2014).
It is worth noting that those fugitives include
the tycoon Félicien Kabuga, whose son-in-law,
Paulin Murayi, is financially supporting the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, a movement
that spread genocide ideology and engaged in related
activities in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Given the material evidence recently unveiled by the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we hope that his name, as well as others, will
soon be included on the United Nations list of sanctions,
as requested by my country.
Regarding the monitoring of the four cases referred
to national courts, we regret that the report under review
(S/2015/340, enclosure) and the oral statements that
were made this afternoon do not provide enough detail
on the status of those cases. While the procedures of
two cases referred to Rwanda in 2012 and 2013 are well
advanced, we are extremely concerned at the delays
encountered in the investigations into the two cases
referred to France in 2007, which are those of Wenceslas
Munyeshyaka and Laurent Bucyibaruta. We call on the

S/PV.7455

French authorities to expedite the investigations and
proceedings in both cases.
Rwanda has, on many occasions, expressed its
view that the ICTR archives, although the property of
the United Nations, should be located to Rwanda upon
completion of the mandate of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. Indeed, the ICTR
records constitute an integral part of Rwandan history,
are vital to the preservation of the memory of the
genocide and will play a critical role in preserving
current and future generations from genocide denial
and revisionism. We hope that all stakeholders will
understand our request and act accordingly.
I will conclude by recalling that this year is the
twentieth anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica.
Like the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, efforts
to address the genocide in Srebrenica have faced
similar problems, mainly related to delayed justice
and the scourge of genocide denial. Nonetheless, we
commend the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, the ICTR and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their
continued efforts for justice and accountability for
genocide and mass atrocities, and we hope that all legal
proceedings will be completed very soon to enable the
affected victims to turn the page on that dark period of
their history.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

15-1654331/31
