S/PRST/2004/43

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 November 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5083rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 November 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms all its previous resolutions and the
statements of its President concerning the situation in Somalia, in particular
the statement by its President dated 26 October 2004.
“The Security Council reiterates its commitment to a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia, and its respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
“The Security Council welcomes the progress made in the Somali
national reconciliation process, in particular the establishment of the
Transitional Federal Parliament, the election of the Speaker of the Parliament
and the President, and the appointment of the Prime Minister, which provides a
sound and solid framework to achieve a comprehensive and lasting solution to
the Somalia situation. The Council reiterates its expectation of the
establishment of a broad-based, all inclusive and effective government inside
Somalia that will continue the reconciliation efforts with all Somali parties.
“The Security Council stresses that it is the responsibility of all Somali
parties to work together to consolidate the gains made so far and to achieve
further progress. The Council calls upon them to seize this historic opportunity
for peace in Somalia by developing a programme of action and timetable for
the transitional period, creating a favourable environment for long-term
stability and making determined efforts to rebuild the country.
“The Security Council commends member States of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), in particular the
Government of Kenya, as well as other countries and organizations for all their
constructive efforts to facilitate the Somali national reconciliation process.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the commitment of the
African Union to assist the transitional process in Somalia, in particular the
planning for a Mission in Somalia, including options for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
04-61731 (E) 191104

*0461731*

S/PRST/2004/43

“The Security Council encourages and urges donor countries, regional
and subregional organizations to provide support to the future Somali
government’s and institutions’ efforts to ensure their ability to function inside
Somalia, and to assist in the reconstruction of Somalia. The Council
encourages a dialogue between the international donor community and the
future Transitional Federal Government on the principles and modalities of
international coordination under discussion, including at the Stockholm
meeting of 29 October 2004, and welcomes the United Nations lead
facilitating role in that dialogue and in the subsequent coordination
arrangements.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for the peace process in
Somalia and the commitment of the United Nations to assist the regional and
subregional efforts in this regard.
“The Security Council expresses its determination to continue to monitor
the situation closely.”

2
