UNITED NA TIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

2239 fll.

MEETING:

JAN 2 6 1988

27 JUNE 1980
:

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Ag&da/2239)

Adoption of the agenda ..............

. . . . . . : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i . . . . . . . . :. . . .
.....

......

..............

PCl$fC

.........

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council(S/13966) ... .. ... ..... .... ..... . .. ... ...... ... .. .... ..... ..

-.

SlPV.2239

1
1

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a’ United
Nations document.

1 ’ ‘.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Srrpplements
of the Qfficiul Records of the Security Cowdl.
-The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
und
Decisions
c$ the Security
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fuJly operattve
on that date.

,.

2239th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 27 June 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Ole ALGARD

Mr. Jumal (Qatur), Mr. Zowuwi (Saudi Arubia),
Mr. Djigo (Senegul). Mr. A. M. Adun (Somulicr).
Mr. Abdullu (Sudun), Mr. Munsouri
(Syriun Arub
Republic), Mr. Eralp (Turkey), Mr. Humaidcm (United
Arub Emirates), Mr. Aluini (Yemen), and Mr. Mujezinovi~ (Yugoslaviu) took the places reserved for them
ut the side of the Council chamber und Mr. Terzi
(Pulestine Liberution
Orgunizution)
took u place at
the Council tuble.

(Norway).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico,
Niger, Norway,
Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2239)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent Representative
of Pakistan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13966)
The meeting

2. Mr. YANG0
(Philippines):
Just recently, on
1 March 1980, the Security Council met on an issue
of great importance to international
peace and security and adopted resolution 465 (1980) which,inter a&,
called upon Israel to withdraw from territories on the
West Bank of the Jordan, including Jerusalem, which”
were occupied in 1967. That resolution remains unimplemented.
Other resolutions along the same lines,
of both the Council and the General Assembly, remain
unimplemented.
Those are the reasons why we have
met again. We have to continue to be seized of this
issue until a solution emerges and a just and comprehensive peace throughout the Middle East has been
attained.

of the agenda

wus culled to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The ugendu MWS adopted.

3. But there is another reason why we ha&to meet
at this time on an urgent basis. The region remains
tense; occasional acts of violence make life precarious
in the occupied territories, in southern Lebanon and
other parts of the Middle East. Recent events point to
an escalation of threats to life, property and the peace
of the area. Not only does retaliation follow upon
retaliation,
but fresh causes are being added to the
dispute. The most recent of these, as everyone now
knows, is the threat of final unilateral action on the
part of Israel to make permanent through an act of
Parliament
the status of Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel, “reunifying”
both the western and eastern
parts, including the Holy Places, into a single entity
under Israeli rule and jurisdiction.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13966)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with previous
decisions [2233rd to 2236th and 2238th meetings],
I invite the representatives of Israel and Pakistan to
take a place at the Council table, I invite the representatives of Bahrain, Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon,
Malaysia,
Mauritania,
Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the United
Arab Emirates, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, and I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
to take a place at the
Council table.

4. Because such a final unilateral act would serve no
purpose, but would only further aggravate an already
complex situation and make a solution much harder
to achieve, my delegation agrees as to the urgency of
this meeting. But we also feel that we should seize
this occasion to move farther along the road towards
the ultimate solution to this problem, and not merely
content ourselves with stopgap measures. We believe
strongly that a basis already exists for such a solution, a basis for a just, comprehensive
and lasting
peace in the Middle East. It is one which the prescient

At the invitution of the President, Mr. Blum (isruel)
und Mr. Nuik (Pukistan) took pluces ut the Council
ruble, Mr. Al-Saffar (Bahruin), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba),
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Suwondo (Indonesia),
Mr. AI-A/i (Iruq), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordun), Mr. Bisharu
(Kuwit), Mr. Tucfni (Lebanon), Mr. Hulim (Mulaysiu).
Mr. Kane (Muurituniu),
Mr. Laruki
(Morocco),
1

Members of this international body, long before the : all mankind. ..No one *should ever be denied .access
present problem developed to such complex propor- s. to it and the ,Holy Places therein. There should never
tions, put forward in General .Assembly resolution
be.:any wrangling, much less fighting, overit for such
181(II), which is the first of the many resolutions that would be .aoontradiction to its holy character.. .Let all
have been left unfulfilled. ,To our mind, there is no’ mankindtherefore see to it that Jerusalem and its Holy
doubt’that history would have been different and’we ’ Places be,for.evec preserved as a common heritage of
would not be agonizing over the .question of war and .- all and as .a holy shrine for. peoples of all faiths. .
. . . ,‘. ,.., 5 ., :
peace in the Middle East ,today, had ‘that- resolution
(,(
,,.. 7
been given full force and effect after its passage.
8.;::What :is. this’ .special, status with international
y guarantees that is desired for Jerusalem? At this,point,
“. ‘a
. . . . ...“.
.,
5. In our statements ‘on two previous .occasions.in :’ I wish .to refer to the special international regime for
the Council, one on the ‘question of the occupied Arab :: the City,of Jerusalem, .asenvisaged in General Assemterritories and the othei.on the question of the exercise’::. bly resolution 181(II) of 1947. In part III of the resoluby the:Palestinian people of their inalienable. rights,,‘< . tion, it is stated that ,’
.. .
_” ‘.<
.._,.I
we stated that the issue of peace in the-Middle East
could not be settled unless the question of;Palestine .’ ” “The City .of Je’rusalem~Shallbe established as a
and ,the occupied territories was’settled. first.’ For we
c&pus .sep&-atum under a special international rehave here a fateful sequence of events that’cannot be :
gime’ and .shaIl
*be’-administered by the United
;,.l
I
..-. c:-“‘:
avoided. The problem .of ‘Jerusalem, with ,which we ‘I. ‘Nations;t’:
I
i
,~.
.
$I.
,
.
*.
..
.are presently seized, is an es$ential and integral element
ofthat,question. It is my delegation’s belief that.we .; The’samd’ resolution’stipulates that, ..
: : : f ,‘ ;,‘,_:>: ” ,_, ), ,’ : ,:*,
have,first to settle this issue before we can ,proceed
to the other elements of this complex equation.;Jeru- ‘.
J “‘TheCity ofJerusalem shall be demilitarized; its
salem is primary;‘but it also touches a raw nerve in the
neutrality-shah
“’
., I,_./..be declared
I .; and preserved.”
.i I.
international community, -for it is a -focal point ~‘of
concern for .most.of mankind,.
._.‘ /
Ir+paragi-aphs 7’and.:8 of its resolution 194 (III) of
,..“.
0’
‘,
.I. ,,
..
1948, the:GeneralAssembly resoived
6. :His Holiness Pope:John Paul II was ,moved to ..
speak about the centrality of this issue. when he ad- :
“that the ;Holy Places-including Nazareth-i-eli-’
dressed the-General Assembly last year and said: ‘. ‘. gious buildings and sites in Palestine should be pro:
:,
.,.
tected ‘and ‘free’ access to them assured, in accord-.
“I also hope for a special statute that, under interante.I.with .,v,.
existing
rights and historical practice” .‘I
,.. I. ., ,.
national guarantees-as my predecessor Paul .VI and-’ .._I
.
,,:-’ .” ;
”
,-. ‘;’
indicated-would respect the particular nature of
.,‘.,..
...//.,_.
Jerusalem,. a heritage sacred to the veneration of
,millions of believers of the three great monotheistic
“that; in’view of its association”with three world’
religions, Judaism, Christianity and Islam.“’
religions, the Jerusalemarea. . ; should be accorded
I.
special and separate’ treatment from the rest of PalIn speaking those words, the Pope spoke not only for
&tine and should be placed undereffective United,
Roman .Catholics, but for the untold millions of this
Nations control”. .’.
planet’s population as well as for those whose lives
have been touched in one way or another-and they Furthermore’: the Assembly instructed the Conciliation
constitute the vast majority of the peoples of the Commission for Palestine:
: .&:,.
world-by those three great religions. The Association
,.
of South-East Asian Nations, to which my country
“to present to the fourth regular session of the Gen:
belongs, is made up of representatives of at least two
era! Assembly detailed proposals for a permanent
of those religions-Muslims and Christians.
international regime for .the Jerusalem area which,
will provide for the maximum local autonomy for
7. For more than 2,000 years Jerusalem has occupied
distinctive groups consistent with the special inter;:
a special place in the hearts and minds of peoples of
national status of the Jerusalem area”.
i .I :>
these faiths. Its name in Arabic means Holy City. To
Christians, Jerusalem is the city of the Fathers of the 9. As far as my delegation is concerned, the status of]
Church; Jerusalem and nearby sites such as Nazareth
Jerusalem is as stipulated in the original plan of par&
and Bethlehem are where Jesus Christ was born,
tion and nothing, in our view, since then has changed;
lived and did much of his work among mankind. The
that status.
Jews also attach a special significance to it as a holy
c
site. For these reasons, and because its status has been
10. It is relevant, in that connection, to draw atten:.
in dispute since partition, my delegation is fully con- tion to the conclusions of the study entitled The Stattis’
vinced that Jerusalem and the Holy Places therein
c$ Jerusalem prepared for, and under the guidance of;
should retain a special status in the international com- the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable’
munity, as the Pope has said, and as the international
Rights of the Palestinian People, which, inter alia,.
,( :.’
consensus would have it. Jerusalem truly belongs to concluded on page 26 that:
?

2

“Thelresoiutions of the:Generai Assembly *and 15. +-As is known to a!!, the Genera! Assembly and the
Security Council have adopted resolutions on many
Security-Council in relation to Jerusalem ,foilowing
the :occupation of, the -entire city of Jerusalem by :: occasions condemning Israel for its illegal act of establishing settlements. on the occupied Palestinian and
Israel-in Jane 1967also maintained this original.‘principie of intemationaiization. Further, they Required ‘, otherrArab territories and demanding an end to a!!
Israel tarwithdraw .from territories occupied during : Israeliacts to change.the legal status, physical characthe conf!ict,:and to rescind a!! measures taken, ‘as. ter..and demographic structure of the occupied Arab.
Jerusalem. .. ..
we!! as to refrain from taking further measures, terrifories;.~inciuding
.~..’
.;
,-1
to alter thestatusof JerusaiemiThus, it wouid’appear *
that the United Nations since ,I947 has ,maintained : 16. However: the israeli authorities for a long time
have. turned ;a,deaf ear .to the unanimous condemnathe principle that the Llegal status of Jerusalem is
tion by .worid.opinion and acted incomplete defiance
thatof a. cwrpus separatum, under an international
regime.“:;
I ,
,.J
., .I ” j . .‘I :.;,,“.a :‘.‘. : ‘-1 ’ of the relevant resolutions of the Genera! Assembly and i
.:, the.Security Cauncii. In particular, the Begin ,Admin- +:
11. This concept of an international regime ‘for Jeruistrationhas’intensified. its. efforts to expropriate the :.
saiem was clearly elaborated upon by the. Rapporteur
private land of the Arabs in the above-mentioned areas; .
of the Committee, .the representative of Malta,, in his expand .the,:Jewish .-settiements;~.control and mo- :.:
statement before the Council, yesterday [22$6th nzcet:
nopoiize the water resources, interfere In the religious ,’
ing]-a concept which, according to him, the .United activities of :ithe ,Arab people, vandaiize precious .
Nations has maintained since 1947 as the true legal Muslim historical reiics,:wiifuiiy arrest and expel Arab j
status of Jerusalem: The , representative ‘.of . Cuba, ‘.. inhabitants and,even deport and,assassinatePalestinian’. v
speaking as Chairman of the non-aligned movement
leaders. Recently, in disregard. of the norms of inter- *
[2235th meeting], likewise referred to an international
national law and the strong opposition of the :Arabs Z
regime for Jerusalem .in the context of the :United
and:aii justice-upholding countries and peoples of the
Nations. Mention of such an international regime was world, the Knesset has taken unilateral .and arbitrary :
also made in the statements of the representatives of’. action to initiate the legislative -process of making.:,
Jordan and Turkey [223&h and J236th.mgetingsj.
.- ,I: Jerusalem the permanent capita! of Israel. A few days
ago Begin ,made a new’ provocation by brazenly :an- ;
12. : Everyone recai!s that in the years subsequent to
nouncing the moving of the Israeli authorities’ office to:.’
1967 a!! actions which had the intent of changing that
Jerusalem. In our view; the above-mentioned actions
status.of Jerusalem were declared invalid in various, taken by Israel to change the status and character of
resolutions, nanieiy, Genera! Assembly resolutions
Jerusalem are completely illegal and null and void.
2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) and Security’ Council
These actions should not be granted recognition.
j
resoiutions252(1968),267(1969),271(1%9),298(1971)
and 465 (1980). It is our belief that any unilateral action
17. Jerusalem is the sacred place of’three major
to change the status and character of Jerusalem .withreligions of the world and it is only natural that people
out the participation of ail the parties concerned :and of a!! these religions should have free access to it for
without the genera! approval of the.intemational corn:
pilgrimage. We fully understand and sympathize with
munity cannot contribute positively to a just, comthe sentiments of the Islamic countries and peoples’
prehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East. L
towards Jerusalem. We are opposed to any Israeli (:
action
to change the status of Jerusalem unilaterally;
13. Once again we have before us the opportunity to
m&e a fateful choice between issues‘of peace and
18. The question of Jerusalem is an important cornwar in this troubled region. We are fortunate that in
of the whole Middle East issue. We have always
this instance we have before us also the product of the ponent
held
that
any solution to the Middle East question .1
wisdom of our worthy predecessors in this world
should
embody
the following three aspects: first, Israel :‘
forum, which can evidently be a path to peace and a
must
withdraw
from a!! the Arab territory occupied
satisfactory solution ‘to the complex problems in the
since 1967, including Jerusalem; secondly, the national
region. My’ delegation shares the anxiety of many
rights of the Palestinian people must be restored,
that, at this juncture, as the-entire, world stands poised
including
the right to return to their homeland, the
.on the edge of this choice, many parties,agitated by the
right
to
self-determination
and to establish their own
cycles of violence that daily sweep over the region
State;
thirdly,
the
solution
to the Middle East queswill ignore that path. Let them not forget that a temtion
must
be
comprehensive
and just.
porary gain for them may lead to a permanent loss for
a!!‘humanity.
/
19. Such are our explicit views and position of pi-incipie on the related issues.
14. Mr. CHOU Nan (China) (interpretation
from
Chinese): Last May the Eleventh Islamic Conference
of,Poreign Ministers, held in the capita! of Pakistan, 20. The Chinese Government and people strongly
condemn the Israeli authorities for their crime of agadopted a resolution2 calling for an immediate meeting
gression, expansion and annexation and firmly support
of the Security Council to consider the question of
the Palestinian and other Arab peoples in their just
Jerusalem. That decision was right and timely. The
struggle to regain their national rights and recover
Chinese delegation fully supports that initiative.
3

their lost territories. We maintain that the Council
must strongly condemn Israel for all its unlawful acts’
to change the legal status, physical character and
demographic structure of the occupied Arab territories and for its unilateral and arbitrary act,to change
the status and character of Jerusalem. The Council,
should declare in explicit terms that the above-mentioned measures taken by Israel are completely illegal
and null and void and that they’ should be rescinded.
The Council should also demand Israel’s withdrawal
from all the occupied Arab territories; including’
Jerusalem. Should the Israeli authorities continue to
defy the relevant resolutions of the United .Nations,‘,
the Council should consider the adoption ‘of more
effective measures ,against Israel.

composition of Jerusalem must now be added the
intention of unilaterally imposing a new status on the
city. In this way an essential principle of the international legal order would be doubly violated, a principle to which Mexico, ,attaches particular value:
conquest must not engender any right.’ The security
of a country or a region cannot be founded on domination. Conversely, there is no surer way of compromising peace ,than by tolerating the dangerous precedent of one nation imposing its will on another or on
others’ in violation of the legal order.
27. ’ Nor can the deep historical significance of Jerusalem, where three great faiths and the traditions of
innumerable peoples converge, be a pretext for an
unjust solution which would carry with it the usurpation of national rights. Respect for the values which
Jerusalem embodies presupposes a climate of peace,
which no military occupation can engender.

21. Mr. MUNOZ LED0 (Mexico) .(intcr~retotion
Spanish): We are: living through some exceptional days in the Council. The two issues that for
decades have been predominant on its agenda-the
Middle East and southern Africa-have
reached
such a point of seriousness and such a juncture that
we can now say that we have a double emergency. :

from

28. ‘The immediate problem which we face is an
illegal occupation, which must end. But the long-term
solution requires a new approach which will lead to
coexistence. The creation of the State of Israel was
made possible thanks to the long sacrifices endured
by the Jewish people in affirming its existence as a
nation. These forces must be transformed into a clear
understanding of the sacrifices now suffered by the
Palestinian people so as’also to achieve its independence through the establishment of a national State.

22. The recurrence of these two issues make them
both symptomatic and symbolic; They both reveal .a
pernicious imbalance between the obduracy of those
responsible for the conflicts, on the one hand, and the
lack of effective co-operation among those who might
make it possible for the decisions of the international.
community to be carried through, on the other. They
exemplify the barriers within which action by the
United,Nations is to be confined.

29. The deepest significance of the tragedy of the
Middle East lies in the fact that two vigorous nationalisms are clashing within the same historical and
geographica framework. One has already achieved:
its essential objectives: the Israeli. The other is struggling to gain them: the Palestinian. Hence, the international community supports the claims of the latter
and, in order to establish harmony, is seeking to curb
the excesses of the former.

23. The issue we are discussing today is of particular
importance. Just as the question of Palestine is the
key to the problem of the Middle East, the fate of
Jerusalem is the key to the problem of Palestine. By
confronting such issues without ambiguity we can
find the thread that will lead us to a genuine joint solution. We shall be at the beginning of the end of a longdrawn-out problem.

30. Both peoples have the same ethnic origin and
have shared the same cultural heritage. For centuries’
they coexisted in various parts of the ancient world.
Tradition and mutual interest militate in favour of
close co-operation between the two nationalities.
Once dialogue can be established on an equal footing,
the problem of Jerusalem can be resolved to the satis-,
faction of both parties and of the international community if, instead of differences being exacerbated,.
occupation is ended and gives way to an imaginative, 1
forward-looking policy.

24. Almost every day starts with news of an escalation of decisions which make a negotiated and peaceful settlement in the Middle East even more difficult.
What is the purpose? It seems to be to make use of a
year of uncertainty in order to impose afair accompli
on the centres of world power. For that reason, now
is the right time to define the role which the Organization should play in making decisions that fall within its
purview.
25. The energies we devote to the discussion of those
issues are not superfluous. They are translated into
important conceptual advances which give form to
the political will of the international community and
which preclude solutions that are not adapted to the
principles of the Organization or the substance of our
resolutions.

31. Strictly speaking, the problem is not that of
choosing between a unified Jerusalem and a divided,
Jerusalem. The city is unified today -in fact, but be-.
cause of a conquest, which can engender no right
whatsoever. If what we want is to unify the city, this
must be done with respect to all sovereignties, so that
Palestinians and Israelis, Christians, Jews and Muslims
may live together in freedom and with mutual ret-*
ognition of their national rights, their traditions and

26. To the measures taken by Israel since 1967 to
change the physical character and the demographic
4

their religious beliefs. It is the peoples, far more than
the physical remains, that are the repositories of a’
historical heritage. To safeguard Jerusalem is, to a
large extent, to promote harmony among the communities which inhabit it through just solutions and
within a stable and lasting political framework. If the
idea ‘of according international status to ‘Jerusalem
proves to be impossible to realize, we can think for
the future-once national -rights are re-established-,
about new formulas of understanding. But for the
present, our endeavours must be focused on the return
to legality by putting an end to an arbitrary occupation.

intransigence and its constant contemptuous disregard for international law and all the unanimous
judgements of the Council. Any unilateral measures
to. alter the status of Jerusalem and any attempt or
measure designed to hide the nefarious acts of Israel
must be firmly rejected and condemned by the Council.
37. I have stated before-and it is a matter of record
and known to ,everyone-that a long list of resolu-.
tions has been ‘adopted by the Security Council and
the Genera! Assembly on the status of Al-Quds AlSharif ‘and on ,Arab territories acquired by force by
Israel. The people of the world, whose opinion is
reflected in the pronouncements of the Council and’
of the Genera! Assembly, have been unanimous in’
upholding the very just <andfundamental principle of
not allowing the aggressor to swallow the land and ”
territories he ‘occupies. This’ is the recurring theme in
al! the resolutions.
.
38.. There has been complete unanimity in the world
community, except for one of its members, with
regard to the preservation of Al-Quds Al-Sharif-the
city of peace and the spiritual centre of three monotheistic faiths of the world. It is a sad commentary
that, in spite’of all the numerous resolutions of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and other
competent international bodies, the situation in Jerusalem and the occupied territories is rapidly deteriorating. The latest act of Israel is not an isolated
incident; it seems to be part of a premeditated, systematic and deliberate policy in total defiance of the
collective opinion of the civilized world on the building
of new settlements, expropriation of lands, demolition of houses, expulsion of inhabitants and the letting
loose of a reign of terror in an area which Israel is
bound to protect and to vacate in accordance with the :
terms of the Geneva Convention relative to the Pro-.
tection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August !949,3 and the universal code of human conduct.
This invidious ethos of Israeli intransigence has
another aspect. The original residents of Al-Quds AlSharif have, through the process of what is euphemistically known as demographic decomposition,
been gradually reduced to a minority. Israel has been,
systematically taking measures in pursuit of a policy
totally incompatible with its obligations under the
Charter and the Geneva Convention.

32. My delegation has been in favour of adopting a
forceful draft resolution, so that we may implement
the legal measures considered necessary for halting
and defusing the repeated flouting of the will of the
international community. We wish further to state
our deep concern about the persistence of this problem, which seems increasingly to be the linchpin of
an acute and deplorable conflict and which requires
greater firmness in our resolutions as we!! as a clearer
vision of the future.
,.
33. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Mr. President, it is
a pleasure to see you presiding over the deliberations
of the Council. It we!! befits you to be in charge of this
crucial meeting of the Council, both because of your
persona! qualities-endowed as you are with a rare
combination of wide experience and statesmanshipand because of your position as the representative of
Norway, with which my country has the closest relations, a country whose commitment to the cause of
peace and international understanding is acknowledged
by a!!. And our persona! friendship, Mr. President,
spans a period of a decade, and I am beholden to you,
as are other friends of yours, for our shared moments
of trying to uphold values which we cherish.
34. I should also like to express my sincerest appreciation to my brother, Ambassador IdC Oumarou of
the Niger, for the excellent way in which he conducted
the proceedings of the Council during the month of
May.
35, “ ‘He who comes seeking equity must come with
clean hands’ ” 12234th meeting, puru. IIS]: this is
how the representative of Israel tried to justify Israel’s
latest phase of expansionism and aggrandizement. The
absurdity of this statement is only borne out by the
universal condemnation with which the Israeli action
on Al-Quds has been greeted. Incidentally, the beautiful name “Al-Quds Al-Sharif’ has a lone objector
reading sinister meanings into it, while it signifies
‘:Ho!y of Holies” to about a billion people.

39. Our memories are not short. We have heard in
the Council the plea against tyranny *so movingly
stated by the Mayor of Halhul, a son of the soil who is
denied entry to his own home. Israeli actions have
moved the world to condemn-and some in milder
words to deplore-their nefarious designs, but with
no effect. The Bangladesh delegation in no uncertain
terms condemns the Israeli actions, and it will do so
again and again until the wrongs are righted and will
keep on demanding that Israel be compelled by the
Council to obey its mandate.

36. The representative of Israel did not stop at that;
he arrogated to himself the task-of lecturing the Council. He found it appropriate to sound a note of warning.
This warning sounded, to say the least, ironic and
sinister, considering Israel’s record of violence and

40. The present series of meetings of the Council
is being held in response to a request of the Eleventh
5

.

Islamic Conference ‘of Foreign Ministers “to examine
the dangerous situation arising from the latest decision
by the Israeli authorities . . . to annex and declare AlQuds Al-Sharif ‘as the capital ‘of Israel’?. [S/13966;]
The 39 States members of the Islamic Conference have
called for these meetings of the Council to consider
the serious and dangerous implications ‘of ,the,abovementioned Israeli moves and their consequences on the
endeavours for achieving- a comprehensive, just ‘and
lasting peace in the Middle ‘East, in accordance‘ ‘with
the relevant resolutions of the -United Nations.
-1Vb
.Y’ ., ._..,I..I
. ;<s;‘;
*
‘,
-_ ,J...’
41. :The introduction of the bill in the’Kiresset;dedaring Al-Quds ‘aAl-Sharif as the ,eteinal. capital ’ of
Israel, ‘which is said to have been referred to ‘a Select
Committee, and the recent announcement of Mr.+Begin
have added a new dimension. That is not only a provocative action on the part of Israel but is also totally
unacceptable -and untenable by all canons.of. inter‘: (’
national law. i I ‘:
;
, s .r;:.
,.‘ ., ,i
.I :.
.42. The Government ‘of Bangladesh .has view.ed this
with great .concem. In complete solidarity with ‘our
Arab and Palestine brothers and all our other brothers
who hold AlQuds Al-Sharif.sacred, we are firmly of
the view that the Israeli action is not only illegal and
ulzru vires but also further proof of the contemptuous
disregard’with which the Israeli rulers look upon world
ppinion.
~, .’
43. The Holy City of Al-Quds Al-Sharif occupies’ a
special place not only for’the whole Islamic Ummah;
its history has been intertwined with that of mankind.
It embraces the spiritual and intellectual contributions of three,great monotheist,ic religions of the world
representing the largest segment of mankind. It has
from time immemorial remained a witness ‘to the
permanent editice of coexistence, peace, love and
tolerance. Let us strive to end this period of horror
and nightmare ‘and decisively ensure the historical
accessibility of pilgrims from all over the world to the
Holy City and its shrines. The Zionist entity ‘must be
compelled to refrain from further desecration and
despoliation of the Holy Places and of Palestine,
thereby helping to usher in an era of peace in the
region and the world.
44. In his statement on the opening day of this
debate [2233rd meeting], the Foreign Minister of
Pakistan rightly touched on the concern of the Islamic
countries on the question of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. This
is the latest effort of the Islamic community in the
quest for justice and peace in the Holy Land. Since
the Rabat Conference of 1969, the heads of State or
Government of the Islamic countries who assembled
to consider the dangerous situation arising from the
desecration of the Al-Aqsa Mosque declared that the
status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif should be restored without
any further delay. The Lahore Summit of the Islamic
Conference in 1974 also underlined in unmistakable
terms the paramount importance of the immediate
removal of Israeli aggression from Al-Quds Al-Sharif

as the &ze qcicr‘nbn. forta lasting peace inthe,,Middle
East, nay the ‘whole world.:As’a member ofthe Jerusalem Committee from its very inception;:Bangladesh
has reiterated time and again that under no circumstances can the Ummah and the civilized world accept
the creeping annexation ‘of ;Al-Quds AiSharif ‘by the
forces of Israel or shy the -maintenance .of the status
qu&.
.. ,. ”
*
..,,.
I’. ,. >,

: ‘ ,.,,.
,, .,

:: _ .
: ‘ .‘. :. : ‘1 j
: f . ,: ‘7
r:,.. 1(

45.’ ‘We have noted with satisfaction the recent overt
pronouncement of the European Council with regard
to,Al-Quds Al-Sharif; which-states: ” I.~.,.
.J I.
“The Nine recognize the special importance of the
’ role played by ,the question.of Jerusalem for all the
parties concerned. The Nine stress that they will not
accept any unilateral initiative designed to change
:’ the: status‘of Jerusalem and that any agreement on
. the City’s,status should guarantee freedom of access
,rof everyone to the Holy Places.” [S//4009, paw. 8.1
;.;; >-.,.
,,a

I.’

~:’

..,’

-46. ,The international community itself has, through
the General Assembly and the Security Council, time
:and again called upon Israel to rescind all measures
taken by it to change, the special personality of Jerusalem and to refrain from taking any further action in
that regard. In this connection, I should like to draw
,attention to Council resolutions 242 (1967), 252 (.1968),
267 (1969), 271~(1969)and 298 (1971). All those resolutions reafIirmed in clear terms the principle of .the
inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by force and,
thereby, that ail actions, administrative as well as
legislative, taken by Israel to alter the status of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif were invalid. In its resolution 465 (1980),
which was adopted unanimousiy; the Council reaffirmed this.’ position regarding the: occupied Arab
I
territories, including Jerusalem.:.
‘.
.,
i.” ..
47.’ It is in this context of the repeated violation of
resolutionsof the Council that the:recently concluded
Islamic Conference of Foreign ,Ministers has called
upon the Council to declare null and void ail such
actions taken by Israel. In case Israel continues, its
policy of defiance of the Council’s resolutions, all
efforts must be made, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of the Charter, so as to compel compliance
.
with,the .resolutions.
48. The edifice of world civilization rests on certain
fundamental values. We cannot be oblivious of, the
fragile peace built upon the debris of the destruction
of the First World War; that peace was achieved without the injection of the element of justice for all the
parties concerned. To be durable, peace must. be
conceived in the context of justice and fair play. We
cannot allow Israel to persist in its policy of occupation and annexation, which is now posing the grave-st
danger to international peace and security. As recently
as a few days ago Pope John Paul II stated that the
resolution of the question of Jerusalem is pivotal to’a
just settlement in the Middle East and he also under‘*
scored the gravity of the situation.

6

49. The vision that was demonstrated,by the leaders
at the Yalta Conferencein order to maintain peace in
the post-Second World War eraand that lentcredibility
to the Charter of the United Nations and to,its principles and purposes is notlost on us in. the Council.
It is time, -therefore; that the Council in. its .wisdom
brings to bear .upon Israel its moral force ‘so as :to
ensure the immediate vacation of Israeli aggression
with regard to Al-Quds Al-Sharif so that a durable
peace can, be .achieved in the Middle East, a peace
that can be ‘sustained, a peace that <will,be meaningful not only for the Islamic world, butralso for the
whole world.
.
.‘.,_. , <
,SO. In conclusion, in the very first day of the debate,
the representative of Israel in his statement said: %
..
“A ~dangerous dimension has been injected, here
into our discussions. We have heard in this meeting,
right from its beginning, the shrill voice of h.atred,
incitement and fanaticism. As the representative
of a people which throughout the ages.has been the
traditional victim .and target rof this ! despicable
phenomenon, I feel in duty bound to caution against
succumbing here to an evil that has brought.so much
misery not only in the past, but even in ,our own
time. Members of the Council need not be reminded
of the most recent manifestations of this evil and of
its implications for all of us.? [22X%? meeting,

peoples of different origins, races or -creeds. Few
places like Jerusalem have, however, raised such
violent passions among so many people and for so
long a time. For centuries and centuries, men have
come.from distant lands to fight and die for the Holy
Places of this city. They were not seeking riches, they
.were not fighting to extend, the territory that would
allow their-own people to live and to survive, nor .to
preserve the land of their ancestors. They were fighting
for their religious convictions, for the preservation of
the material-foundations of .their faith,.and they were
ready to sacrifice, in accordance with their beliefs, an
ephemeral life on earth to,more eternal values. Such is
for, Jews, Christians and Muslims alike the symbolic
strength of ,the Holy, Places. situated in the City )of
Jerusalem,.
‘I I,.:-j
.. . ,.
1 , ,<’
3’.
.;..;
‘.
sh. This unique spiritual. dimension of .Jerusalem
must never be ignored by. those who exert control and
authority over that city. Those who choose to ignore
it will only set afire new passions, thus leading to more
violence and intolerance. Thus we cannot but express
‘our clear disapproval of the legislative steps recently
initiated in the Knesset unilaterally to alter’the char; !‘.
acter and status of the City of Jerusalem.?
jI
c,-i
.

In this regard, I should like to take members back to.a
historical event of more than I,$)0 years ago. The
Second Caliph of Islam, Hazrat Omar, ,of blessed
memory, on entering the grounds of Al-Quds Al-Sharif
at the head of a conquering Muslim army, was invited
to say his prayers in the shrine. He respectfully declined the invitation explaining that by offering the
prayer in the premises, he would set a,bad- precedent,
:encouraging his followers to claim the shrine as their
own. The recent decision of the Islamic Conference
to bring this matter to the Council is based on that
noble example, in the spirit of ‘seeking justice and
practising tolerance and in the quest for a peaceful
.solution of this explosive issue.

55.‘. Neither can we silence our dismay ‘at seeing that
the Israeli authorities have ‘apparently turned a deaf
ear to the wise, tolerant and conciliatory words we
heard not that long ago in this very building about the
problems of Jerusalem from His Holiness
I John Paul II.;
56. In the view of the Portuguese Government, any
attempt by the Israeli authorities unilaterally to define
the status of Jerusalem will be illegal in the ‘face of
international law and contrary to the spirit of tolerance
that’must preside over the relations between the three
religions for which Jerusalem is a Holy Place. Likewise, any attempt to impose control over that city by
force, ignoring the feelings of the three religious
communities that live there and venerate its shrines,
will only be illusory and will contain the seeds of new
violence that sooner or later will turn against those
who initiated the process.

‘i 1. Engraved in bold letters on the wall of the Union
of American Hebrew Congregation, at East Sixty-fifth
Street and Fifth Avenue, New York, are wonderful
exhortations and words of wisdom: “Do justice, love
‘mercy, walk humbly withethy God”. I do not have to
go. into the significance of those wonderful words
providing the code of human conduct, for tolerance
and for eternal peace. Let it be practised in deeds.
I,,
52; Nemesis has invariably followed injustice and
intolerance. Let us avoid it while there is time; let it
not engulf the guilty and the innocent alike.
I’
53. Mr. FUTSCHER PEREIRA(Portuga1): Throughottt history, almost every city in the world has at one
time or another been the object of conflicts between

57. A peaceful and adequate solution of the question
of Jerusalem can therefore be found only if the historic and religious pluralism of that city isrecognized
and taken into account, for Jerusalem is a sacred place
not only for those who live .in it, but for all those,
numbering almost 1.5 billion people, who follow the
creeds of the three great monotheistic religions.
Respect for the religious dimension of the city implies
a search for a special statute that, under international
guarantees, will define equal rights for the three religions, assure free accessfor all to the places of worship
and safeguard the promotion of their spiritual and
cultural endeavours. Such a solution must be found in
accordance with the three religions, and Israel should
therefore avoid creating any situation that will block
the way to a negotiated settlement.

para. 98.1

j

,’

t,,

7

58. On the other hand, Israel must abide ,by the
relevant provisions of international law, namely,- the
fourth Geneva Convention of 1949: as far as the
exertion of its civilian authority over East Jerusalem
is concerned. The political future of that part of the
city cannot be determined by the Israeli, occupying
authorities. As in the case of other Arab lands occupied by Israel since 1967, only through negotiations
and respect for the right of self-determination of the
Palestinian people can the’future of East Jerusalem be
shaped. That is why any attempt to hinder such ,an
outcome, by creating an irreversible situation for
Jerusalem, will only. compromise the. possibility +of
achieving a-durable and just peace’in rheawhole of the
Middle East.
‘( 1..’ ” .l
I ‘,,.*‘ia.‘,._’ ‘..I.. . ~,
9.
59. We therefore hope that good sense will prevail
and that‘the legislative process initiated in the Knesset
will not lead to a regrettable conclusion. In this respect,
we ,must refer to the recent announcement made <by
the Israeli’Govemment to the’ effect that the offtce of
the Prime Minister and the conference room of’the
Israeli cabinet will shortly be moved to East Jerusalem. I regret to say that, in the view of my delegation, such a.‘decision,:if implemented, would be a
useless provocation not onlyto the Arab world and to
the people of East Jerusalem but also to the whole
international com!munity..

the othe.r members of theSecurity Council for allowing
me to participate in the,discussion of the question of
Jerusalem; We are delighted to see you, Mr. President,
presiding rover the meetings of the Council on this
highly sensitive issue. We are confident that under
your skilful guidance the deliberations of .the Council
will be fruitful.
_.: .,:
64. Almost nine years ago, in September 1971, the
Council last convened to consider the persistence of
the Israeli authorities in changing the status and character of the Holy City of Jerusalem. Today the Council is meeting to discuss the latest Israeli aggressive
measure: the annexation of Jerusalem. Passing a new
law to transfer the Prime Minister’s office as we!! as
‘the Israeli Cabinet conference room to East Jerusalem
is one of the most provocative plans to Judaize the
Holy City. .The intended plan is indeed a challenge
not only to the Muslim world but to the Christians
as we!!. The disfiguration of the Holy City and the
changing of its unique character have indeed stirred
indignation throughout the Muslim world.
65. We are faced today, as we have always been,
with a very dangerous and alarming situation. Israel
is declaring its plans to annex the Holy City of Jerusalem, thus defying the will of the international community and ignoring United Nations resolutions and
the principles of international law. In fact, Israel has
always adopted a negative attitude towards the decisions of the United Nations, whether in relation to
Jerusalem or to the rest of the occupied Arab territories.

60. But we must not respond to such provocations.
The mission of the’ Council is to guarantee intemationa! peace and security; We must ,therefore avoid
assuming ,as our own the passions of those who are
parties to the controversy we are called to deal with.
That would only lead us to rigid positions that would
stall our capacity to trigger any process of negotiation
able to lead to a solution acceptable to a!!. Such a
solution will be reached only if we are able to recognize and understand the legitimate anxieties and
aspirations of a!! the parties involved and if, with
patience and an open mind, we try to help them bridge
their differences and overcome their mutual lack of.
confidence and their hostility.

66. The newly declared plan is not new to the Council. Since 1967 Israel has declared that Jerusalem has
been liberated from Arab conquest and will never be
divided again. The reaction of the world community to
that declaration has been we!! defined in several resolutions of the Council. The Council has demanded that
the Israeli Government, as the occupying Power,
.desist from taking any action which would result in
changing the legal status, geographical nature or
demographic cornposition of the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including the Holy City of Jerusalem. The opposition of the United Nations to the
Israeli designs is in fact based on a generally recognized principle of international law: the inadmissibility of acquiring territory through war.

.6!. As we stated almost a year ago, when we presented the report of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (!979), the
Portuguese delegation firmly believes that only by
following such a course will it be possible to
“make the Holy City a unique meeting place and a
place of peace, a point of departure for a!! to unite
in a determination to give it a status that will guarantee and encourage fruitful and fraternal dialogue
between men, peoples and religions” [2156rh meeting. puru.

67. The Zionist Government often refers to the
religious and spiritual attachment of the Jewish people
to Jerusalem. Does that mean that the other faiths,
Islam and Christianity, have no attachment to their
holy places? Does it also legitimize the Israeli occupation, annexation and aggression?

201.

62. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Bahrain. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make a statement.

68. If the Jews have an historical association with
Jerusalem, others also have historical and religious
ties with the Holy City. It is a part of their religious
belief also. Jerusalem remains for ever in the hearts
of the Muslim peoples a!! over the world. The Arabs

63. Mr. AL-SAFFAR (Bahrain): Mr. President, on
behalf of my delegation, I should like to thank you and
8

ities, including the United States, which has always
considered the annexation of Jerusalem illegal.

have preserved the historical, cultural and legal status
of Jerusalem for many centuries. Jerusalem was
accessible to all religions, including Judaism. Today
Jerusalem is an exclusive place to the Jews only.

75. The Security Council should shoulder its responsibility by implementing its resolution 298 (1971). .It
should take all the necessary measures in order to
ensure the preservation of the status of Jerusalem. The
Council should call upon Israel to respond to the world
community and abandon .its designs in the Holy City
and to rescind all illegal measures in all parts of the
occupied ,Arab territories.

69. The establishment of colonies in the occupied
Arab territories has always been the strategic objective and policy of the Israeli Government-first
by
the Labour Government until 1977, and subsequently
by the Government of Menachem Begin, who pledged
to do all he could to Judaize the Arab territories occupied since 1967.

76. It is also imperative for the Council to call on
Member States not to c&operate with the Israeli
authorities in realizing their expansionist designs in
Jerusalem and to urge those Members which have
accepted the transformation of Jerusalem into the
capital of Israel to reconsider their position.

70. The annexation and the change of the legal
status, geographical nature and demographic composition of the City of Jerusalem by the occupying Power is
irrefutable evidence of the expansionist policy of
Israel towards the occupied Arab territories. As a
result of that policy, the Israeli authorities resorted
to demolishing houses and historical sites of great
cultural value to the Arabs. They also confiscated
privately owned Arab properties, and expelled the
Arab inhabitants from their land. And, in certain
cases, they obliterated entire quarters, as in the
case of the Harat Elmaghreb quarter, which was transformed into a parking lot.

77. If Israel persists in its dkgns’ to change the
demographic and cultural character of the.Holy City,
the world community should expect grave and tragic
consequences.
78. As a matter of fact, since the inception of the
State of Israel, the Israeli objectives were the seizure
and occupation of all Palestine, whidh they claimed as
their Promised Land. Therefore, Israel Wants the land
without its people, and at the same time it claims
interest in peace in Palestine and coexistence in peace
with its neighbours. Peace cannot be founded upon
continued violence and hatred perpetrated against an
unarmed population living captive in its own homeland.

71. The expansionist policy of Israel in the Arab
territories has also led to’ violence against the Palestinian population, the last of which was the crime
committed against the lives of the Palestinian Mayors.
72. The Zionist hatred for the Arabs and their contempt for Islamic culture and heritage have been the
basic policy of Israel since its inception. Fanaticism
does not pay. Certain of my dolleagues who haite
spoken in this debate warned that the designs and the
aggressive policy of the Israeli authorities in occupied
Jerusalem will have repercussions all over the Islamic
world, for Muslim peoples will never remain silent
vis-d-rfis this grave and dangerous situation.

79. In our view, peace can only be established on
justice, which is ttie recognition of the rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination. This is a
fundamental element for establishing ! lasting peace
in the Middle East. As long as Israel and its allies and
supporters deny the Palestinian people its inalienable
rights, the situation will reinain dangerous and explosive. The latest Israeli actions towards the City of
Jerusalem will increase the already tense situation in
the occupied territories and a violent reaction in the
Islamic world cannot be ruled out.

73. As I mentioned before, the annexation of Jerusalem was not a secret. The announcement of the
unification of Jerusalem is considered irrevocable by
the Government of Menachem Begin. According to
our information, even at Camp David, the Israeli
negotiators refused to discuss the status of Jerusalem.
The Americans have failed to persuade the Israeli
negotiating team to include Jerusalem in the agenda of
Camp David and, for that reason and many other
reasons, the Camp David accords have been rejected
by the Arab peoples.

80. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
81. Mr. ABDALLA (Sudan): Mr. President, allow
me at the outset to express my delegation’s sincere
appreciation and satisfaction at seeing you guiding
the deliberations of the Council for the current month.
The issues under consideration are of a serious nature
and have serious consequences for world ,peace and
security, including the present issue of Jerusalem.
We are confident that you will undoubtedly enable the
Council to conclude the task before it in a satisfactory
manner.

74. In keeping with the provisions of the Charter and
the principles of international law, both the Security
Council and the General Assembly have adopted a
series of resolutions condemning the Israeli illegal
‘actions in Jerusalem, the first of which were General
Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V)
and the last was Council resolution 298 (1971). These
resolutions were all adopted by overwhelming major-

82. I also take this opportunity to extend to you,
and through you to the other members of the Coun9

cil, my delegation’s gratitude for allowing me to participate in an issue of vital concern to my Government
and people. Our ‘participation in the debate on this
important question, stems from many basic considemtions.
.’
,,’
.s’ ,* ,_ .:: s
a.,
*.
,I
i;
:.
‘: ..m.*.‘. ;
83. : .As ‘a ‘predominantly’Muslim country with a considerable number ofChristians of almost all deriomina:tions; the Sudan, has ‘always ‘been deeply concetied
-over the fate of Jerusalem and the holy shrine of Al‘Quds‘ Al-Sharif, the precincts of .which. are ‘blessed
,byG~d~jn)is
t.‘;, , ’ :I +’ ‘.!.,“i“LC.$,,.“.::-, :I,$ _/, -; :.>. a .
‘1 1.. ,,:,,‘I:’
:s& Fdr ‘.,
cint#~~s:anda in ‘a .;;&‘exemp*&
;hd. jist
‘m’anne~;.th‘e’Palestinlan’Arabs had guarded the Holy
Places,for all’ believers’; ,whether’ Muslims,’ Christians
“or’.Jews:‘until’ 1948 when’ Jerusalem ‘was conquered
-by ‘Zionists .who used untold &i&l and’barbaric’means
to expel both Muslims‘ and ‘Christians,’ and seized a
large portion of the Holy City. Once more, and seemingly unsatisfied-with .what they had taken in ‘1948 by
:for& and sheer :aggression, the Zionists ‘were again
to conquer and expand. <In June 1967, they completed
their usurpation of the entire Holy City and declared
,it. their capital. :!t might be.of much relevance in this
‘respect to re.tter#e what was, so ably stated by the
*drstinguished. reprcsentatrve of the Palestine Liberatton Organization before the Council three days ago
[223Jrd m,eetingJ when, he said that the history of Palestine.throughout the .agesclearly draws a distinction
’ between the pilgrims who came to pray and the con, querors who came to usurp
:
,.“, :
856,:.The Council is meeting upon a request made on
behalf of 39 member States of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, which represents approximately
one third of mankind, to examine a serious and most
.dangerous situation resulting from the Israeli move
@‘consolidate its illegal annexation of the Holy City
of Jerusalem. The Council is now sitting in judgement
on a State, Member of the United Nations charged
with wanton aggression and total defiance of numerous
‘resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and,
indeed, by.this very Council on the status of the Holy
C’ity of Jerus$lem.
_I
,
86. Moreover, the latest Israeli move constitutes a
flagrant violation of the Geneva Conventions and
international law governing military occupation, under
which Israel, like all other States, has clear obligations and responsibilities. In this context, it is perhaps
worthwhile to mention the significance of the conclusions drawn by the Committee ,on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People in its
recent publication The Status of Jerusalem when it
stated on page 26 that
fI~ly'Book$;

“Israel’s reiection of these resolutions which have
declared its ‘actions and legislation in Jerusalem
invalid, in no way deprives the resolutions of their
own validity.*’

87. ‘We are not :dealing with ,questions ‘of political
expediency. We are dealing here with theCharter and
practice of the United Nations, Members of which
have pledged themselves, against- all forms’of aggression and other breachesof the peace.lit is‘worth noting
the well-known. Iegalprincipie that ,by an,‘illegal act
no legal result can be produced ‘and no .right‘can be
acquire&.
,.:
’;

~;.
..;.

‘::I .I . . ., : ;: , ..: : :.,
7) *.,: 4. -/ /.i..
I,.,
‘. ‘/ :

88; : A long time ago, the Secretary-General’set the
seal on this ‘questiotrwhen he stated that ‘, 1
‘+.I ( .( _ .‘..‘., .+>.,
:”
:_“.,, >>,1,,
.”
“The United Nations cannot condone a change
of the statusjuris resulting from military action contrary to the provisions of the ‘Charter: The Organization must, therefore, maintain that the status
jut-is existing priar to such military action be re,established .by a withdrawal of troops and by the
(’ relinquishment or .nullification of rights asserted in
territories cover&l bv the ‘militarv action and depending~ujion

it."

~"

_'

'I

,

.\:

.

,

.89. The thrust of those basic principles of the Charter
and practice of the, United Nations ,is the fact that
Jerusalem, under the occupation of the Zionist entity,
is not the Israeli capital, nor should it be. Moreover,
the latest israeli. move is yet another ample proof of
the *Zionist ‘laggressive acts and their expansionist
intentions.. Such a defiant po!icy of aggression and
expans.ion aims at making radical geographic, demographic and historical transformations in the. character and status not only of the Holy City of Jerusalem,
but also in the occupied Arab territories as a whole::
..
90. In order to forbid this obliteration, the Security
Council and the General Assembly have on a number
of occasions affirmed the basic principles and ,practice of,the Charter and declared Israeli measures and
actions, both legislative and administrative, to be
totally invalid. Israel was condemned or censured in
those resolutions, the, most recent of which is resolution 465 (1980), adopted by the Council only three
months ago. Outside this body, the international community has voiced its condemnation of Israel.
91. The agony and sufferings of the Palestinian
people under Zionist, occupation have now become. a
matter of great concern tu the entire world community. For us in the Sudan, it has been our firm belief
that the Israeli practices in the Arab occupied land,
including Jerusalem, and particularly Israel’s systematic and relentless pursuance of the policy of establishing new settlements not only jeopardizes the
character and status of Jerusalem and the entire bccupied Arab lands, but also impairs any attemptsat
reaching a peaceful, just and lasting settlement of the
.’
whole issue of the. Middle East.
..
92. Such a conviction is of course now shared by,an
overwhelming majority of Member States and is supported by wide-reaching international opinion. As far

back as 28 July 197S;for instance, The: Washington
:I ,‘. .I
Post reported: ’
i i ‘:c:-I
.’ :
I _.,Ij. .,..
“$ith, :&ore than SO:settlements, alr&dy established,+tnd with the process of .coion’izttion ,acceierating. through the occupied, territoriest !many
Israelis.-are not easily #aware.of the inconsisTency
between what their Government is saying and what
it is doing about reaching a political settlement with
the Arabs. ,Lord &radon; who visited. Israel last
month to explore the, possibilities of- such an agreement, has called these 50 settlements :SOsignposts
to destruct@’ “.
._ .; I.... /_, ,l/,
..,
The, @wspa& wept on to: ;a$ I
‘. :. - .:
!?These are a!sd j0 cia&c eiamplt& of ihe -&ay
thk’ State of Israel has been constructed; .but. if .the
objective is.toensvre the su&val qf the Stale itself,
the, Israelis will, sooner oy later have, to, .abandon
these outposts beyond their’ borders-ven
if it
means reversing the course of Zionist history.”
93. Arab &usaleti is now suk&nded‘ 6~’ h&h&e
residential colonies constructed with a view tq formi-kg
an‘effective barrier bettieen thousan$s of P@stiniatis
inliabiting the Holy City and the rest oftfie tenitories
in the West Bank. Israel’s naked obj&ive in such a
policy of expansion’ ‘and arihexation is that A&b J&usalem be turned inio a ghetto and that links tiith’the
West Bank and Jordan be acco-rdingly severed,, thus
achieving the sinister ultimate design through the fina
expulsion of the remaining Arabs -of tumiirg thi: ‘Holy
City of great religions into the capital. of the Zionist
entity.
.94. The international cortlmunity .is n&v ‘aware of
thedimension’and magnRud6 of the Pal&tini&$ticsgedy
and demands that an end be put to it before the woiid
is Fngulfed in a datigerous confrontation.
95.. In this respect, -my Government and, more par,ticuiarly, my President, Mr. Gaafar Mohamed Nimeiri,
&ho has maintained close contacts with the Holy See
over the issue of Jerusalem, note with appreciation the
recent statement made by His Holiness Pope John
Paul II, when he reaffirmed that the resolution of the
question of Jerusalem was essential for the attain-merit of a just peace in Palestine. It goes without
saying that as long as the Palestinian problem remains
unsolved, the Middle East region will remain a hotbed
-of tension.
:’
96. Also in this respect, it is the consistent position
of my Government that the Palestinian question ,is
the very substance of the Middle Eastern conflict and
that any solution to this question must and should take
this aspect into consideration. The Palestinian people
must exercise their inalienable and legitimate rights
10 establish their independent State on their own land.
The PLO must be recognized as the sole legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people.
.ll

97; In conclusion, it is .my delegation’s considered
opinion @at the Counkii is called upon’ today more
than, .ever before j to shoulder. the responsibilities
entrusted to,.it ,by the.,peopies of the United Nations.
Such responsibilities were so-eloquently identified by
Mr. Agha Shahi, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
.P+tan, ,ip: <his statement before the. Council .on
.?4.June,[i/#..l.,My delegation fully subscribes, to the
.!ett.er,and spirit of his appeal and to the appeals made
by other delegates ,to the Council to, take the ,neces:.sary actionsand measures. .We do so because we are
cdnfident that the situation in $he Middle. East Ias a
whole, and in the occupied Palestinian and Arab larids
i?,,qz+cui.ar, is extremely dangerous and does not
!%ve room, ot,dine for :inactioli. ,The’.cjti&tion urider
‘c,&i$iheratid;n”by =the Council ,.~a&% one bf’*the fu&
&dam$tai pi-ir+i~ies yf&“which the United: Nations
,$a+. In *r@pect ‘and ,r$$&$ion of such bz@,pripcipies
.: I, i f ‘, ,~, ’
.I ,,th$rq ,sh?uld, be no-)I,comp@mise.
r,.,
L,.
‘, ., )-“I.
,‘,V
__“.
98. The PR&IENT:
The ne& speaker is,.th&r&&eseqtative of Somalia. 1 invite -him to take .a-place at
+the Council table ,and to m&e his,statement. :.: .* ._
,._’ 1 ‘l ( ‘.-:i::. ‘, !,:
I’.. : ,’ ;,
‘I
99; Mr. A. *M.. ADAN (SomtiIia): ~/I’ thank \ yoii,
Mr. Pr&ident,‘and ‘the other memb&‘s’of the Council
for having-accepted &y request to’ participate in this
‘debate -on the problem of the violatidn by ,Israbt &.6f
ih,e status of the Holy City of Jeiirsalem. Permit’nie,
therefore, to congratulate you;’ first ,of Al!, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council foi this
month. You have already earned the gratitude of’611
of us for the statesmanlike manner in which you have
guided the work of the Council during your presidency
and for your dedication to the cause .of peace. -\I ” ,’
...4:.
/
.’
.”
’ 100’. In addressing thi ‘Council, my delegaiion< hds
nothing to add to all that has been so eloquently sajd
by the Foreign Minister of Pakistan in his capacity
‘as Chairman of the Islamic Conference of Foreign
Ministers [ibid.] and by other speakers who have
preceded me. Those speakers ‘have dealt ,with ‘the
problem of the Holy City of Jerusalem in itS entirety.
They have put forward conclusive evidence to disprove
Israel’s claim to Jerusalem as ‘its hist%al capital,
making it quite clear that neither was the city founded
by the Jews of biblical times, as is often falsely assertid,
nor was the presence of biblical Israelites in Jerusalem
continuous or even the presence of lonhest duration.
It is an historical fact that Jerusalem was founded by
the Canaanites, the forefathers of the Ptilestinians,
whose presence .*in i the city has been continuous
throughout its entire’existence of 38 cent&es, and that
the city was in Arab and Muslim hands for more than
12 centuries, as against 5 centuries of Jewish occupation. Previous speakers have also dealt adequately with
Israel’s spurious legal claim to Jerusalem as its capital
city, as the successor of ,a Jewish kingdom which
lapsed 25 centuries ago, and with the inhabitants of
which the Jews of today, in any case, have no historical
or racial links.

.s

101. Previous speakers have also traced the tragedy
which has befallen the Holy City of Jerusalem and
its Arab peoples since the occupation and annexation
of its modem and old parts by Israel in 1948 and 1967
respectively. Not only has its status of corpses scpcrrutum, established under General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947, been destroyed by Israel as the
occupying Power but numerous illegal ‘actions and
atrocities have been committed against the Palestinian
people. Their human rights have been repeatedly and’
consistently violated; their homes have been pillaged
and confiscated; their leaders have been deported and
physically attacked; their historical sites, including
the Maghrebi quarter in the Old City, have .been
wantonly destroyed to give way to such mundane
irrelevancies as a car park; their religious rights have
been continuously interfered with; the Holy Places
have been desecratedi’:and last but not least, the
centuries-old Arab character. of the city has been
progressively ‘altered and the sovereignty of the Palestinian people over Jerusalem has been denied them.
.
102. All this and more has been heard by the Council over the past few days from speakers who are
eminently more qualified and knowledgeable than I in
the historical, and legal background of Jerusalem, as
well as the tragic circumstances that have been the lot
of the Palestinian‘ inhabitants of that city-beginning
with the infamous Balfour Declaration of 1917, through
the unauthorized partition of Palestine by the United
Nations in 1947, to the illegal occupation of the Holy
City by the followers of Zionism whose only claim to
the city rests on the untenable pretext that 25 long
centuries ago a Jewish Kingdom existed in Jerusalem.

resolutions condemning Israel and calling upon it to
desist from its illegal activities, in the full, knowledge
that adopting resolutions represents no more than a
mere exercise in futility. I say that not for the sake of
rhetoric, for it is clear that each resolution adopted
gives fresh impetus to Israel to take yet another step
towards the consolidation of its illegal grip on Jerusalem in particular and on Palestine in general, in utter
disregard of the inalienable iights of the.,Palestinian
people: Has the time not come to look for more effective means to persuade Israel to heed the. remonstrations of the international community?
105. It is a matter for regret that the Council cannot
act effectively against Israel so long as Israel enjoys
the unconditional support of one super-Power and so
long as the other super-Power continues to pay lipservice to the realization of the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people.
106. The problem of Palestine is essentially a colonial
problem. and as such is no different from the colonial
situation existing in South Africa and in Namibia. In
Palestine, as in Namibia and South Africa, the indigenous populations are being held in bondage while
alien usurpers justify their domination on the principle of self-determination, thus making a mockery of
a sacred principle which is enshrined in the Charter.
But.peace in the Middle East is impossible without the
full realization of the rights of the Palestinian people
-as has been rightly recognized recently by the nations of Western Europe-in the same way that the
attainment of peace in southern Africa is impossible
without the full realization of the rights of the African
peoples of Namibia and Azania. Indeed, peace and
stability will continue to elude mankind so long as
imperialism and colonialism, of whatever colour or
creed, continue to be the order of the day on our planet.

103. If I am making a statement, therefore, it is not
because of the paucity of facts on the history, ancient
and modem, of Jerusalem or the lack of conviction on
the part of the previous speakers. Were that the case
there would be no need for me to speak, for I possess
neither the knowledge nor the wisdom to make out a
more convincing case than they have already done on
the tragic matter before us. I am speaking because, as
the representative of an Islamic country to which
Jerusalem is sacred, I find it impossible not to add my
voice to those of my brothers in Islam who have already
spoken with the deepest anger and emotion at Israel’s
recent moves to perpetuate its illegal annexation of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif and to turn it into its capital by
the introduction of a fundamental law to that effect in
the Knesset. As if that were not enough to convince
the world of his nefarious intentions, Prime Minister
Menachem Begin has overtaken even the process of
legislation by announcing the moving of his offices to
the Old City, thus throwing down the gauntlet to chal’ lenge the international community and the Muslim
world and also the Council which is currently seized
with the problem.

107. At all events, the increasing momentum of the
struggle of oppressed peoples against colonial and
racist domination is only too evident for all to see.
Only last April Zimbabwe attained independence
from a minority racist regime and has since joined the
comity of free nations, when not so long ago Ian Smith
had refused to foresee that happening even in a thousand years. The tide of history is running strongly
against the forces of imperialism, colonialism, hegemonism and oppression and with the forces of justice,
liberation and freedom.
108. The Government of Israel would therefore do
well to move its people-who by their own free choice
have made their home in the midst of the Arab nationwith the tide of history. It should remember that even
five long centuries of Jewish occupation of Jerusalem
in ancient times failed to destroy the inalienable rights
of the people of Palestine and that despite current
attempts by Israel to destroy those rights, the Palestinian people shall in the end be victorious.

104. In the circumstances, one may indeed wonder
whether it is at all useful for the Security Council and
the General Assembly to continue to adopt unending

109. Finally, the Security Council, as the United
Nations organ responsible for international peace and
12

11s. In considering the issue of Jerusalem, we should
not lose sight of certain salient facts and factors which
underline the character and status of Jerusalem. My.
Government attaches great importance to them. Our
policy on the problem of Jerusalem is motivated by
and based upon them.

security, cannot abandon its. obligation .to take such
measures under the Charter, including sanctions if
necessary, as would bring to an end Israeli occupation and annexation of Arab territories, including
Jerusalem. Any resolution whose provisions .did not
contain such effective measures would add nothing to
the numerous resolutions ailopted over the past
30 years ‘by the General Assembly and by the Council. Therefore, the Council should act in a manner
commensurate with the dangerous developments
which are unfolding before our very eyes in order to
avert yet another tragic war in the Middle East with
grave consequences for international peace and security.

116. The first is the fact that Jerusalem is the capital
of Palestine, the. main crystallization of Palestinians
expectations and aspirations and the central issue in
the exercise’by the Palestinian people of their rights.
Palestine,without Jerusalem is like a body without its
soul or, heart.
117.. The second is the fact that Jerusalem is ai Arab
city, inasmuch as Palestine is an Arab- country, an
integral part of the Arab nation,. It has maintained its
Arab character throughout time. Israel’s claim to the
Judaization of the city is spurious and cannot be sustained by history. We for our part cannot envisage an
Arab nation without Palestine, just as we cannot
envisage a Palestine without Jerusalem, the heart and
soul of that country.
:

110. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker #is the
representative of the United Arab Emirates. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
111. Mr. HUMAIDAN (United Arab Emirates):’
I wish at the outset to express my appreciation to the
members of the Council for affording me the’opportunity to participate in the consideration of the situation in Jerusalem, which is of the greatest importance
to my Government and people.

118. The third fact is the great religious and spiritual
attachment binding Muslims to Jerusalem:No Muslim
will ever accept the obliteration of its historical and
religious character. Muslims have. always held Jeru-,
salem as a trust for all who venerate it. The Muslims’ *
belief in and veneration of the two other religions
confer on them a unique role in preserving the sanctity
of Jerusalem for all religions.

112. May I also express to you, Mr. President, my
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
Presidency of the Council for this month. I wish also
to express my admiration for the wisdom, integrity
and leadership which you have shown in steering the
meetings
of the Council during this month.
$’

119. The fourth fact is the universal spiritual heritage
and significance of Jerusalem to all religions. Its status
cannot and should not be altered by Israel. The deciaration of Venice by the heads of State and Govemement
of the European Community [S/14009] reaffirmed the
universal consensus by stating that they will not accept
any unilateral initiative designed to change the status
of Jerusalem.

113. The Council has been convened in accordance
with the decision taken by the Eleventh Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers held at Islamabad in
May 1980. The purpose of the meeting is the consideration of the dangerous situation arising from the
latest Israeli proposed legislation purporting to annex
and declare Al-Quds the capital of Israel. The Muslim
countries expect the Security Council to declare the
Israeli legislation null and void and, in the case of
Israeli persistence in its unlawful endeavour, to impose
sanctions against Israel in accordance with Chapter ,VII of the Charter of the United Nations. The
United Arab Emirates, as a member of the Islamic
Conference, participated in the making of that decision and fully adheres to it.

120. The fifth fact is the rejection bv the world community of Israeli policies and practices affecting the
character and status of Jerusalem. Such rejection was
reflected in the many decisions adopted by the various
organs of the United Nations and by governmental
regional organizations, non-governmental organizations-both regional and international, churches, political parties and so on.

114. The Council is fu!Iy aware of the fact that the
decisions of the Islamic Conference were not confined
to one matter, namely the convening of the Council.
The Conference dealt with other matters pertaining to
the relationship of Muslim States members of the Conference with other countries that support Israel in its
sinister design of annexing Jerusalem or encourage
Israel in its colonial and aggressive policies against
the Palestinian people. We in the United Arab Emirates adhere to those points in their totality and consider them indivisible.

121. In view of the international consensus on nreserving the historical and religious character and-the
status of Jerusalem, and in the face of Israeli defiance
of this consensus, the least that may be expected of
the Council is the adoption of effective measures aimed
at the halting of Israel’s sinister designs on Jerusalem.
Mere pronouncements of concern-whether described
as deep or grave-will not be up to these expectations.
We therefore urge the Council to adopt measures
against Israel in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter. Whoever obstructs such action on the part of
13

the ‘Council will bear the gravest responsibility before :’: speakingrof< Jerusalem,,:that] he should ha& :stressed
historji’tind before the conscience of mankind. I ..,*:‘*.t the necessity bf,restorin&@eaid in our.victi& country
.t, ,
..,’
:.:
(_,. i.,
”
-.... ^j while seeking a solution to the whole Palestine ques122. : In paragraph 4. oft the decision ‘taken at.:the
tion, is ,no ,less significant iand, I dare Tsay,.no less
Eleventh Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers,:
logical;.Indeed, the issuesare intertwined’here, organthe Conference decided
j
1 .. . :,:, ;.: ‘-~:.. .- ically ..as/ well as, histor$ally,.,with Jerusalem in a
central ,position that.caimot be:overlooked qr denied.
“to confirm the commitment of all the Islamic States So.spellbound by therHoly ‘City are both the Lebanese
and the Palestinians that neither can envisage.% soluto sever all relations with any State that supports
the decision of the -Israeli enemy to annex Al-Quds
tion to their national problems should the world allow
Al-Sharif and consider it its capital, or that recJeru‘salem.to.become alien to their destiny; ,.-: ‘.
. I ‘.
: I_. “f!
__(I. ,.) : :‘a ’ ., I
ognizes it, or contributes. to its implementation, .or
.
128.“::No .cot.&ry mo~~::&n ‘Lebanon i&.claim to
T\pyes
its ‘C.,
embasvy
: .’ _I, ,‘I ,j .i-‘y’ .,;.(il”\
. . . ‘9, Al-Quds”.2
.’ ‘1.’
understand, and hopeto conveydo the world,today, the
My Government,,will. be &uid&.‘b‘f:. &kse,:~&l& ,&d “. true ,message,of Jerusalem. For we are, ,b.your. very
guidelines in its relations and its inter&ion with:&
tragedy, the witnesses to the fulfilment of the Book
State in the world.
of Revelations; we believe that what was written in that
Book has found in Jerusalem its historical manifesta123. -The PRESIDENT: The, next speaker is the
tion. As Arab Christians, we remain, and shall remain
representative of Lebanon. I invite him to take a place
for ever, a perpetuiil testimony to fhe 2,000 years
at the Council table and to make his statement.
during which our history had become the one miraculous encounter between the human and the divine.
124. Mr. TUfiNI (Lebanon): A debate on the
Having then chosen to recognize Jesus of Nazareth as
subject of the Holy City, whatever the specific issue the ,Messiah, we cannot now be expected to abandon
at .stake, is necessarily a debate of extraordinary
the City of God thus belatedly following a new
*importance. 1~simpact-whoever its sponsors, whatBarabbas.
ever the speeches, drafts and resolutions-is bound
to have a unique historical dimension. Hence, the ‘129. Having said all this, allow me to emphasize that
emphasis, and I dare say the prayer, by many of us the Council
is meeting in response to a very specific
here that we should all remember that Jerusalem can- demand. It is of paramount importance for us all that
not be dealt with in ,exclusively human terms, that it
this debate should remain in focus and that the United
cannot and should not be looked upon as a bone of
Nations should not be prevented-as it has been so
contention between nations and between policies, and often in the past-from exercising a very special
that its future cannot be subjected to territorial oi
responsibility: that of preventing Israel, as an occustrategic imperatives, no matter how vital they may be.
pying Power, from unilaterally and illegally altering
the,
historical, cultural, demographic and geographical
125. We have heard Jerusalem called “the eternal
character
of Jerusalem. And let no one here tell us that
capital of Israel”, and told that it was so by divine
freedom
of
worship is, or will be, guaranteed. To us,
right. This Civitus Dei is indeed the eternal capital,
Jerusalem
is
not, and never can be, considered a
but it is the eternal capital of all, not of one, a unitemple of stones. It was, is and should remain the
versal capital if ever there was one, and it is so by
living congregation of believers, a continuing human
faith and not by conquest. For if Jerusalem is worth
presence, physical as well as moral, representing
warring over, does it not also deserve, as no other city
before
God and history the uninterrupted communion
does, the peace of the Lord among nationsof all faiths?
with the Holy Land from one generation to another
until the end df ages.
126. Where else, in what city past or present, can
man, ,whatever his religion or nationality, come so
130. Many of us in the United Nations and in the
close to reaching for God? This, we believe, is what
Council
would probably have wanted another debate,
prompted His Holiness Pope John Paul II to speak of
one which would have examined in- this, the only
Jerusalem again, last Saturday, during President
global framework, and in a spirit of love and in the
Carter’s visit to Rome, in words that were surely
interest of peace on earth, the ultimate status of Jerumeant to be heard and understood within the context
salem. But conditions are such that we must be conof the international community’s present conceti
tent
at present with pre-empting the irreparable in the
about developments relating to the character and the
fate of the Holy City. The choice of the occasion face of immeasurable danger. The action of the Council should therefore be viewed as one of containment.
could hardly have been accidental; it was probably
meant to accent the special role of the United States
in the making of peace in the Middle East, and the 131. Yet it is to be hoped that even limited action on
an issue of infinite’impottance can become the beparticular responsibility of the President of the United
ginning
of a real process of peace, one in which the true
States with regard
: to the question of Jerusalem.
message of Jerusalem will be heard. Has not the Pal127. That the Holy Father, for. whom we have infiestinian representative, in his plea for peace, spoken
nite gratitude, should have spoken of Lebanon while
with’ pride of our heritage, upheld by our ancestors,

which brought together in‘ tokkance-and communion
134: ‘,Let the Council impose, with unchallengeable
the cultures ,of Judaism, Christianity and Islam? .jti ‘. authority, a beginning of .c‘onfidence that,the, United
,. .:“l .,
I’A,’
I*. $
“” -“’
Nations indeed has the capability to restore the rights’
132. Let usall be very clear’on this at lea&l the Holy , of man and the law of nations in precisely the one city.
City should ,nbt and canriot.be allowed to-$ecome a “’ where *God has called for the abolition of frontiers s
ghetto. Obsessions ,of security cannot project ..their between nations and men.
;...
- , (I.b:. .?:‘.
physical exprtksions in the onecity in the wqrld.which
no war should iniperil or sa&ifice.derusalem shall not i
: :..’
The mcPting rosewt,6y.m;:
I’ -.. :A 1.
become.Massada.. .I ‘...I ..r, “: ‘_ -..l;,‘;
t...:
:. ,,, *,*. I,( ,,., )‘I :*.
. ‘,. ./.
L *>‘,.
.‘_ ,..<...; I ,.; ?. :‘: :* .. , ;,.
*:.-.r
,,,A._
,’ “!\,‘,.
..’
, .
,.
.* ‘. I
,,L- -,
.I ? ‘,‘.;
,, ,$>. ,‘,.I,. d,,
.., _I.
:,- I,1.I
133. In the truP spirit bf Jerusalek, let Wabolish the.~‘
walls of hatred, fear and suspicion. For there, in JeruI i;, , ,:.‘.,, _.
‘NOTES.:
‘A ,, :
,‘.; . ‘,._
:I,,
.1..,~. ,,, . .,.
I.,‘
?
;
salem, should. be nurtured the .messageof joy, charity:. ,
-,‘I’ -s
and love’ rather, than the seeds of .disdord; cynicism. ” ’ Ofticiul Records of the GeneralAsser&ly. Thirty-jii’urth S&ion.
Meet+p.
17th meeting,para.24..
and terror, which can only produce further <wailings ;. Plena,v
1”
A/35/419-S/14129, annex I. tesolution I&j>‘4/il~P:p:‘~
‘,;
ad suffe&gs. .
:.‘.. ‘t ,+ ,:
.. j
.
, ,I.,.-‘:, *3 United
Nations, (Treuty 5eriei, vol.‘OS.:N6~973,‘p.i287.
:.:.“!,.:;:.
‘,~!1,(... : : I,,. 2: ,‘.j
)_
.,.

:,.
.,

~*.
.“_

*
:

.,

.

_.

;

,...

,

. , ,<.a
*c
‘
-i.
I
_.
:
_,
. * .
. .

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout-the
world, Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans Ies libmiries et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous P : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Get&e.

H3nann%
31fHaX

OpranltsaurrH
H aI-enTc?TSax

ao

06%.e~(WneHnbix
BCeX
p@OHaX

*aurenr KR~XKHOY*araarme
HaunR. C~KUEIR no npo&ame

HaunR

MOXKHO

zcynu~b

Maps. HaBONiTe
CUPaBKK
HAH nrftmf~e no anpecy : Opratiu3ausff
HqaHwR,

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONRS

Hbm-EopK

~nlt

B KHnlKHbIX
Mara06 HJAaHWRX
B

06’beAnHenHbtx

tieHeB9..

DE LAS NACIONRS UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas disttibuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Lithoin United Nations, New York

00400

83-61462-October 198%2,05(1
