THIRTY-SECOND

YLAR

MEETING: 31 OCTORER 1977
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
... . .. . ., .. .. . .... .

Page
1

. . . .. , ,, .. . .. . ,, .. .. , ..,. ,

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Secwity Council
(S/12420)
. , , .. . ., , . . .. ,. .. , , . .. .. . ., . ,. .. .. . . ..

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2044)

Adoption

of the agenda

..

. . . . , . ..

.. . . . .

SjPV.2044

NOTE
Synlbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a LJnited Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in CiuiIrfc’rlY
S~ipphet~ ts of the Official Records of the Smtrity Cwtlcil. The date of the docun~ rlt
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with :I syslt’rll
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsoh~tiotts atld Ddsims
of‘ T/Ic’
Se~~~ritJ’
&~~il. The new system, which has beenapplied retroactively to resolut icllls
adopted before 1 January 196.5,becamefully operative on that date.

I
I

2044TH
eld in New York on Monday,
Presidcnf: Mr. liilchi JAII’AL (India).
Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada,China, France, Germany,
FederalRepublic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan.
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Statesof America and Venezuela.

Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/2044)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The questionof South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1077 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressedto the l’rcsident of the Security Council
(S/ 12420).
The meetingwuscalled to order at 12.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agendawasadopted.
The questionof South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12420)
I. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith decisionstaken
by the Council at its earlier meetings, I invite the
representatives of Algeria. Botswana, Ghana. Guinea.
Guyana, Lesotho, Mauritania, the Niger, Nigeria, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal,Somalia, the Sudan, Togo. Tunisia. the
United Republic of Cameroon and Viet Nam to take the
placesreservedfor them at the sideof the Councilchamber.
At the invitation of the President,Mr, Redjwui (Algeria).
Mr. T/o tl (Botswana), Mr. Bouten (Ghana), Mr. Ciwara
(Guincu), Mr. Jackson (Guyana), Mr. Mohpo (Besotllo),
Mr. Kunc (Mauritanitr), Mr, Poisson (Niger), A4r. GarDu
(Nigeria), Mr. Baroody (Suudi Arabiu), Mr. K(zmurn
(Senegal), Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr, Medani (Sudan),
Mr. Kodjovi (Togo), Mr, Mcstiri (Tunisiu), Mr. ([VOIIO
(United Republic of Cumeroon)arid Mr. Dirllz BU Thi (Viet
Nnnz) took the placesrcserved fiw them nt the sideof the
Councilchamber.
7,. The PRESIDENT: The first speakeris the representative of Somalia.I invite him to take a placeat the Council
table and to makehis statement.

MEETING
31 October

1977, at 10.30 a.m.

3. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): Mr. President, I should like
first of all to congratulateyou on your assumptionof the
presidency of the Council for the month of October. Your
country’s valuable contribution in the past on the problem
of South Africa is on record. MahatmaGandhi, who played
a leadingrole in the struggleagainstthe evils of apnrtheid,
was a son of your country. It was India that took the
initiative which led to the inscription on the General
Assemblyagendaof the problemoiapartheid.
4. Having known you personallyfrom asfar back as 1954
when, as a memberof a United Nations visiting mission,
you came to visit my country, Somalia. then under the
United NationsTrusteeshipSystem.I can say that you have
been instrumental in the causeof the people’sstrugglefor
their right to self-determinationand independence.With
that backgroundin view. I feel it is a happy coincidence
to
see you presiding today over the Council. I have every
confidence that under your wiseguidancethe Council will
approach the tasksbefore it in a business-like
mannerand
that its deliberationswill bearthe desiredfruit.
5. My &legation isgrateful for this opportunity to .join its
voice to the many voicesof protest which are being raised
in the Security Council, and indeed around the world, 10
expressoutrage at the most recent actions of the South
African racist rCgime to suppressthe forces of reason.
moderation andjustice within that country.
6. Like the majority of African States, we welcome the
unanimity :uid the strength of current
condemnatkms
of
the Vorstcr r&ime, but it is pertinent to recall with a
pessimisticnote that thcrc were similar oLltcriesover the
Sharpeville and Soweto massacres,
over the imprisonment
of’s0
n~any
freedom
fighters
and
over
the deathsin prison
of a great number of opponentsof upnrtheid
who shared
the sametragic fate asSteveBike.
7. Murder, torture, arbitrary arrest anti imprisonment, as
well as banning and censorship,are not new tools of a
r&ime which claims to representand defend so-called
Western civilisation in southern Africa. I-lowever shocking
the repressivemeasureswhich we are condemningtoday
may seem,similaratrocities havebeensuffered by countless
South Africans of all raceswhoseonly crime hasbeen to
oppose the institutionalizcd racismof the rCgirnein South
Africa.
8. Third-world countries have long striven to keep this
situation before the attention of lhe world conimunity and
to bring about effective international action against np*theid, a system repeatedly and universally condemnedas 3.

crime against the conscience of humanity. Unfortunately.
those efforts have been frustrated mainly by South Africa’s
Lrading partners who have convinced theirlselves that their
economic interest is worth more than the relief of the
suffering of the oppressed majority and who have minimized upurt/~ciu”s threat to peace because of their interests
there, Consequently, the only movement in the South
African situation over the past three decades has been the
fulfilment of every prophecy and every fear that has been
expressed in anticipation of the potential dangers of
apurthcid as a threat to internal, regional and international
peace and security.

to reach negotiated settlementson the funda.
mentalproblemsof southernAfrica.
atklTlptS

12. The question which the world community is anxiously
awaiting to hear answeredis whether South Africa’s
traditional allies 011 the Security Council will once again
seek shelter behind mere condemnationsof apartheid and
expressionsof regret for the fate of its victims or whether
they are now prepared to adopt a more positive policy
commensuratewith the implementation of the kind of
measureswhich the situation demands. My delegation
hopes
that the measures
which the Council is about to take
will, at last, be a form of action that matchesUnited
Nations principles.

9. Be that as it ~-nay, let us not for one momentforget that
far-reaching changesare taking place within South Africa.
Nundrecls of dedicated African leaders and leadersof
non-African origin in South Africa with countlessfollowers
have by their efforts and devotion made known to the
world their determination to create an open society with
equal opportunities for all. Young
Africans imbued with
inspired courage have now been stimulated to a new drive
of organized protests in the face of the might of the brutal
police and Fascistorganization of the ruling white minority
r6gime. No OJIC here can fail to be aware that hardly a day
goes by without pressreports that someof those courageous young people have given their lives in the strugglefor
a just society. But they are otdy the spearheadof a national
movement which has begun a legitimate struggle for
liberation whose momentum will soon reachdimensionsto
be reckoned with.
10. The exportation of apmfheid to Namibia and Zimbabwe by Vorster’s rbgimc has had the gravest consequences.South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia and
its war of repression against the Namibian people are a
continuing cause of regional conflict and international
tension. Pretoria’s full support of the illegal Ian Smith
rCgime in Zimbabwe directly contributes to the longdrawn-out and bloody war which prevents the people of
Zimbabwe from exercising its inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence.In both cases,there is a
continuing threat to neighbouring African States, namely,
Angola, Zambia, Mozambique and Botswana, which have
been the victims of the aggressionof’ the racist minority
rCgime. In both cases,South Africa has with contempt
violated the Charter of the United Nations and the
resolutionsof the Security Council.
I I. Apnrthcid plays another baleful role in international
affairs. The Pretoria rt5gime’spretence that it representsa
bastion of “Western civilization and interest” in the region
is an attempt to subordinatean essentiallyAfrican problem
to a big-Power perspcctivc and a thinly disguisedploy
which is designedto deflect the attention of the worId from
the real issueat stake, namely, npartheid. Such a pretence
and such an attempt must be dismissedwith the contempt
which they deserve. There must bc no mistake about the
realities of the southern African situation today. By his
recent crack-down OJI every organisation and every leader
of the movement for a just society in South Africa,
Mr. Vorster has sent a very clear message
to South Africa’s
traditional friends and trading partners. The messageto
them is that he has nothing but contempt for their
unworkable plan to bring about changethrough friendly
relations and economic co-operation and for their futile

13. In this connexion, the measuresannouncedby President Carter at his press conference on 27 October,
following the repressivemeasuresrecently taken by the
Pretoria rbgime, fall, in the view of many, far short of the
expectations of the international community. The decision
of the United Statesand other WesternStatesmembersof
the Security Council to apply an armsembargounder the
auspicesof the United Nationsis a stepforward, in the light
of the hitherto well-known position of those Governments
expressedby their veto of the application of any form of
mandatory sanctionsagainstSouth Africa. However, we2111
know that the minority rkgime in South Africa hasalready
been provided with hugestockpilesof military weaponry
by its traditional alliesof the Westernworld. WCalsoknow
that the Pretoria regimeitself possesses
a military industrial
complex that is capableof producing sufficient quantities
of sophisticatedarmswith which it can stifle the legitimate
aspirationsof the defenceless
majority in South Africa. We
had hoped that PresidentCarter would announcestronger
measureson behalf of his Administration which wou1d
representan adequateresponse
to the gravesituation which
is now unfolding in South Africa. My delegationconsiders
that any measuresshort of full And completeCcOnOmic
sanctions,as provided for by Chapter VII of the Charter,
would not only go againstthe spirit of the Organizationbut
would produce no meaningfulresults.
14. The most pressingneed is for a mandatory and
all-encompassing
economicandarmsembargoagainstSouth
Africa, with no time-limit, until the objectives of the
United Nations are achieved.The frantic armsbuild-upin
that country is obviously aimed at the suppression
of the
legitimate aspirationsof the majority of the peopleand at
their permanent subjugationunder the racistminority rule.
South Africa’s militarism posesa direct threat to the
neighbouring independent African States. Those Western
Powersthat led the scandalous
rush to supply South Africa
with the most sophisticated weapons, and even with
nuclear-weapon capability, now profess dismay over the
military monster of their own creation. If they cannot undo
the evil of the past, they can at least refrain in the future
from maintaining and addingto the military machinewhich
existsfor the entrenchmentof apartheid.
15. My delegationhasalwayssupported,andwill continue
to support, the call for the diplomatic, socialandeconomic
isolation of Vorster’s rCgimein South Africa until its ruling
minority acknowledgesthe equality of all men in that
beautiful country. In particular, we believe that the

2

cessation of foreign investment in South Africa and the
imposition of trade sanctions would be an important step in
bringing home to the Vorster rigime the abhorrence of the
international community for apartheid and its practices.
Obviously, economic sanctions would only be effective if
all South Africa’s trading partners were to act vigorously
and in concert. My delegation therefore thinks that it
would be a constructive step if those countrieswere to
engagein joint consultations on the modalitiesof imposing
effective economic sanctions on South Africa. In this
connexion, it is pertinent to recall tho praiseworthy
example set by the front-line African States,which have
made great national sacrifices in order to comply with
United Nations resolutions.

20. Only a few months ago, the Security Council was
seizedof the situation in South Africa, Just a few weeks
havepassedsincethe World Conferencefor Action against
Apartheid hekl at Lagoslaunchedits urgent appealagainst
apwtheid. The Government of South Africa, however, has
turned a deaf car to the appealsto seethe problem of racial
discrimination in its true proportions and to discard any
illusionswhich standin the way of pcaccful change.

71. ln the statementwhich I madebefore the Council on
30 March last /lYOXth
meeting/, I stressedthe point that
only
where a Stateis ready to honour its commitmentsand
obligationsunder international law canit hope to enjoy the
fu11and undiminishedpartnershipof other States.Wehave
all exhorted South Africa time and again to change its
16. It is time that the facts and developmentsin South
policy. The bannings,prohibitions, detentionsand acts of
Africa were accepted at their true value.The gravity of the
repressionmust come to an end, The proponents of
situation has increasedwith the passage
of time and leaves uportheid in South Africa shouldrealisethat repressionwill
us in 110 doubt that the racist r@gimein South Africa is rebound upon the white population itself; it will destroy
determined to maintain unchanged the usurpationof the
the goodwill of those who up to now have been ready
rights of the overwhelmingmajority of the peopleof South for dialogueand co-operation.
,Africa by a white minority practising apm’theid. The
statementsof all the previous speakersconfirm thisand all
73. The Federal Government is deeply dismayed at the
give warning of the explosive situation with which we are developments in South Africa of which the events at
now confronted, A solution can be reachedonly by positive Soweto and t.he death of Steve Biko are the most tragic
and determined actiun. The Security Council, the body
results.We are not ready to acceptthe argumentthat, since
entrusted by the Charter with the authority to maintain freedom of expression and the freedom to assemble
peace and security, alone has the power to take such peacefully are not fully acknowledgedand are often
effective action. The attention of the world community is violated in other parts of the world, therefore-in that
now focusedon the Council and the stagehasbeenreached context-the recent developmentsin South Africa should
where postponementwill only give Vorster’s regimetime be regardedaslessserious.
further to intensify its efforts to silencethe forces of
oppositionto apartlzeid
and spreaddestruction,producinga
23. The FederalRepublicof tiermany hasurgedthe South
situation that will bc beyond control. Firm action mustbe
African Government immediately to rescind the grave
taken, and it must be taken IWW, by the Cowcil under measures
it has taken. It hascalled back its Ambassadorat
ChapterVII of the Charter.
Pretoria to report to the Federal Government and is
currently assessing
the impact of the rcccnt eventsin South
17. ‘I’hc provisionsof the four draft resolutionssubmitted Africa on its bilateralrelationswith that country.
by the African membersof the COUJNA would, if the drafts
were adopted and faithfully implemented,cover the main
24. The Government of the FederalRepublicof Germany
aspectsof the presentgrave situation in South Africa.
reaffirmsits view that the policy of apartheid constitutesa
seriousviolation of human rights and an infringement of
18. I should like to conclude my statementby quoting South Africa’s own international commitments.The occurremarks made by Mr. ‘I’ambo, Presidentof the African
rencesin South Africa require a clear responsefrom the
National Congressof South Africa ascited by Mr. Makatini:
international community.
“The racistsand Fascistsin southernAfrica for the time
beingenjoy the support of what they regardaspowerful
forces.However, we are armedwith ajust causeanda will
to bc free.” /2037th mectiug, pamu. 75.1

15. At a time when respectfor humanrights hascometo
be an international concern, thesedevelopmentscannot be
passedover in silence.The States Membersof the United
Nations are now called upon
actively to oppose a policy
which further aggravatesthe conflicts prevailing in that
19. Mr, vm WECHMAR (Federal licpublic of Germany): region,thereby jeopardizing lengthy efforts to bring about
The events of 19 October which the Security Council has a solution without resorting to the use of force. The
beenconsideringduring these past few days area challenge Security Council must declarein a mannerwhich is binding
to all--in South Africa itself and elsewhere-whohave on all States that the supplying of weaponsto South Africa
is bound to heighteneven further the tension in that area.
worked consistently for a peaceful changein SouthAfrica,
This supplying of weapons must therefore cease.The
for the elimination of racial discrimination and for the
Federal Republic of Germany, for its part, has observeda
effective implementation of the basic1v~1na1~ rightsfor all
voluntary arms embargoin relation to South Africa since
groups of the people there. The measurestaken by the
1963.
South African Government have dealt a heavy blow to all
endeavoursto halt the escalation of force in southern
26. We considerthe acquisitionof armsby South Africa in
Africa. No one who values human dignity and political
equality as the unquestionablefoundationsof any human the current circumstancesa threat to peace and security.
We are, consequently,ready to acceptand vote in favour of
society can remainindifferent to thesedevelopments.
3

a mandatory arms embargo under Chapter VII of the
Charter. This is, in our view, a serious and significant
decision as it is the first time in United Nations history that
such a step is being taken against a Member State. Such a
decision is meant to alert South Africa to the gravity of the
situation which has been aggravated still further by its
most recent measures. South Africa must know that the
international community cannot remain idle while such
developments arc taking place. The decision of the Council
should serve as a most serious warning. Yet it should not
bar the way to a constructive dialogue, for which there have
recently been some encouraging indications, at least as far
as the question of Namibia is concerned.

3 I. The system of apartheid is inadmissiblebecause
it is a
systemwhich isolatesboth thosewho must undergoit and
those who practise it, to the latter’s profit asthey believe,
It isolates those who are its victims, in a world which
humiliatesthem and deprivesthem of the mostelementary
freedoms and safeguards.But it alsoenclosesthe partisans
of that policy in an absurdall-or-nothing adventurewhich
today is leading them to the worst excesses
andwhich may
carry the country to catastrophe.Steve Bike’s death is the
most recent of theserevolting excesses.
32. The persistencein southern Africa, becauseof the
blindnessof those who refuseto initiate essentialchanges,
of a hotbed of hatred and humiliation not only is an
unacceptableaffront to humandignity, but also is fraught
with dangerand threatensto bring on an escalationof the
violence. Thus, asMr. de Guiringaudsaidon 28 September
last in the GeneralAssembly,’ the risk of worseningtension
which may disintegrate into racial war continuesto grow.

17. The Federal Cfovernment is resolved to contribute by
all means at its disposal to peaceful changes in the southern
part of Africa. It will continue to support all efforts
towards a settlernent of the Namibian and Rhodesian issues
on the basis of negotiations. In collaboration with all other
States which are ready to do so, we shalt persist in working
by peaceful means towards the exercise of the right of
self-determination in the whotc region of southern Africa so
that people of different races can live together in equality
and partnership. Only thus can we hope to avoid dangerous
conflicts.

33. My delegationbelievesthat the Security Councilmust
take account of the feelingsarousedthroughout the world,
and particularly in Africa, by the repressivemeasures
taken
by the South African authorities. The passingof the
months and years swellsthe legitimate impatienceof the
African countries, which are even more sensitive than
others to the racial discriminationon which the systemof
apartheid is based. In any case, international opinion in
generalis arousedat the failure to remedy t.hisinadmissible
situation. In a word, the questionof apartheid isno longer
the internal affair Of an individual State, but a matter of
legitimate concern to the entire international community.
The international community must therefore now take
measuresdesignedto make the South African authorities
understand that they must put an end to thesepractices,
which are both reprehensibleanddangerous.

28. In the economic field the Federal Republic of Germany has set up, together with its partners in the European
Community, a code of conduct for subsidiaries in South
Africa of cornpanics located in the Community area. This
action is designed to abolish discritnination against black
workers, to institute wage equality and to encourage trade
union activity. We view this as an important contribution
towards overcoming nparthcid. In a modern industrial
society, the social integration of the working population is
essential.

34. Chr Organization and our countries have repeatedly
expressedtheir disapprovalof the South African authorities
and condemned the policy of repression.Thesewarnings
have gone unheeded.The South African authorities must
reatize that, through the policy of fzppartheid,they are
hindering the birth of a South African nation and thus
alienating themselves from the Other countries of the
continent.

29. We are willing to use the economic influence at out
disposal to work for changes in an active way. Wc feel,
however-and here I should like to refer to the remarks just
made by the representative of Somalia that a complete
isolation of South Africa at this time would leave us with
no possibility of exercising any influence. My (iovernment
does not see merit in ending any political dialogue with the
Government of South Africa right now, but it once again
urges South Africa to break away frotn the entanglements
of its futile policy of racial discrimination and to resume its
place within the community of nations.

35. No one here would deny that a number of raceshave
made their contribution to the formation of a South
African whole, and that all those living in South Africa,
regardlessof colour, have equal rights to sharea common
destiny on the samesoil. It is hard to understandwhat
twisted logic hasled the South African authoritiesto build
an entire policy on the denialof theseobviousfacts.

30. Mr. I..EPtIETTE (I:rance) (intspr’etation
~iur~~
Frerwh); The recent repressivemeasI1res
taken by the South

African authorities againsta number of black organisations
and their leaders have deeply shakenthe people alld the
Government of’ my country. Becausethey derive from the
false logic of the unacceptable, the abominablesystemof
apurlheid, they cannot but arouse our indignation.
My
country has always stood for and made a point of
scrupulously practising democracy-and apnrtlzeid is the
most flagrant denial of democracy. Webelievedeeply in the
equality of all men We unreservedly condemn a system
which makesethnic differences the criterion whereby those
who hold the power keep the privilegesfor themselvesand
shareout the worst humiliations.

36. Today there is needto go further. It is the Security
Council’s duty to apply itself to that task, The Councilwill
gain in honour if it does so with a wisdomcotnmensurate
with its responsibilities.
37. We hope that the measures
WCadopt may make an
opening in what the representativeof France last year

4

described as “the absurdly closed space of upartheid”.z
They must be designed to make the South African
Government aware of the extent of its isolation and to
induce it to initiate the necessary political changes.

39. But there is one point on which we must today take
an absolutely clear-cut position.. In strictly legal terms,
there can be no question of denying any country the right
of self-defence provided for in Article 51 of the Charter.
Nevertheless, the intention here, in the aftermath of the
recent crack-down by the South African Government, is to
forearm ourselves and to protest against the stockpiling of
weapons intended fur purposes of internal repression.

38. 1 have noted that in their statements a number of
African representatives have suggested that some latitude
should be allowed for negotiation. France shares their
concern. Let us be firm, but let us be wise, as befits the
Council. Let us preserve opportunities of arriving at
peaceful solutions of the problems of that part of Africa
that are in keeping with the legitimate aspirations of ail the
peoples of the region.

40, Taking due account of all these elements and of the
legitimate concern of the international community as a
whole, my Government has decided to vote in favour of a
mandatory embargo on arms shipments to South Africa.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

5

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unitr 1 Nations
publications
may be oblilined
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: IJnited
Nations.
Sales
Swtion. New York or Geneva.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Nariones
LJnidss estin en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase
a: Nariones
Unidas, Scrci6n de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: SU.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
