United

Nations

Nations

unies

LKWXXCTED

DRAFT RESCLCTICN SUBXITT3D EY S~YRIA AT TEE 585th MXETIXG ON
TIE APPLICATICN CF ISRAFL FOR AXIISSION
TEE SECuRiT‘f

...i._::...
.::_:

TO THE UNITED ,KATICl'?S

cocmcIL,

NOTINGthe contentions raised by one of the members to the effect that
the applioetion of the "State of Israel" for admission to membership of the
Tjnited Nations is not worthy of beiw reccmmended, oliing to the fact that the
international
status of Palestine at the termination of the Man&ate on
creat.ion of
15 &y 1948 is not yet established so as to permit a legitimate
a Jewish 8cvereiSn state in any part of that country against the wishes of
the majority of its population, and the recognition of that state by certain
membernations as de facto authority rices not entitle this de facto authority
to enjoy sovereign equslity with the de jure authority and sovereignty of
the othsr member states under the provisions of the Charter of the Vnited
Xaticns,
DECIDESto request an advisory

legal opinion of the International

COUrt

of Justice under Article
96 of the Charter on& chapter Ff of the Statute of
the Court on the follcwinS questions:
1.
Do the rscommeniations of the General Assembiy in the resolution
of 29 November 1947 for a partition
plan with econcmic union, r;hich was
create right to the Jewish minority
rejected by the Arabs of Pslestire,
to proclaim their separate state et ihe termination of the Mar-date onthe area assigrEd to them by that resolution?
2.
1v2s.t is the international
status
of Palestine atr..%hkixeWinatio~'of
t3-e Mar~data OIZ i: YEY 19&8?
_
-3rxier t&e present circumstarxes xould the Security Council be
3.
actin
in car-~+crmity xith the Lkited Nations Cherter and the international
lav if it recommendedthe admission cf the State of Israel to membarship
i2 tie United Nations?
4.
Is the General Assembly empowereii to partition
Palestine betxeen
Arabs an& Jews Mithout consulting the lawful irhsbitants
of the country
ir- securirs their consent?
Tke Secretary-General is requested tr* supply ti?e Court with all
i~~r.?v.*
c.
l-l*.U1on
and documents which the Court may require to clarify
the quastion.
