S/2002/1352

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 December 2002
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
Attached is a letter dated 12 December 2002 from the Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa addressed to the
President, transmitting a set of recommendations relating to the enhancement of the
effectiveness of the representatives and special representatives of the SecretaryGeneral in Africa (see annex).

02-73625 (E)

131202

*0273625*

S/2002/1352

Annex
I have the honour to forward a copy of a set of recommendations relating to the
enhancement of the effectiveness of the representatives and special representatives
of the Secretary-General in Africa from the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which have been agreed by members of the
Security Council during informal consultations on 9 December 2002 (see enclosure).
I would like to request that you circulate the present letter and its enclosure as
a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Jagdish Koonjul
Ambassador
Permanent Representative
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa

2

S/2002/1352

Enclosure
Recommendations of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa on enhancing the effectiveness
of the representatives and special representatives of the SecretaryGeneral in Africa, agreed as of 9 December 2002
Members of the Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa, joined by representatives of the Department of Political Affairs of the United
Nations Secretariat and the Office of the African Union Observer Mission to the
United Nations, met to share views on recommendations to offer the SecretaryGeneral on how to improve the effectiveness of the representatives and special
representatives of the Secretary-General, especially in the African context. The
Working Group’s discussions were undertaken after reviewing the historical
background of the office of the special representatives, the recent expansion in the
role and number of special representatives in Africa, and the expanded functions
that special representatives have assumed.
Based on the discussion and exchange of views, the Working Group offers the
considerations and recommendations on strengthening the effectiveness of the
important office of the special representatives of the Secretary-General in Africa set
out below.
1.0

Appointment procedures
1.1 The Secretary-General must retain sole authority to appoint, choose and
determine the mandates of special representatives. The office of the special
representatives is a unique and valuable tool of international diplomacy, which the
Secretary-General can use on behalf of the international community. Special
representatives must be able to speak for the Secretary-General and have the
Secretary-General’s full confidence, which can only be achieved if the SecretaryGeneral alone selects special representatives and establishes their mandates. Other
elements of the United Nations organization that work with special representatives
such as the Security Council or specialized United Nations agencies, may offer
recommendations to the Secretary-General on the mandates and roles of special
representatives for the Secretary-General’s consideration, but ultimate responsibility
remains with the Secretary-General.
1.2 The Secretary-General should consult with the Security Council on
appointments to ensure success. The Working Group concluded that special
representatives need the full confidence of the Security Council to be effective. The
special representative is often the Council’s primary source of information on a
conflict or post-conflict situation and it is through the special representative that
many of the Council’s decisions are implemented. Therefore, to ensure that special
representatives and the Council can work effectively together, the SecretaryGeneral’s office should consult the Council, perhaps through informal dialogue with
the President of the Council, before special representatives are named to their posts.
Such consultation is not intended to limit the Secretary-General’s authority to name
special representatives or to politicize the selection process. Rather, it is a way for
the Secretary-General and the candidate to find out whether Council Members have

3

S/2002/1352

concerns that might keep a special representative from having the Council’s full
confidence and to take steps to address such concerns early in the process.
2.0

The profile of special representatives
2.1 In selecting a special representative, the Secretary-General should give
equal priority to managerial abilities compared to other qualifications and
skills. The Working Group concluded that in most cases, certainly those in which a
special representative will be named to a country in which there is a peacekeeping
operation as well as political and humanitarian United Nations agencies on the
ground, the Secretary-General must give priority to selecting a special representative
with strong managerial and leadership skills. Such skills are now a critical element
of a successful special representative’s makeup, especially in African missions
where the full panoply of United Nations agencies are often on the ground.
Sustaining support for large, costly United Nations missions in conflict and postconflict situations, in Africa and throughout the world, requires that Members have
confidence that missions are efficiently managed and operated. A special
representative with excellent political and negotiation skills may still fail to achieve
success if Members are not convinced that the mission supporting the negotiations is
being effectively run.
2.2 The Secretary-General should strive for gender diversity in the
appointments of special representatives. There is only one woman special
representative or deputy special representative currently serving in Africa. The
Working Group acknowledges that the most important priority in selecting special
representatives is the appointment of the most qualified individual, looking at the
full range of skills and abilities needed for a particular post. The Working Group
recommends that the Secretary-General ensure that, when selecting a special
representative, an effort be made to include equally qualified women among the
candidates for consideration.
2.3 The Secretary-General should not limit the applicant pool of special
representatives when naming special representatives to African nations.
Different situations require special representatives with different backgrounds. The
Working Group recommends that the Secretary-General not restrict the pool of
candidates for the office of special representative to those already working within
the United Nations organization, although such individuals will often be excellent
candidates in many situations in which knowledge of the United Nations system can
be important. Representatives and special representatives from within the United
Nations system should generally be recruited at the Assistant Secretary-General
level at least. Extending the pool of candidates in that way would also reduce the
risk that transferring too many highly qualified and experienced people from within
the United Nations system could weaken the ability of the United Nations to manage
complex situations from New York. The Working Group also encourages the
Secretary-General to consider, in the African context, naming special representatives
of African and non-African nationalities. The Working Group acknowledges that
often a special representative from the region brings useful knowledge and the
confidence of the parties to the post. But too much reliance on naming regional
special representatives can be counterproductive, restricts the pool of qualified
applicants and can prevent the naming of an individual from outside the region who
would bring a new perspective.

4

S/2002/1352

3.0

Structure and mandate of the office of the special representative
3.1 The Secretary-General should always establish the mandates of special
representatives on a case-by-case basis. In making its recommendations, the
Working Group fully supports the Secretary-General in avoiding a “one size fits all”
model for the office of the special representative. The strength of the office of the
special representative is its flexibility to meet a specific situation. The SecretaryGeneral alone will decide whether a given situation requires a special representative
to have a deputy, for example, or what the relationship should be between the
special representative and other United Nations agency heads. The Working Group
offers its recommendations as a model from which to start in shaping mandates of
special representatives, especially for those involving large in-country peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations, but recognizes the need for mandates to be
set on a case-by-case basis.
3.2 In most instances, the Secretary-General should give the special
representative clear authority, not just a coordinating role, over all in-country
United Nations agencies and peacekeeping operations. In reviewing past and
current United Nations missions headed by a special representative, the Working
Group found that special representatives are most effective and overall United
Nations missions most successful when the special representative has clear and
ultimate decision authority over in-country United Nations agencies. The Working
Group concluded, for example, that the authority which the current special
representative in Sierra Leone enjoys to set priorities, give guidance to United
Nations agencies and in turn be held responsible for the performance of United
Nations agencies is a key reason for the success of his United Nations mission. In
other peacekeeping operations in Africa, by contrast, the Working Group found that
in several instances the role of the special representative is more that of a gatekeeper
who oversees meetings at which agencies share information and plans. Real
coordination can suffer because intra-agency disagreements are not resolved quickly
in such countries but instead are often referred back to New York for resolution.
The Working Group makes the present recommendation to give the special
representative real policy guidance and responsibility for all United Nations
agencies and operations in full recognition of the important role that resident
humanitarian coordinators play in United Nations missions around the world. The
Working Group supports the important work of resident coordinators in ensuring
that there is no duplication or effort among humanitarian agencies and that their
work is coordinated for maximum efficiency. But the Working Group concludes that
it is crucial for an effective mission, especially in Africa, where there is often a
range of United Nations agencies working, to have the special representative solely
responsible for setting policy guidance for United Nations agencies and ensuring
that all United Nations agencies understand the overall goals set by the SecretaryGeneral, the Security Council and other organs of the United Nations system. Such
authority does not conflict with a resident coordinator’s responsibility for day-today coordination and consultation among agencies. The Working Group emphasizes,
in making the present recommendation, that a special representative is not mandated
to override any United Nations agency’s existing mandate. The Working Group’s
recommendation is that special representatives be empowered to ensure that all
United Nations agencies, within their mandates, are implementing same policy
guidance and understand the mission’s goals.

5

S/2002/1352

3.3 The Secretary-General should appoint a strong, empowered deputy for
special representatives. Related to the Working Group’s recommendation that
special representatives have authority for all in-country United Nations operations is
the Working Group’s recommendation that a special representative have a strong
deputy. That is especially important where there is an in-country peacekeeping
operation, which often the special representative exclusively focuses upon, leaving
little time to play a strong coordinating role and making it difficult for the special
representative to be an honest broker between peacekeeping operations and other
United Nations agencies. It is also important in situations where a special
representative is called on to play a significant mediation or “political” role, which
usually means that he or she cannot give time to the executive/managerial oversight
of in-country United Nations operations. If the Secretary-General has determined
that a specific mission requires a special representative with strong political and
negotiating skills, then it is particularly important that the deputy, who should have
representatives status and full authority to speak for the special representative, have
managerial abilities and be responsible for day-to-day management of the mission.
3.4 The Secretary-General should set forth clearly the responsibilities of the
special representative and a peacekeeping operations force commander. The
relationship between the special representative and the force commander must be
clearly defined and lines of responsibility clearly drawn. Although the special
representative is the senior in-country United Nations representative, in the most
successful missions the force commander has a clear mandate holding him/her
responsible/accountable for the military component of the United Nations mission.
Many United Nations missions in Africa with a military component have complex
military deployment and force protection issues — the force commander is uniquely
qualified to handle those issues and should be clearly responsible for all operational
aspects of the military component. The mandate of the special representative should
be equally clear: the special representative has policy oversight of the force
commander, who serves as the adviser to the special representative on all military
issues, and the special representative therefore has ultimate authority over the whole
mission, including its military component. The executive role of the special
representative is not undermined if the lines of responsibility and accountability
between the special representative and force commander are clear from the start.
3.5 The Secretary-General should hold special representatives accountable for
mission safety/security and institutionalize that responsibility. The special
representative is the senior in-country representative of the Secretary-General and,
as such, should be responsible for the safety and security of all mission personnel,
including troops from contributing countries. To underscore that responsibility,
he/she must report back to United Nations Headquarters whenever a member of
his/her team is injured or killed in the country of the mission; specifically, an
accountability board should routinely determine whether negligence or preventable
action on the part of the mission leadership has created circumstances that led to
injury or death to members of the mission. That procedure is common in many
national diplomatic services. Making it a standardized practice will build confidence
among mission personnel, provide special representatives with a standard procedure
in which to address any issues arising from incidents involving mission personnel,
give confidence to troop-contributing countries and improve the safety and security
of United Nations personnel.

6

S/2002/1352

4.0

Secretary-General’s role in coordination
4.1 The Secretary-General should encourage coordination between regional
and national special representatives. The Working Group has taken note of the
increasing number of regional special representatives, especially in Africa, and
recommends that the Secretary-General include in the mandates of special
representatives specific requirements for close coordination between regional and
country-specific special representatives. The Working Group is concerned that there
be an appropriate division of labour between those special representatives tasked to
address specific country-specific goals and issues and regional special
representatives who are to address issues that cut across borders. It must be clear to
national political leaders and other parties that the special representative speaks for
the Secretary-General on political and military issues specific to their nation without
any risk of conflicting messages from a regional special representative. It is vital
that country-specific and regional representatives and special representatives closely
coordinate their activities to avoid duplication, overlapping and possible confusion,
and to enhance the effectiveness of the role of the United Nations. A clear
distribution of labour should therefore be agreed and widely communicated between
the national and regional representatives, whose separate roles and mandates should
be seen as complementary and not in terms of one being subordinate to the other.
4.2 The Secretary-General should encourage special representatives to
coordinate with regional and subregional organizations. The Working Group
recommends that the Secretary-General give special representatives guidance to
more closely cooperate with African regional and subregional organizations,
especially those that address conflict prevention and resolution issues. The Working
Group concluded that regular consultation with such organizations would not only
be an effective source of ideas and information for special representatives in
carrying out their duties but would also help to improve such organizations’
capabilities to assist in future conflict prevention.

5.0

Improving the capabilities/training of special representatives
The Secretary-General should continue the efforts of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) to provide “lessons-learned”
operational training for special representatives. The Working Group is pleased at
the current UNITAR project under way, with the assistance of the United Kingdom
Government, to create, as a series of focused lessons-learned briefing materials for
special representatives. The Working Group found a need for more hands on
management training for special representatives and training in mediation skills, and
supports UNITAR efforts to prepare technical and operational handbooks that would
include standard operating procedures and requirements.

6.0

The role of the special representative
The Secretary-General should encourage special representatives to focus
on results and not the process. The Working Group has concluded that the most
effective special representatives are those who focus on the end result and not the
process. Some current special representatives in Africa are failing to empower their
staff to contact or are themselves failing to personally engage with political actors
and rebel forces outside of any agreed-upon process. That approach is often driven
by a fear of upsetting the negotiating process rather than an assessment of whether

7

S/2002/1352

an action might, in the long run, build a dialogue that achieves the ultimate goal.
Special representatives need to have some flexibility to use their discretion to use
whatever method and contacts will achieve their mission goals. The Working Group
endorses encouraging such discretion for special representatives, but emphasizes the
importance of the special representatives using such discretion in the context of
ongoing and close consultations with the Secretary-General.

8
