General Assembly-Eleventh Ses111ion

48

mies may be possible without, however, lowering the
present standard of reprod11dio11 of the Treaty Series.

66/nd plenary meeting,
27 Felm.ary 1957.

1093 (XI). Appointment to fil] a vacancy in the
membership of the Board of Auditors
The Ceneral Assembly
Appoints the Auditor-General of Colornbia as a member of the Board of Auditurs fur a three-vear tenu to
commence on 1 July 1957.
·
662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.

1094 (XI). Administrative and hudgetary co-ordination hetween the United Nations and the
specialized agenciPs
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Aclvisory Committee on Administrative and Bu<lgetarv Questiom on
the administrative budgets of the specializecl agencies
for 1957 31 and its special rt'ports relatim~ to the International Labour Organi,atiu11:i 2 and the l l nited Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organi1.ation, 3 :i

I
l. Invites the attention of the specialized agencies
to the observations and rernmmendati()ns contained in
the report of the Advisorv Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions Oil th(' admi11istrative
budgets of the specialized agencies fur 1957;
2. Requests the Economie and Social c·ouncil to
study the matters raised in paragraph, I> and 7 of that
report concerning an appraisal of the uver-all programmes to be undntakl'.ll by the Unit1·d Nations and
the specialized agencies in the ecorwrnic and social tields
over the next five or six _\'ear,, ;rnd to report thereon
to the General Assemblv at ih thirternth session;
.3. Requests the specialized agencies to co-operate
w1th the Economie and S(\cial Council in its consideration of this question;
Il

1. Notes that the special reports of the Advisorv
Com?1ittee on Administrative and Budgetary Question\
relatmg to the International Labour Organisation and
the United Nations Eclucational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization are of a preliminary character and that
the Advisory Committee intends, on completion of
S!~ila~ stu_dies in respect of other organizations partlc1patmg m the Expanded J 'rogramme of Technical
Assistance, to submit a final report to the General
Assembly embodying its conclusions and recommendations;
2. Invites the attention of the International Labour
0gani~ation to the observations and suggestions contamed m the Advisory ( ·ommittee's special report on
ithat organization, and in particular in paragraphs 36.
43, 46, 52, 59, 66 and 80 of that report;
3. Invites the attention of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to the
.,_ Ibid., agenda item 49. <lucumc11t :\,i.î489
• A/3142.
11
A/3166.

observations and suggestions contained in the Advisory
Committee's special report on that organization, and in
particular in paragraµhs 16, 32 to 35, 43, 45, 47, 60,
7S, SO and 98 of that report.

662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.

1095 (XI). United Nations salary, allowance and
henefits system
A
The Ccneral Assembly,
I !aving considcrcd the report of the Salary Review
Committee 34 established by General Assembly resolutiun <)75 (X) of 15 Decernber 1955, the comments
t!ten·on by the Secretary-General and by the executive
heads of the International Labour Organisation, the
L nited Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and the International Civil
Aviation Organization, 35 and the observations of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions/16
l. Expresses its great appreciation to the Salary
l{eyiew Committee for its valuable work;
., R eque sts thl' Secretary-General :
(a) To apply the provisions of base pay, post adjustments and dependency allowances, as set forth in
paragraph 7 helow, to staff serving at Headquarters or
at the Euroµean l)lfice of the United Nations with
effect from 1 January 1957, and to apply these provisions as soon as practicable to other members of the
staff of the l;nited Nations, with effect from dates
c.,tablished by him for each office;
( b) To carry out, ai ter consultation with the executive heads of the specialized agencies, the reconciliation
of conditions of service under different programmes
referred to in chapter XIII of the report of the Salary
Review ( 'ommittee, by application of the basic measures
proposed by that Committee, including provision for
an assig11rne11t allowànce for staff members on Ct'rtain
temporary assignments, subject to such modification
of the detailecl proposais as the Secretary-General deems
necessary and desirable;
( c) To be gmded by the conclusions of the Fifth
Committee, as recorded in its report to the General
Assembly,:n in respect of matters therein not covered
b_v the present resolution;
3. Requcsts the Secretary-General, in conjunction
with the executi\T heads of the specialized agencies
concerne<l and iu co-operation with the Joint Staff
Pension Board :
(a) To review the question of the pensionable remuneration of the staff with a view to making recommendations for action by the General Assembly;
( b) To provicle for death and disability protection
for members of the staff on temporary appointments
for a fixed terrn, if practicable by eventual amendment
of the Regulations of the Joint Staff Pension Fund;
4. Resolves to amend the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 359 (IV) of 10 December 1949,
"'A/3209.
""Official Records of the Gener-al Assembly, Eleventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 51, document A/C.5/691.
.. Ibid., document A/3505.
"'Ibid., documen' A/3558.

Resolutions adopted on the reparu of the Fifth Committee

as amended by resolution 973 C (X) of 15 December
1955 dealing with the Staff Assessment Plan, i.Jy adding
a new text, as set forth in paragraph 7, which will
become staff regulation 3.3 ;
5. Authorizes the Secretary-General to broaden the
existing medical and hospital care schemes applicable
to the staff, with effect from 1 June 1957 or as soon
thereafter as may proYe practicable, these schemes to
be financed on the basis of an over-all sharing of the
costs by the participating staff and the Organization
on an approximately equal basis in such a manner that
a larger measure of financial assistance will be granted
to staff in the lower salary Ievels than to staff in the
higher salary levels ;
6. Authorizes the Secretary-General to pay, as a
transitional measure, persona! allowances to present
staff members who would otherwise suffer a reduction
in emoluments through the initial application of new
rates or conditions for dependency allowances, such
persona! allowances to be decreased and eventually
eliminated according to a procedure to be prescribed
by the Secretary-General;
7. Resoh•es that the Staff Regulations of the United
Nations be amended as follows with effect from 1
January 1957:
Annex I, paragraph 3
Replace the present text by the following:
"A Director shall receive a salary of $US 18,000 per
annum (subject to the Staff Assessment Plan provided in
s:aff regulation 3.3 and to post adjustments wherever applied) and, if otherwise eligible, shall receive the allowances
which are available to staff members generally. In addition,
the Secretary-General is authorized, on the basis of appropriate justification and/or reporting, to make additional
paymcnts to Directors to compensate for such special costs
as may be reasonably incurred in the interest of the Organization in the performance of duties assigned to them by
the Secretary-General. The maximum annual payment for
any one Director shall be $1,000."

Annex I, paragraph 4
Replace the present text by the following :
"Except as provided in paragraph 6 of the present annex,
the salary scales for staff members in the Principal Officer
and Director category and in the Professional category shall
be as follows ( subject to the Staff Assesment Plan provided in staff regulation 3.J and to post adj ustments wherever applied) :
"BASIC SALARY SCALES

"( Subject to the Staff Assessment Plan provided by staff
regulation 3.3 and to post adjustments wherever applied)"
In the table change the rate for Director to $18,000.

Annex I, paragraph 9 (Post adjustments)
Replace the present text by the following :
"In order to preserve equivalent standards of living at
different offices, the Secretary-General may adj ust the basic
salaries set forth in paragraphs 3 and 4 of this annex by
the application of non-pensionable post adj ustments, the
amounts of which shall be determined on the basis of relative
costs of living, standards of living and related factors at
the office concerned as compared to Geneva on 1 January
1956. Such post adjustments shall not be subject to the Staff
Assessment Plan and their a:nounts shall vary by salary
level as determined from time to time by the General
Assembly."

Regulation 3.2 (Children's allowances and education grants)
Delete the first paragraph in order to eliminate the reference
to children's allowances.
Delete the word "also" from the first line of the second
paragraph.

49

Deiete the words "the children's allowance or" from the
fourth paragraph.
Delete paragraph 1 of annex IV dealing with children's
allowances.
Regulation 3.3 (Staff Assessment Plan former/y in resolution
359 (IV), as amended by resolution 973 C (X))
Add the following new text :
" (a) An assessment at the rates and under the conditions
specified below shall be applied to the salaries and emoluments of staff members, but not to dependency benefits or
to post adjustments, provided that the Secretary-General
may, where he deems it advisable, exempt from the assessment the salaries and other emoluments of staff engaged at
locality rates.
" ( /J) The assessment shall be calculated according to the
following rates:

Total assessable pasments
Assessment
Kot excee<ling $4,000 per year ................ 15 percent
K ext $2,000 per year ........................ 20 percent
N ext $2,000 per year ........................ 25 percent
N ext $2,000 per year ........................ 30 percent
Next $2,000 per year ........................ 35 percent
N ex t $3,000 per year ........................ 40 percent
Remaining assessable payments .............. 50 percent
" ( c) [ Same text as article 3 ( b) which appears in resolution 359 (IV) l.
"( dJ [Same text as article 6 which appears in resolution
359 (IV)].
"(e) [Same text as article 7 which appears in resolution
973 C (X)]."
Add, as paragraph (f) the text of article 8 which appears
in resolution 973 C (X), with the addition of the following
sub-paragraph :
"A payment under the conditions prescribed in the three
preceding sub-paragraphs is authorized in respect of dependency benefits and post adj ustments, which are not subject
to staff assessment, but may be subject to national income
taxation."

Hegulation 3.4 (Dcpendency benefits)
Add the following new text:
'"(a) Staff members in the Principal Officer and Director
category and in the Professional category shall be entitled
to receive dependency allowances as follows:
·•(i) At $200 per annum for a dependent wife or dependend husband and at $300 per annum for each dependent child; or
"(ii) Where there is no dependent spouse, a single annual
allowance for $200 for either a dependent parent, a
dependent brother or a dependent sister.
" ( b) If both husband and wi fe are staff members, one
may daim, for de pendent children, under ( i) above, in
which case the other may daim only under (ii) above, if
otherwise entitled.
" ( c) Staff members whose salary rates are set by the
Secretary-General under paragraph 6 or paragraph 7 of
annex I to these regulations shall be entitled to receive
dependency allowances at rates -nd under conditions determined by the Secretary-General, due regard being given to
the circumstances in the locality in which the office is situated.
"(d) Claims for dependency allowances shall be submitted in writing and supported by evidence satisfactory to
the Secretary-General. A separate daim for dependency
allowances shall be made each year."

Annex III
Add to paragraph ( d) a new item as follows :
"A staff member who for disciplinary reasons is dismissed for misconduct otherwise than by summary dismissal,
provided that the Secretary-General may grant in such
a case, at his discretion, a termination indemnity in any
amount not exceeding the full indemnity provided under

50

General Aaemhly-Ele..,entb S-1on

paragraphs (a), ( b) or ( e) of this annex, whichever is
applicable."
Add a new paragraph (f) to read :
"A staff member whose appointment is terminated for
reasons of health shall receive the termination indemnity
set out in this annex, to the extent that the amount of
the termination indemnity, when added to the annual amount
of the disability benefit payable to him under the Regulations
of the Joint Staff Pension Fund, does not exceed one year's
salary."

Regulation 9.4 and annex IV ( Repatriation grant and
service bene fit)
Replace the present text of regulation 9.4 by the following :
"The Secretary-General shall establish a scheme for the
r,ayment of repatriation grants or service benefits within
the maximum rates and under the conditions specified in
annex IV to the present regulations."
Renumber the repatriation grant provision as paragraph 1
of annex IV and replace the first sentence of that provision
by the following text :
"In principle, the repatriation grant shall be payable to
staff members whom the Organization is obligated to repatriate, except staff members on temporary appointments for
a fixed term entitled to a service benefit. N either repatriation grant nor service benefit shall be paid to a staff member
who is summarily dismissed."
Insert as paragraph 2 in annex IV a new provision entitled
"Service benefit", as follows :
"(a) If his letter of appointment so indicates, a staff
member who has served at least one year on a temporary
appointment for a fixed term shall receive upon separation a
service benefit at the rate of 4 per cent of salary during
service in his home country and at the rate of 8 per cent
of salary during service outside his home country, for each
year of service.
" ( b) Should such a staff member, without break in service, be granted a probationary or permanent appointment,
or complete live years of qualifying service on temporary
appointment for a fixed term, he shall !ose entitlement to
the service benefit.
"(c) Service for calculation of the service benefit shall
mean service subsequent to the entry of this provision in
the letter of appointment."

662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.

B
The General Assembly,
Believing it desirable that, as far as practicable, there
should be a common system relating to salaries, allowances and benefits of the United Nations and of the
spc::ialized agencies and that, in particular, staff serving
the United Nations and the specialized agencies in the
same centres should be governed, as a general rule,
by similar standards of salary and related benefits,
1. Calls the attention of the specialized agencies to
resolution A above, which sets out decisions taken by
the General Assembly with regard to the staff of the
United Nations, and recommends to the specialized
agencies the adoption of similar provisions with respect
to their staffs;
2. Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1957,
the post adjustment for United Nations Headquarters
in New York shall be class 5 within the system proposed by the Salary Review Committee and adopted
by the General Assembly;
3. Recommends to the specialized agencies that,
for the purposes of post adjustment, and with effect
from 1 January 1957, Geneva be placed in class 1, and
that, provisionally, Rome be placed in class 2, Paris
in class 4, and Montreal in class 4;

4. Requests the Secretary-Geheral to apply, to the
members of the staff of the United Nations serving
in the headquarters area of a specialized agency which
bas adopted the post adjustment sy1tem recommended
by the Salary Review Committee and approved by
the General Assembly, the class of post adjustment set
by that agencYi for that area;
5. Commends the United Nations Staff Assessment
Plan to the attention of the specialized agencies, and
invites consideration of the advantages to be gained by
common adherence to this system.

662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.
1096 (XI). Suhmission of revised budget estimates

The General Assembly,
B elieving it desirable to minimize the number of
requests for additional appropriations submitted after
the Secretary-General has circulated bis annual main
budget estimates,
Decides that, on an experimental basis in relation
to the estimates for the financial year 1958, requests for
a.dditional appropriations for 1958 after the main
budget estimates have been circulated to Member States
shall be limited to :
(a) Those for which approval is required as a matter
of urgency in the interests of peace and security;
( b) Those in respect of projects which the Secretary-General certifies to be of the highest urgency an<l
which could not have been foreseen at the time the
main budget estimates were circulated ;
( c) Those in respect of decisions of the Security
Council, the Economie and Social Council or the
Trusteeship Council, provided that such requests are
circulated to the Governments of Member States not
later than twenty-one days before the opening date of
the General Assembly session;
( d) Tho se in respect of <lecisions adopted by the
General Assembly, either without reference to a Main
Committee or on the recommendation of such a Committee.
662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.
1097 (XI). Changes in geographical distribution
of the staff of the United Nations Secretariat

The General Assembly,
H a'Ving considered the report of the Secretary-General38 regarding changes in the geographical distribution of the staff of the United Nations Secretariat
submitted to the General Assembly at its eleventh
session,
Taking note of the admission of twenty new Members to the United Nations,
1. Recommends that, in future appointments to the
staff of the United Nations Secretariat, at ail levels,
appropriate preference be given to nationalities which
form a disproportionately small part of the Secretariat,
subject to the provisions of Article 101, paragraph 3,
of the Charter of the United Nations;
.. Ibid., agenda item 43, document A/C.S/689.
