United Nations

S/PV.6212

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6212th meeting
Thursday, 5 November 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mayr-Harting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Austria)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Artiñano
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Belle
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Elkrekshi
Mr. Puente
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country
(S/2009/552)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-59461 (E)

*0959461*

S/PV.6212

The meeting was called to order at 10:10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Council in the month of November, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Le Luong Minh, the
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam, for his service
as President of the Security Council for the month of
October. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Minh and his delegation for the great diplomatic skill
with which he and they conducted the Council’s
business last month and were able to move the
Council’s work forward on a number of very important
issues.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in that country (S/2009/552)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau, in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau.

2

It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Her
Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, in her capacity as
Chairperson of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
It is so decided.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 4 November
2009 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda to
the United Nations, in which he requests that the
Acting Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio, be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda in accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/552, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti
and His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio. I now give
Mr. Mutaboba the floor.
Mr. Mutaboba: It is a pleasure to be here today
to introduce the thirty-sixth report of the SecretaryGeneral on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support

09-59461

S/PV.6212

Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) (S/2009/552).
Allow me just a few words to update Council members
on developments in Guinea-Bissau since the report was
published.
In the political arena, on 28 October, President
Malam Bacai Sanhá issued two decrees changing the
structure of the Government and reshuffling the
Cabinet, aimed at better addressing Guinea-Bissau’s
challenges and at reducing expenditure. The new
Cabinet was sworn in on 29 October and now has 16
ministers, as compared with 21 previously, and 12
secretaries of State, as against 10 in the previous
Cabinet. It also includes five women. The major
changes are in the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, the
Interior, and Defence and in the Ministry in charge of
the Council of Ministers. There are no changes in the
key posts of Economy and Finance.
On 3 November, President Sanhá opened the
2009-2010 legislative year and called for a national
stability pact and revision of the Constitution. This is
very new. He also called for a holistic reform of the
State, not confined only to public administration and
the security sector. He called on promoters of the
national conference to work with similar initiatives and
come up with durable and coherent solutions. The
Speaker of Parliament, Mr. Raimundo Pereira, called
on Parliament to expedite laws related to security
sector reform. The session has been suspended for
three days’ mourning for Antónia Mendes Teixeira, the
parliamentary leader of the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC),
who died last week in a car accident.
In the field of justice, on 3 November President
Sanhá issued a decree appointing a new Prosecutor
General, Mr. Amine Saad, to succeed Mr. Luis Manuel
Cabral, who was in charge of the investigations into
the March and June assassinations. Mr. Saad held the
same position in 2000 when President Sanhá was the
Interim President of the Republic.
With regard to the commission of inquiry,
ensuring transparent and fair investigation of the highprofile political assassinations of March and June 2009
remains a key national priority. While the Government,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and the United Nations
are still working together to provide experts, logistics,
funding and security to the ongoing national

09-59461

investigations, financial commitments from partners to
support the overall assistance package are necessary to
move the process forward.
In the military arena, the Chief of General Staff
of the Armed Forces, Zamora Induta, and his deputy,
Antonio N’djai, were sworn in on 27 October. The
Chief of General Staff was promoted from Navy
Captain to Vice-Admiral, while his deputy was
promoted from Colonel to Major General. President
Sanhá stressed that the new military chiefs need to
continue the process of building a republican, modern
and disciplined army that is subordinate to the civilian
authorities.
On security sector reform and drug trafficking,
UNOGBIS organized on 21 October a meeting of the
Guinea-Bissau Security Sector Reform International
Partners Group to discuss the level of support provided
by the international community to the Government’s
security sector reform programme and to achieve
consensus on ways of enhancing international
coordination
and
assistance.
The
diplomatic
community with accreditation to Guinea-Bissau, based
in Dakar, participated in the meeting through audio
link.
As Chair of the Security Sector Reform
International Partners Group and in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1876 (2009), UNOGBIS
will continue to hold regular consultations and pursue
contacts with relevant partners, including the European
Union, to ensure synergies in our strategies and
approaches towards security sector reform in GuineaBissau. On 3 November, the special envoy of the
African Union, João Bernardo de Miranda, led a joint
African Union-ECOWAS delegation to Bissau for a
two-day mission focusing on security sector reform,
post-conflict reconstruction and combating drug
trafficking.
Although there seems to be a downward trend in
the trafficking of cocaine through West Africa over the
past few months, drug trafficking and organized crime
remain a significant challenge to stability in GuineaBissau and the subregion. On 27 and 28 October,
UNOGBIS participated in a conference in Dakar aimed
at discussing the implementation of the West African
Coast Initiative (WACI) involving the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Department of Political Affairs
and INTERPOL in support of the ECOWAS Regional

3

S/PV.6212

Action Plan to address drug trafficking, organized
crime and drug abuse in West Africa (2008-2011).
In order to pursue WACI’s objectives, our Office
has agreed to further strengthen inter-mission
cooperation in the subregion, especially with the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone, the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, as well
as the United Nations Office for West Africa. In
addition, in coordination with relevant donors,
UNOGBIS remains committed to help tackle linkages
between organized crime and the trafficking of small
arms.
With regard to the Peacebuilding Commission,
the review of the strategic framework for
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau is progressing. The
Government has established six thematic working
groups which are being proactively supported by our
Office and is assessing the activities undertaken in the
areas of security sector reform; strengthening of the
justice sector; consolidating the rule of law and
fighting drug trafficking; measures to jump-start the
economy and rehabilitate infrastructure; elections and
institution-building; and social questions critical for
peacebuilding.
As to social and economic matters, the economic
and fiscal situation remains very fragile. The
International Monetary Fund (IMF) is planning to field
a mission from 5 to 18 November to review the
emergency post-conflict assistance to Guinea-Bissau
and to discuss a poverty reduction and growth facility.
A World Bank mission was in Bissau from 26 to
29 October to conduct a portfolio performance review.
The Administrator of the African Development Bank
(ADB) for Guinea-Bissau will be in Bissau from 4 to
7 November. The ADB Director of Operations will also
be in Bissau from 15 November, towards the end of the
IMF mission, to discuss budgetary support, among
other matters.
On border security, the media have reported very
widely on a rebel offensive begun in early October,
against the Senegalese military in Casamance, close to
the border between the two countries. Besides
reporting alleged incursions of Senegalese troops into
Guinea-Bissau in hot pursuit operations, the media also
reported the alleged displacement of border markers on
the extreme western part of the demarcation line
between Senegal and Guinea-Bissau, in an area of

4

tourist and offshore petroleum potential. The
President’s spokesperson denied the existence of any
tensions between the two countries and reiterated
Guinea-Bissau’s willingness to support a resolution to
the Casamance problem through dialogue.
A meeting between representatives of GuineaBissau and Senegal took place in Bissau on 23 October
to discuss border issues, and both sides agreed to
revive a joint cooperation commission and, among
other measures, to create a joint commission to survey
the area of the extreme western part of the demarcation
line between the two countries to ensure that the border
markers are correctly in place.
With respect to the Integrated Peacebuilding
Office, Council resolution 1876 (2009) gives the future
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) a robust mandate to
support the Government of Guinea-Bissau in the areas
of political dialogue and national reconciliation,
security sector reform — especially with respect to
policing and internal security — the promotion of
human rights and the rule of law, combating drug
trafficking and organized crime, and assisting the work
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
the
Peacebuilding Fund. The overall budget proposal for
the new integrated office will be considered by the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions next week, and it is our hope that the
resources requested will be provided to help enable the
much-needed and coordinated support to national
authorities and the people of Guinea-Bissau.
To conclude, allow me to highlight some key
points. First, the country has a Government that
achieved an absolute majority in the legislative
elections in November 2008, and a President from the
same party who also won the presidential elections by
a large margin. The defence leadership has been
legitimized through the confirmation of both Chief of
General Staff and his deputy. In principle, the
conditions are in place for institutional harmony and a
stable Government. The momentum is very favourable
and we should maintain it.
However, two threats exist, one of which is
internal. People do not realize the degree of hegemony
in politics, with the same party ruling forever, without
any opposition. The second threat comes from interparty divisions relating to personal rather than
ideological differences and which have a negative

09-59461

S/PV.6212

impact on Government stability. Much depends on the
governing party’s ability to evolve away from
exclusionary politics and to develop inclusiveness and
accountability. I am confident that it will overcome this
problem if we continue to support it.
Secondly, the Government’s attention during a
good part of the year has been focused on managing
the consequences of the March and June events, and
there is a perception that in other critical areas limited
progress has been made. The Government must get
back on track with its programme but, as I mentioned
so often before in this Council, Guinea-Bissau cannot
pursue this agenda alone. There is a window of
opportunity for change that requires commitment and
results on the part of the Government and adequate
international support to address the country’s shortterm challenges and the long-term goals of building
capacity and strengthening State institutions.
It is encouraging that the World Bank, the IMF
and the ADB have fielded important missions to review
their portfolios and discuss strengthening their support
for the country. The international partners and the
Government are planning a donor round table
conference early in 2010 to address the country’s
development and fiscal, public administration and
security sector reform needs. This agenda needs to be
supported.
Thirdly, the weakness of justice has eroded the
confidence of the people in public authorities. In a
country with a history of unresolved politically
motivated violence, a transparent and thorough
investigation of the political assassinations in March
and June, as well as of the alleged coup d’état in June,
is important if we are to fight impunity, re-establish the
confidence of the people in the justice system and, in
establishing truth, contribute to forward-looking
reconciliation. The investigation process and its
aftermath should not lead to further destabilization, but
rather should be part of the overall reconciliation
process. In that connection, the international
community should spare no effort to accompany this
country in its pursuit of justice and reconciliation.
The President: I thank Mr. Mutaboba for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.

09-59461

Mr. Costa: I thank the Security Council for the
invitation to attend this meeting.
As members may recall, my Office had the
distinction — if you can call it that — of ringing the
alarm bells five years ago to warn the world about the
destabilizing impact of cocaine trafficking from Latin
America to Europe via West Africa, especially through
Guinea-Bissau. After a couple of years of hesitation —
wasted time that turned out to be quite costly, by the
way — the international community started to move,
prodded by the Council, and I thank all members for
that.
Actions taken by the Security Council and actions
promoted by the regional action plan of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
inspired by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), as well as generous bilateral support,
are paying off. That is good news. Over the past 18
months, we have noted a significant drop in the number
of drug seizures in West Africa, corroborated by a
similarly strong decline in the number of European
drug seizures, with West Africa indicated as the
suspected source. As members may be aware, trends in
the area of seizures are a good indicator of what is
happening in terms of drug flows. Therefore, we
conclude that drug trafficking through the region has
declined. Yet, that trend must be interpreted cautiously.
Europe’s craving for cocaine persists, and international
efforts may have merely displaced trafficking routes
further south along the West African coast.
Furthermore, the threat to Guinea-Bissau,
although less obvious than in the past, remains very
serious. There have been reports of smuggling through
many privately owned islands in the Bissau
archipelago. The Government needs greater assistance
in order to gain control over those islands, which
provide safe havens for light aircraft and fast boats
coming from across the Atlantic. I therefore urge the
Council not to be complacent.
In addition, there are three new disturbing
elements. First, a growing amount of the drugs coming
into West Africa is being consumed locally. This is
new, but perhaps not surprising. The low prices and
ready availability of cocaine, particularly in GuineaBissau, cause havoc among young people, who are
already distraught as a result of so many problems
related to poverty, illiteracy and unemployment. And
let us not forget that the foot soldiers of organized

5

S/PV.6212

crime — local young people — and petty traffickers
are being paid in kind with coke and crack, which are
then sold domestically.

peacebuilding office in Bissau, including a law
enforcement expert in the Office of the Special
Representative.

Secondly, there are reports that drug use is
affecting the military. That not only threatens security
sector reform; as developments in neighbouring
Conakry have shown, soldiers’ behaviour can easily get
out of control. This is not a problem unique to Bissau
or Conakry; the disastrous consequences of addiction
among the military have also been experienced in other
parts of the world, including in rich countries. The
difference is that in Guinea-Bissau, there is only one
national drug treatment centre — in Quinhamel, 30
kilometres from Bissau — run by a pastor who can
only offer discipline and spiritual guidance. That is
hardly an alternative.

With our assistance, a team of police experts
from Brazil visited Bissau in September and is now
planning to establish a national police academy. Three
dozen officers will undergo training in Brazil by yearend. Training programmes have been conducted for
magistrates dealing with organized crime and for
criminal justice experts to improve their anti-moneylaundering capabilities and financial intelligence skills.

My third point is the most serious, and I would
like the Council to consider it very seriously. Since
July, UNODC and INTERPOL have been investigating
numerous West African sites, where we have found
large amounts of chemicals used in drug processing to
convert pasta basica into high-grade cocaine, as well as
chemical precursors for the manufacture of ecstasy.
That was a shocking surprise for us, and it may be for
the Council too.
While that shocking information is being
processed, I want to ring a new set of alarm bells. West
Africa is now on the verge of becoming a source of
drugs, not just a transit area. Indeed, organized crime is
growing and developing indigenous roots. Right now,
those developments are taking place not in GuineaBissau, but across its borders. Yet, something similar is
likely to happen in Bissau, where drug traffickers have
acquired a significant real estate presence. The country
is very vulnerable because of its poor judicial system,
its obviously uncontrolled sea and airspace and its
open land borders.
At UNODC, we are doing our utmost to help. As
part of the West Africa Coast Initiative, and in
partnership with the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and INTERPOL, we are establishing a Transnational
Crime Unit in Guinea-Bissau. We are, of course,
supporting criminal justice reform as part of the
peacebuilding process, by seconding our staff to the
Ministry of Justice. We are working with DPKO on
security sector reform and, starting in January next
year, we shall have a new United Nations integrated

6

Last year, I saw first-hand the desperate state of
Bissau’s prisons, if one can call them that. I am
therefore happy to inform the Council that, following
an evaluation — again by Brazilian experts — a new
prison will be built in the capital, while two others, in
Bafatá and Mansôa, are to be refurbished with money
from the Peacebuilding Fund. The impunity of drug
traffickers — a fact of life in Guinea-Bissau until
recently — will soon come to an end.
The efforts of the Security Council have been
bearing fruit. Yet, the threat to Guinea-Bissau posed by
drugs has not diminished; it has evolved, as I have
explained, into patterns whose breadth and depth are
hard to assess, but whose negative impact will surely be
felt in the years ahead. I urge the Council to follow up
on the international support pledged at the ECOWAS
ministerial meeting, held at Praia in February this year,
and at the Guinea-Bissau conference held in Lisbon late
last year. It may be news to members that the ECOWAS
Commission is planning to hold a new funding round
table in Vienna on 3 December. I urge them to attend
and to confirm their commitment to help. GuineaBissau needs their support, as well as their funding.
The President: I thank Mr. Costa for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chairperson of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti: I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of November. I also thank
you for the opportunity to participate in this meeting in
my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. In
addition, I thank the Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Representative of the Secretary-General in Guinea-

09-59461

S/PV.6212

Bissau, for his comprehensive and insightful remarks
on the situation in the field.
Since I last briefed the Council, on 23 June (see
S/PV.6149), a number of developments have affected
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. Following the tragic
assassinations in March and June, the country seems to
have restored constitutional normality. The two rounds
of presidential elections occurred in a peaceful manner,
and the candidate of the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde, Malam Bacai
Sanhá, was elected President.
From 7 to 12 September, I visited Bissau in order
to attend the inauguration ceremony of President Sanhá
and meet with the Prime Minister, members of the
Government, civil society and bilateral and multilateral
partners. From the many conversations I had, I could
sense an atmosphere of cautious optimism. I would
mention four developments among the reasons for
positive expectations, which have already been
highlighted by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba.
First, the fact that the President and the Prime
Minister are both from the same party contributes, in
principle, to strengthening political stability. The
decision by the National Assembly to hold a national
reconciliation dialogue focusing on the root causes of
conflict and the future of the country augurs well for
the peacebuilding process.
Secondly, the need to pursue security sector
reform remains a top priority. The launching of a
pension fund for members of the military who will be
demobilized is seen as a major step in this regard.
Thirdly, Government authorities expressed their
willingness to put an end to the culture of impunity.
They remain interested in receiving international
technical support for the work of a commission of
inquiry into this year’s political assassinations.
Fourthly, there has been a notable improvement
in the management of public finances. The Government
had been able to normalize payrolls, mostly through
the mobilization of domestic resources. The growth in
public revenue and the record performance of cashew
nut exports illustrate the economic potential the
country needs to tap into.
However, many challenges remain. In the context
of security sector reform, the Government is expected
to take decisions that will enable the process to move
forward, in particular with regard to the establishment

09-59461

of the pension fund. The Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) has offered to organize
a meeting on security sector reform in Abuja as a
follow-up to the meeting held in Praia this past April,
to be followed by a donors’ round table next year. All
stakeholders should join in supporting Guinea-Bissau,
as successful security sector reform is key to the
peacebuilding process in the country.
Guinea-Bissau continues to need assistance to
build capacity that may enable State institutions to
function properly and the rule of law to take hold.
Efforts to help Guinea-Bissau build a functioning State
capable of addressing basic social needs, ensuring
security and promoting human rights continue to be
essential.
There are still important bottlenecks hampering
economic recovery. Despite a recent increase in total
power generation, the production and distribution of
energy is still a matter of great concern. Without
adequate infrastructure, the prospects for sustained
economic growth and employment generation will
remain unfulfilled.
The attention given to the fight against drug
trafficking in Guinea-Bissau has yielded some positive
results, as reported by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), as we just heard from
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa. This should be seen as an
encouragement for further action and enhanced support
to the country, with a view to achieving even more
effective results.
During my trip to Bissau, I encouraged the
national Steering Committee to review the strategic
framework approved last year. Such a review would be
aimed at assessing the progress achieved so far and
defining, within each priority area, those aspects that
will need the particular attention of the international
community in the short term. I was pleased to learn
that this process has already started and is progressing
well. Apart from its intrinsic value, this prioritization
exercise will be instrumental to informing the
allocation of a second round of Peacebuilding Fund
resources to Guinea-Bissau.
In the light of the importance attached to a
regional approach to peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, I
will be travelling with the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission to Addis Ababa next week, to establish
contact with African Union officials on matters of
relevance to the countries on the agenda of the

7

S/PV.6212

Commission and, in my case, Guinea-Bissau in
particular. I will also travel to Abuja in order to meet
with ECOWAS officials on issues pertaining to
Guinea-Bissau. I believe these trips will provide a good
opportunity to strengthen cooperation with both
organizations and coordinate actions in support of
Guinea-Bissau.
Last but not least, I would like to reiterate the
importance of a renewed and strengthened presence of
the United Nations on the ground. The transformation
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau into an integrated mission, endowed
with the necessary resources and staff to fulfil its
mandate, is vitally important to the success of
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. We hope that the
budget proposal for the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau will be
favourably considered in the Fifth Committee and that
the new Office can start operating at full capacity as
soon as possible.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio, Acting Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): On behalf of the
African Union, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your accession to the presidency of
the Security Council. I join previous speakers in
extending to you our gratitude for having organized
this meeting.
Our thanks also go to your predecessor and to
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Guinea-Bissau, for having presented the
Secretary-General’s exhaustive report (S/2009/552).
We would like to express to Mr. Mutaboba how pleased
the African Union is to see him at the head of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS). The African Union also
welcomes the personal role he has played in
strengthening cooperation between the African Union
and the United Nations in the field. This has been
carried out, inter alia, through regular contacts with
Mr. João Bernardo de Miranda, Special Envoy of the
President of the African Union Commission, who
would have liked to participate in this meeting, but was
not able to do so, as he is on the way to Bissau with the
joint mission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union.

8

As Council members know, the African Union, in
backing the efforts of ECOWAS, and in cooperation
with the United Nations and other partners, remains
deeply involved in promoting positive developments in
the situation in Guinea-Bissau, which has been marked
for some time now by troubling instability, a critical
economic situation, an army that is far larger than
warranted, given the country’s real needs, and the
negative impact of illicit drug trafficking. The
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime has just referred to this last matter.
I would recall that, since the events of July 2003,
the efforts undertaken jointly by ECOWAS and the
African Union have dissuaded the former junta, or
Military Committee for the Restoration of Democratic
Constitutional Order, from holding on to power. At that
time, you will recall, the interim president of the
Committee sent a special envoy, Mr. Francisco
Madeira, Minister of the Presidency for Parliamentary
and Diplomatic Issues of Mozambique.
Since then, the African Union has spared no
effort in assisting Guinea-Bissau to extricate itself
from the various crises it has experienced, including by
sending special envoys and deploying observation
missions during the elections held in the country, so
that it might once again take its rightful place in the
community of nations.
More recently, the President of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Jean Ping, appointed Mr. João
Bernardo de Miranda, former Minister for External
Affairs of Angola, as his special envoy to GuineaBissau. Shortly after his appointment, he undertook a
number of missions to Guinea-Bissau.
In the light of the early presidential elections held
following the assassination of President Nino Vieira,
and given the tensions that arose before the second
round, Mr. Miranda visited Bissau with the objective of
meeting with Mr. Malam Bacai Sanhá and Mr. Kumba
Yala to promote conditions conducive to a successful
election.
It is in this context that he obtained the signature,
on the eve of the election, by his two interlocutors, of
the memorandum of understanding on the results of the
second round of the presidential election. In this
agreement, the two candidates committed themselves
to abide by and enforce the results of the elections of
26 July 2009, to utilize legal avenues in cases of
possible challenges and to act in a dignified and

09-59461

S/PV.6212

respectful way in their dealings with the unsuccessful
candidate.
The Council will recall that this memorandum of
understanding, which entered into force on the date of
its signature by the relevant parties, will remain valid
for the duration of the presidential mandate resulting
from the presidential election of 26 July 2009. As
Mr. Mutaboba painted an exhaustive picture of the
elections, I will not dwell on them.
In the context of consolidating that momentum, a
joint African Union-ECOWAS consultative meeting on
Guinea-Bissau was held in Addis Ababa at African
Union headquarters on 4 and 5 August 2009.
Participants engaged in fruitful exchanges on the
nature of the collaboration and the contribution of the
African Union and ECOWAS in Guinea-Bissau, the
financing of that effort and the relationship between
the African Union-ECOWAS contribution and other
efforts underway in Guinea-Bissau. The meeting then
recommended the convening of a high-level
preparatory meeting in Guinea-Bissau prior to the
donor conference that the President of Nigeria, the
current chairman of the ECOWAS Authority, is
proposing to convene before the end of the year.
The objective of that meeting is to afford the
Government and the people of Guinea-Bissau an
opportunity to express their needs and their priorities
for security sector reform, especially at the moment
when a new Government is being set up. It should also
be an opportunity to discuss with the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau the forms of assistance that the AU and
ECOWAS can provide and the modalities of that
assistance.
As an extension of the consultative meeting, the
heads of State and Government, gathered in Tripoli on
31 August in the framework of the special session of
the African Union Assembly, also addressed the
situation in Guinea-Bissau and made concrete
recommendations on consolidation of peace and
stability in Guinea-Bissau, the finalization of
consultations with the authorities of Guinea-Bissau on
the means of creating conditions favourable to the
conduct of a credible inquiry into the political
assassinations in that country in 2009 and the
organization, before the end of 2009, of a regional
conference
on
post-conflict
reconstruction,
stabilization, security sector reform and drug
trafficking.

09-59461

As I am here addressing this Council, the joint
AU-ECOWAS mission has been at work in GuineaBissau since 2 November 2009. That mission is to
study how to implement the Tripoli recommendations.
It is clear from its first contacts that Guinea-Bissau has
already undertaken substantial efforts, even though a
great deal remains to be done. However, the political
will and commitment of the authorities are clear.
Here, it behooves me to note that the new
Government is sparing no effort to improve public
finances in order to meet basic needs, including the
payment of salaries, which considerably reduces its
ability to contribute to the pensions funds, which
everyone knows is the key to success of security sector
reform.
We welcome the initiative of the National
Assembly to hold a national conference to study the
underlying causes of the conflict and strategies to set
up to prevent future tension.
This is the place to invite the partners in the
international community as a whole to become
resolutely involved in the post-conflict reconstruction
and development of Guinea-Bissau in order to extricate
the country once and for all from the cycle of
instability and violence in which it has been trapped in
recent years.
The African Union welcomes the progress being
made in setting up the integrated office of the United
Nations in Guinea-Bissau, as well as ongoing efforts of
the Peacebuilding Commission. That new momentum
underway in Guinea-Bissau is worthy of everyone’s
support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank His
Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio for his presentation.
(spoke in English)
I now give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency
Mr. Alfredo Lopes Cabral.
Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
My delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, the
Ambassador of Austria, presiding over the Security
Council in November. I endorse the well-deserved
praise that you addressed to your predecessor, the
Ambassador of Vietnam.
At the outset I would like to very warmly thank
the members of the Council for the interest they have

9

S/PV.6212

shown in the situation in Guinea-Bissau, all the more
so because, thanks to the efforts that Council members
are making from here in New York and the
recommendations that are being followed to the letter,
we in Guinea-Bissau have been able, on our part —
which is as it should be — to undertake what we must
do. And that is to ensure that we can increasingly
deserve the confidence and assistance of the
international community and also can strengthen
democracy and the rule of law in my country.
I would like to thank the Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mutaboba, for his briefing,
which certainly complements the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/552) before the Council.
As the Council has seen, much remains to be
done in Guinea-Bissau. Nonetheless, thanks to our own
efforts and, of course, to international assistance, we
have been able to undertake and achieve convincing
results. Above all, we were able to organize just,
credible and transparent elections, elections that we
hope will be the crowning achievement of a cycle that
is necessary in building the rule of law.
The new President of the Republic, who took
office on 8 September, wanted to stress in his inaugural
statement the need to set up a new culture of dialogue
in Guinea-Bissau, a culture of inclusion, to ensure that
the people of Guinea-Bissau speak to each other,
understand each other and can work together. I believe
that that bodes well for a new era. We really want to
start a new chapter so that together we can address
what is important, and that is the rebuilding of our
country, to make it, through an ongoing and
constructive dialogue, a country calm and reconciled
with itself.
However, as Mr. Mutaboba said, there
are immense problems, and regardless of our
determination — which does exist — and our
willingness to work on what is essential, regardless of
the very accurate understanding that we have of our
responsibility first and foremost to solve our own
problems, we will not be able to resolve every problem
by ourselves, and at the same time. That is why it is
important that the international community continue its
efforts to support us so that we can build upon the
momentum that we have started and that is a great
satisfaction to us.

Crime, that there are still problems in Guinea-Bissau.
There have been results in the fight against
international crime, organized crime and drug
trafficking, but that question still cannot be considered
resolved if we do not take into account the context of
the situation, its subregional or even regional nature.
That is why we are pleased with the efforts of
Mr. Costa’s Office. Above all, we are very pleased with
the subregional understanding of the need to ensure
that efforts are made in a concerted and combined
fashion, and that is why we are now seeing results. We
will have to continue that effort, and I can assure the
Council, in the name of my Government, that we are
aware of that fact.
As Mr. Mutaboba has just stated, there is, above
all, a need to take action so as to enable justice to
function in Guinea-Bissau. We will not be able to
establish the rule of law until justice — the
fundamental element on which all democratic systems
are based — is able to function. Those on trial must
have confidence in their justice system, the justice
system must be accessible and justice must be
administered in a transparent and equitable manner.
There is a great deal to be done in this area.
Mr. Costa has just noted that, at present, there are not
even any prisons — at least no prisons deserving of the
name. In this connection, I would like to thank our
partners who are helping us to build prisons equipped
to receive those who are convicted and to allow them
to serve out their sentences in conditions which meet
international standards, especially those relating to the
need to respect the most basic rights in keeping with
human rights obligations.
I would like to thank Ambassador Viotti. As the
Council is aware, in her capacity as Chair of the
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission for Guinea-Bissau she has devoted great
efforts to ensuring that sustained attention is given to
the situation in Guinea-Bissau and, in particular, to
mobilizing energy and efforts in favour of my country.
I would like to thank Ambassador Viotti on behalf of
my country and to pay tribute, in this forum, to the preeminent role played by Brazil and other member States
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries in
ensuring that Guinea-Bissau remains on the agenda,
continues to be the subject of sustained attention and
receive the help that it needs.

Yes, we do agree with Mr. Costa, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and

10

09-59461

S/PV.6212

Finally, I would also like to thank my friend and
colleague, the representative of the African Union, for
the efforts undertaken at the continental level to
ensure that Guinea-Bissau can not only get back on the
path to political stability, but also put an end to the
recurrent conflict that has plagued our country and
mobilize ourselves and our resources — very limited as
they are — in favour of development efforts.
In conclusion, having at the beginning of my
remarks paid a well-earned tribute to the members of
the Council, I would also like to pay a very particular
tribute to the delegation of Burkina Faso — which, as
members are aware, will leave the Council at the end
of December — for the pre-eminent role it, as a
member State of the Economic Community of West
African States, has played within the Council. Council
members know this better than I do. Not only has
Burkina Faso drawn the attention of Council members
to the specifics of the situation in Guinea-Bissau, but it
has also worked to ensure that, through constructive
dialogue with our partners, we will be able to achieve
what really matters — that is, the goals we undertook
to pursue.
I wish therefore to pay tribute to the efforts of
Ambassador Kafando and to thank Burkina Faso,

09-59461

which, as the Council knows, plays a very important
role in the subregion. We have seen this in the context
of Togo, in Côte d’Ivoire and, even more recently, in
the role played by President Compaoré as mediator in
the crisis in Guinea-Conakry.
I would therefore like to thank all members of the
Council for their support and to assure them, on behalf
of the Government of Guinea-Bissau, that we will not
cease — we will not cease, I repeat — to deploy our
best efforts to promote dialogue, to realize the
inclusion that Mr. Mutaboba seeks, so that all the sons
and daughters of Guinea-Bissau may participate in
managing the affairs of their country and make their
contributions to constructing the rule of law, to
strengthen democracy and to create the conditions for a
better life for our people. That is our essential goal —
to ensure that the people of Guinea-Bissau can enjoy
peace, stability and development.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. In accordance with the understanding reached
in the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

11
