S/2016/968

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 November 2016
Original: English

Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia
I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council, in its resolution 2239 (2015), affirmed its intention to
consider the possible withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
and transition to a future United Nations presence that would support the
Government of Liberia in consolidating peace, based on the Council’s review of
Liberia’s overall capacity to ensure stability and security conditions on the ground,
and, in that regard, requested me to conduct an assessment mi ssion to Liberia in
order to provide recommendations. That request was reiterated in resolution 2308
(2016), in which the Council extended the mandate of UNMIL until 31 December
2016 and requested me to include an update on the modalities for transferring to the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) pursuant to resolution 2295 (2016) the quick reaction force
established within the United Nations Operation in Côte d ’Ivoire (UNOCI) pursuant
to resolution 2162 (2014). In accordance with those resolutions, a strategic
assessment mission visited Liberia to assess the situation on the ground and consult
with national and other stakeholders. The present report contains the findings of that
assessment and my recommendations on the future of UNMIL.

II. Strategic assessment
2.
The strategic assessment mission conducted its field visit from 29 August to
8 September 2016. It was led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
comprised representatives from the Department of Field Support, the Department of
Political Affairs, the Department of Safety and Security, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Peacebuilding Support Office,
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), UNOCI and
UNMIL, as well as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
United Nations Children’s Fund, representing, respectively, United Nations
development and humanitarian agencies, funds and programmes.
3.
The assessment team met with a broad spectrum of stakeholders, including
President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and members of her Cabinet; the leadership of the
Senate and the House of Representatives; the Chief Justice and other Supreme Court

16-20206 (E)

251116

*1620206*

S/2016/968

justices; senior security officials, including the leadership of the army, police,
immigration and corrections services; the national commi ssions responsible for
elections, governance, human rights, law reform, small arms and anti -corruption;
integrity institutions; the land task force; political parties; civil society, including
women’s groups, traditional chiefs and elders, religious leader s, and media
managers; representatives of the diplomatic and donor community; the United
Nations country team; and UNMIL. The team also visited Bong and Grand Gedeh
counties.

A.

Findings of the strategic assessment
4.
A comprehensive assessment of Liberia must be placed in its historical
context, including the legacy of more than a century and a half of constitutionally
enshrined exclusion of the vast majority of the population, a quarter of a century of
political crisis and 14 years of successive, brutal civil wars that devastated the
people of Liberia and destabilized the region. The Liberia to which UNMIL was
deployed in October 2003 was a completely failed State in which three warring
factions controlled sections of Monrovia and the interior; the public sector had
collapsed; the infrastructure lay in ruins; the national police and army had
disintegrated into various factions; what remained of the security sector was
dominated by a proliferation of agencies created by successive regimes to persecute
political opponents and repress citizens; the justice sector had disintegrated; more
than a third of the population was displaced; and criminal economic exchange,
dominated by the illegal exploitation of natural resources, was thriving.
5.
In that context, persisting challenges, including with respect to the security
and rule of law sectors, governance and national reconciliation, have been linked to
structural issues that predate the conflict, specifically a State designed to serve a
minority settler population based in Monrovia. These challenges have been
compounded by the continued effects of the 2014 outbreak of the Ebola virus
disease, which constrained the limited fiscal space, depriving the Government of
resources to pursue its transformation agenda. Consolidating the hard -won peace,
therefore, requires sustained, long-term efforts to build institutions that are
inclusive, free of corruption and able to provide opportunities for, and services to,
all citizens.
6.
The present assessment also took into account previous efforts to define an
exit strategy for UNMIL, specifically, the 2012 assessment recommending a gradual
drawdown of the Mission through mid-2015 commensurate with the development of
national security capacity (S/2012/230), as well as the 2014 strategic review that
recommended concluding the security transition by mid -2016 (S/2014/598).
Political environment
7.
All interlocutors underscored the significance of the October 2017 elections
and the democratic transition that will follow in January 2018, which will be the
first handover of presidential power following an inclusive and competitive election
since Liberia’s establishment as a republic in 1847. Given that the President
appoints nearly all public officials in the country, it will be seen as a “winner-takesall” contest and it could be highly contentious, as was the case in 2005 and 2011.

2/22

16-20206

S/2016/968

There is no clear front-runner to succeed President Johnson Sirleaf, who is
supporting the candidature of her Vice President, Joseph Boakai. Additionally, all
73 seats in the House of Representatives will be contested in October 2017. Given
that only one electoral round is required for legislative elections, some seats may be
decided with slim margins, raising prospects for numerous election -related disputes.
A year before the elections, 22 political parties have registered with the National
Elections Commission and the political environment is dynamic, with party
alliances forming and splintering on the basis of personalities and expediency rather
than ideology.
8.
The National Elections Commission conveyed to the assessment mission
confidence about its readiness to organize and conduct the elections with limited
international assistance. However, the Commission faces challenges, including the
Government’s inability to disburse adequate funding in a timely manner; logistical
shortcomings; limited capacity to adjudicate election -related disputes; and persistent
questions from some stakeholders about its impartiality. International partners
informed the assessment mission that the 2017 elections can and should be a fully
nationally owned process, pointing to the capacity the Commiss ion demonstrated by
conducting elections in 2011 and 2014 with limited international support. However,
those partners also expressed regret that political decisions were taken that
undermine the ability of the Government to meet its financial obligations f or the
electoral process, including the non-inclusion of tax increases on luxury goods in
the budget for 2016/17, which could affect the partners ’ willingness to fill a funding
gap estimated at $25 million. In October 2016, the President approved a nationa l
budget of $600 million, allocating $20 million for the elections.
9.
UNDP is providing technical support for the elections, in accordance with the
recommendations in my August 2014 report (S/2014/598), which followed the
National Elections Commission’s request for support. In a letter to UNMIL dated
15 September 2016, the Chairman of the Commission called for specific assistance,
primarily logistics, which falls broadly within the parameters of electoral assist ance
for the period from 2015 to 2018 that were approved by my focal point for electoral
assistance activities following the 2014 needs assessment mission; it therefore may
be addressed in the context of the ongoing UNDP electoral assistance project,
resources permitting.
10. Legal provisions that are inconsistent with Liberia’s obligations to protect civil
and political rights remain in place, however, and have been used to curtail
fundamental freedoms. In recent months, the Government has closed or suspen ded
two opposition and independent media outlets, ostensibly for failing to comply with
tax and licensing regulations. Members of the political opposition and civil society
denounced these actions as an attempt to silence dissenting voices and an
independent press, with a view to influencing the elections.
11. Though the President has articulated an ambitious reform agenda, many
reforms have yet to show an impact. Greater political will is required to expand
democratic space and enhance citizen engagement and to address corruption at all
levels of government and society. Impunity for shortcomings in governance has
contributed to cynicism, with many interlocutors expressing regret that a narrow
elite is benefiting from corruption, nepotism and cronyism, while the vast majority

16-20206

3/22

S/2016/968

has given up on promised peace dividends of basic services, improved livelihoods
and a transformed Liberia.
12. Several reforms are pending legislative action, including on domestic violence,
land rights, local governance, and equitable participation and representation.
Members of the legislative leadership with whom the assessment mission met have
committed to expediting the passage of priority legislation. Subsequently, the
legislature has adopted the land authority bill and ratified 3 2 protocols of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
13. As found in previous assessments, the root causes of Liberia ’s conflict remain
unaddressed in the absence of meaningful national reconciliation, accountability for
human rights violations and abuses, or efforts to develop a shared sense of nation
among all Liberians. This has undermined progress in taking forward critical
reforms that would broaden political space, develop the security sector and improve
governance and rule of law. Many interlocutors expressed the view that,
notwithstanding the passage of important legislation during the 11 years under the
present Administration, implementation has been slow. As a consequence, many feel
marginalized. Members of civil society pointed to poor state-society relations as a
risk to sustaining peace, saying that most members of the population believe the
Government is unaccountable to them.
14. Relations between the executive branch of the Government and segments of
civil society appear to have improved since the strategic review in 2014. However,
it was apparent from all interlocutors that efforts by the Government to
communicate with or fully engage the people of Liberia have been inadequate,
particularly with respect to seeking their input on reform processes or empowering
them as citizens. Moreover, despite the creation of several institutions focused on
transparency and oversight, the public lacks confidence that the Government is
committed to addressing corruption. Several interlocutors expressed the view that
the international community should do more to encourage the present
Administration to deliver on its promises, including by empowering national
institutions to carry out their mandates. In that regard, they called on the United
Nations to undertake a serious introspection about its past mistakes in Liberia, with
a view to proceeding in the future on the basis of mutual accountability between the
Government and the international community.
15. Most interlocutors pointed to an absence of political will as the reason why
national reconciliation has stalled. Members of civil society informed the
assessment mission that they were unaware of any progress made since the
elaboration of a reconciliation road map in 2012. It was observed that , to be
effective, reconciliation must be a comprehensive process guided by vision, taking
into account aspects such as dialogue, community empowerment and accountability
at the appropriate time. Interlocutors also pointed to the actions of the internation al
community as contributing to lost momentum, vision and cohesion, starting with the
determination, following the publication of the 2009 report of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, that national reconciliation is a “Liberian problem” and
subsequently reducing the highly political process to a series of projects.

4/22

16-20206

S/2016/968

Human rights situation
16. Improvements with respect to human rights include the establishment of a
national commission to promote and protect human rights; increased oversight by
civil society; and the adoption of important legislation, including legislation
criminalizing rape. Remaining shortcomings involving human rights are a risk to
sustained stability, in a context of limited political will to take forward national
reconciliation and essential reforms, and with security agencies that have yet to earn
the trust of the population.
17. There remains almost total impunity for past and present human rights
violations and abuses, particularly for sexual and gender -based violence including
rape, due to factors such as limited capacity to administer justice, inadequate
procedural laws, corruption and a lack of political will to hold perpetrators
accountable. In the 1,511 rape cases registered in 2014 and 2015, less than 4 per
cent of the alleged perpetrators were convicted; the trend has not improved in 2016.
Many alleged perpetrators, even if arrested, are not held accountable under the law
because of compromises within communities and families, inadequate
investigations, corruption, and weak security and justice sector oversight and
accountability mechanisms.
18. Deeply entrenched harmful traditional practices such as female genital
mutilation, forcible initiation into secret societies, trial by ordeal and ritualistic
killing, which disproportionally affect the most vulnerable, including women and
children, have had a negative impact on human rights. Perpetrators are rarely
brought to justice. During the 2015 universal periodic review of the Human Rights
Council, the Government committed to criminalizing female genital mutilation.
However, the pending domestic violence legislation only provides for partial
criminalization.
19. The mandate of the Independent National Commission on Human Rights,
established in 2010, includes receiving complaints, monitoring and reporting on
human rights violations, proposing policy and legislation, promoting human rights
education and implementing the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. However, the National Commission faces institutiona l, operational
and governance challenges, including limited field presence and poor management
of its annual budget of less than $1.2 million, which constrain its ability to perform
its statutory oversight role and to undertake monitoring, public reporting and
advocacy on human rights issues. Newly appointed commissioners assumed office
in May 2016, which should give new impetus to the work of the National
Commission.
20. While civil society continues to increase its activism, many organizations have
limited capacity to monitor and report on human rights violations or to undertake
advocacy. Many organizations are concentrated in Monrovia and some are reluctant
to engage with sensitive issues such as impunity and harmful traditional practices. A
forum bringing together human rights actors could help enhance coordination and
information-sharing.
21. The Government has adopted human rights policies and plans and included
human rights in its development strategy. However, more efforts are required for the
implementation of those policies and plans, as well as for international

16-20206

5/22

S/2016/968

commitments and reporting thereon. Liberia has ratified several international human
rights treaties, is party to seven core human rights instruments, participates in the
universal periodic review process and has extended a standing invitation to the
special procedures of the Human Rights Council.
Security situation
22. The security situation has remained stable since the completion of the
handover of UNMIL security responsibilities to Liberian authorities on 30 June
2016. There has not been any incident requiring the armed intervention of UNMIL
in 2016.
23. Liberia has not faced a military threat for several years. However, risks are
posed by civil unrest and mob violence, which ignite quickly and could escalate
beyond the response capability of national security institutions, particularly if there
are simultaneous incidents. Latent threats could exacerbate those risks, many of
which led to the civil war, including ethnic and regional tensions, land disputes,
economic inequality, and competition over natural resources, particularly in
concession areas. Violent crime, unregulated small arms, and cross -border
trafficking in drugs, persons and weapons also present risks. Notwithstanding th e
assessment by the Liberia National Police of a low-to-medium risk of electionrelated violence, several interlocutors expressed concern about the large population
of unemployed, unskilled youth who have nothing to lose by displaying antisocial
behaviour and are vulnerable to manipulation by potential spoilers during the
electoral period.
Capacity of national institutions to maintain stability
24. All interlocutors identified resource constraints as the biggest challenge facing
the national security services; as a consequence, there are insufficient personnel,
logistics and transport for timely response to security incidents, particularly in
remote areas. Nearly 90 per cent of allocations for the security agencies are for
salaries and recurrent costs, leaving little for operational and development -related
expenditure or for reaching personnel targets. According to an adviser of the
President, Liberian security agencies have achieved 70 per cent operational
effectiveness, the gap of 30 per cent being attributable to the need for logistics and
continued training.
25. Security sector governance based on civilian oversight and human security has
improved. A national security strategy developed in 2008 is under review. The legal
framework for the security sector is being established, including the enactment of
legislation on the control of firearms and ammunition. On 4 October 2016, the
President approved legislation for the police and immigration services that provides
for the establishment of civilian complaint and policy management boards and other
oversight and accountability mechanisms. There have also been advances in
decentralizing services, including the deployment of security personnel outside of
Monrovia and the establishment of county and district security councils. Ninety -five
per cent of weapons held by security personnel have been marked and registered by
the Liberia National Commission on Small Arms. Implementing the legislative
framework and continuing to develop the security services will require more

6/22

16-20206

S/2016/968

investment; allocations for all agencies marginally increased in the budget for
2016/17.
26. The lack of sustained effort to instil a culture of accountability, respect for the
rule of law, and human rights has had a negative impact on progress in a number of
areas, including with respect to addressing systemic weaknesses in the security,
justice and corrections sectors. This has had an impact o n the ability of national
institutions to protect the population and maintain stability, which requires that the
entire criminal justice chain operate effectively, in a coordinated manner and in
accordance with international human rights standards. Trigger s of public disorder
include resentment linked to shortcomings in governance, including perceptions
about pervasive corruption, while limited access to justice undermines gains by the
security sector. Members of civil society expressed regret about the slo w
progression of legislation aimed at enhancing civilian oversight of the security
sector and allowing for more holistic coordination, noting that existing oversight
and accountability mechanisms are inadequate to address human rights violations,
as well as violations involving lack of discipline, committed by security personnel,
though some have faced criminal charges for alleged indiscipline.
27. At the same time, many interlocutors noted that lack of confidence and poor
perceptions were attributable, to some extent, to a lack of public awareness about
the considerable advances achieved by security actors.
Armed Forces of Liberia
28. The Armed Forces of Liberia, which comprises 2,236 personnel, 4 per cent of
whom are women, has primary responsibility for defending the country against
external aggression and insurgency. There are constitutional limits on its role in
internal security set out in article 85 of the Constitution and the 2008 National
Defense Act of Liberia.
29. In August 2016, the United States of America concluded its training and
mentoring programme for the Armed Forces of Liberia, considering the task of
creating a professional and credible army to have been successfully completed. The
United States still provides support for strengthening defence institutions,
professional development, maritime security, engineering support and medical
readiness. ECOWAS is also mentoring the Armed Forces of Liberia. The army is
well trained and equipped, but lacks experience, having been newly establis hed in
2006. Negative perceptions remain, although the army comprises mostly new
recruits who were vetted by the United States and are not associated with the Armed
Forces of Liberia that was a party to the civil war. The army has taken steps to
ensure that it represents the entire country and to demonstrate that it is a “force for
good”.
30. The army faces operational challenges due to insufficient funding, which
hampers its ability to deploy quickly or sustain operations outside of Monrovia.
Notwithstanding those challenges, the army continues to engage in joint training
and exercises with the Liberia National Police and other security agencies.
31. The coastguard has 50 personnel and the capacity to patrol up to 150 nautical
miles from Monrovia. It has a limited operational role because it lacks personnel.

16-20206

7/22

S/2016/968

32. In both the army and the coastguard, attrition is high and discipline has been
an issue. Development is constrained by limited opportunities and resources to
conduct the exercises required to sustain training and develop skills.
Liberia National Police
33. The Liberia National Police continue to develop and decentralize. It currently
comprises 5,101 personnel, including 950 females; it has a target of 8,000
personnel. Twenty-four per cent of police officers are deployed outside of
Monrovia, and professional standards personnel are based in each of the five
regions. The police service includes a partially armed Police Support Unit,
comprised of 1,548 officers, 408 of whom are deployed outsid e of Monrovia, as
well as a fully armed Emergency Response Unit, comprised of 371 officers, 53 of
whom are assigned outside of Monrovia. The United States and UNMIL are the
primary partners of these specialized units.
34. In the budget for 2015/16, $14.2 million covered salaries and $1.7 million
covered operations. As a consequence, the national police lack sufficient mobility,
communications, uniforms, computers and generators, which undermines
operational performance. The late or partial payment of salari es also has had a
destabilizing effect. However, the police have demonstrated improved planning and
implementation of crowd control and public order management at public events,
though there is inconsistency in practical application.
35. The police training academy provides recruit and in-service training. Due to
budgetary constraints and a change in recruitment policy, priority is being given to
enhancing the capacity of existing officers, rather than training additional officers.
The assessment team was informed by the then-Inspector General of a need for
training in human rights and for developing capacities in specialized areas,
particularly forensics and pathology.
36. Efforts are under way to enhance engagement between communities and the
police, including by building partnerships with community leaders and civil society.
The Liberia National Police have elaborated a policy and a plan to enhance
community policing, and efforts are under way to integrate these into ongoing
activities, in order to build trust and confidence. The UNMIL budget for 2016/17
includes a project that will support the expansion of community policing.
Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
37. The Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization manages and controls borders
and enforces the Aliens and Nationality Law. It comprises 2,596 personnel,
including 751 women. Thirty per cent of the Bureau’s commanders are women, and
its Commissioner informed the assessment mission of efforts to achieve gender
parity at all levels. With strong leadership, the Bureau has advanced internal
reforms and decentralization of services, despite lacking sufficient mobility,
communication and infrastructure to sustain deployments at border posts. Though
the Bureau is a source of revenue for the Government, its allocations and salary
scale are not on a par with those of other security agencies.
38. An immigration training academy that is being constructed in Foya, in Lofa
County, will have a capacity to train 1,000 officers per year if it receives the

8/22

16-20206

S/2016/968

required funding. UNMIL continues to provide high-level advice, mentoring and
support activities for the Bureau, primarily through immigration officers from
various African countries, and the Commissioner has welcomed that as a
constructive approach that should be regarded as good practice.
39. The Bureau engages effectively with other security services, particularly the
Liberia National Police, and also works closely with local communities. Inter -agency
cooperation, community engagement and early warning systems have been
strengthened through joint border security and confidence -building units, security
councils at the county and district levels and community watch forums, as well as
through sensitization and outreach programmes.
Justice and corrections
40. Some progress has been made in rebuilding the justice system, which
disintegrated during the civil war. There are magisterial and circuit courts in all
15 counties of Liberia, processes for vetting and training judges and systems for
tracking cases and disseminating laws. The legal framework governing the justice
system has been improved, including by the adoption of laws to expand the
jurisdiction of magisterial courts, reduce case backlogs, define court fees and fines
and redefine rape. However, there is a need to update many laws and to ensure that
judicial personnel have access to those laws. Access to justice remains extremely
limited, particularly outside of Monrovia, notwithstanding the establishment of
three justice and security hubs. Only two prosecutors and two public defenders have
been appointed to each circuit court; the assessment mission’s interlocutors stressed
the critical linkage between public defenders and effective policing. Cases are
processed with significant delays, if they are processed at all, while oversight and
accountability of rule of law institutions are limited.
41. Prisons are operational in all counties except Grand Kru, though only the
prisons in Monrovia and Zwedru are secured by armed personnel, from the Poli ce
Support Unit. The Bureau of Corrections and Rehabilitation, which comprises 496
personnel, including 111 women, is unarmed. Pretrial detainees account for 63 per
cent of the national prison population; many of those detainees languish in
overcrowded prisons.
Humanitarian situation
42. When the Government of Côte d’Ivoire closed the border as a preventive
measure during the Ebola outbreak in August 2014, an estimated 38,000 Ivorian
refugees remained in Liberia. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) resumed the facilitation of voluntary repatriation on
18 December 2015, through humanitarian corridors. The process was suspended in
September 2016 until the end of the rainy season, due to poor road conditions.
UNHCR plans to facilitate the voluntary repatriation of 25,000 refugees by the end
of 2016; as at 1 November 2016, 19,426 refugees were repatriated. Those refugees
wishing to remain in Liberia will be locally integrated. Most refugees have
expressed their intention to return home but have also expressed concerns about
security in areas of return, lack of access to basic services and fear of foreigners
occupying their land. Given the physical protection provided by the UNOCI force
for the return process, the drawdown of the UNOCI troops has had an impact on

16-20206

9/22

S/2016/968

perceptions about safety. The Ivorian authorities have been making efforts to
encourage refugees to return, including a visit to refugee camps in Liberia by the
Minister of Solidarity, Social Cohesion and Victim Compensation of Côte d’Ivoire
in May 2016.
43. Prior to the Ebola outbreak, humanitarian response had been transitioning to a
development agenda. There has since been limited donor support for post -Ebola
recovery, including for rebuilding the devastated health sector or protecting
survivors. Human development indicators remain low due to limited livelihood
opportunities, youth unemployment, female vulnerability, demographic expansion
and food insecurity. Access to basic services is limited, particularly in ru ral areas.
Consequently, Liberian households have little resilience.
44. Disaster risk reduction strategies could have a preventive impact. The national
disaster management agency of Liberia, established in July 2016 for disaster
preparedness and response, will require external support to execute its mandate. In
2016, the World Bank approved a $10 million grant to improve social safety nets.
Border assessment and regional issues
45. The Liberia-Côte d’Ivoire border area has remained stable since the
assessment conducted in February 2016, details of which are provided in my special
report on UNOCI (S/2016/297), subsequent to which UNMIL troops were
withdrawn from the border. On 8 September 2016, the G overnment of Côte d’Ivoire
reopened the border, which had been closed since August 2014 due to the Ebola
outbreak.
46. The Liberia National Police and the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
have increased their presence in the border area and, toget her with local government
authorities, have effectively managed border-related challenges such as conflict
between communities and foreign farmers illegally encroaching on land in Grand
Gedeh and River Gee counties. However, insufficient personnel, logisti cs and
mobility continue to present challenges. The Armed Forces of Liberia deployed a
small detachment to Zwedru but is not involved in routine border management or
security operations.
47. Past claims regarding the presence of former Ivorian combatants in border
areas have been overstated, though some estimate that 2,000 of those combatants
could be present in Liberia, which could have an impact on perceptions about
stability. The security environment is also affected by distrust between communities
and security forces in south-western Côte d’Ivoire. However, those challenges are
localized and pose no direct threat to Liberia’s stability.
48. A quadripartite meeting bringing together the commanders of the Liberian and
Ivorian armies with the force commanders of UNMIL and UNOCI was held in
Grand Bassam in March 2016; since then, the two missions have been supporting
the development of a joint operations plan for common border security exercises.
While there are plans to initiate joint operations before the Ivorian legislative
elections, operations could be affected by poor roads in the south -east of Liberia and
resource constraints facing Liberian security personnel.
49. The United Nations system is also supporting various initiatives focused on
enhancing conditions in the border area. These are aimed at improving food

10/22

16-20206

S/2016/968

security, livelihoods, physical security, cross-border social cohesion, border
surveillance and security service delivery and at increasing public confidence in
security providers.
50. Liberia does not face any threat from its neighbouring countries; it is
considered improbable that the dynamics within Côte d ’Ivoire, Guinea or Sierra
Leone will have an impact on Liberia’s stability. UNOCI and UNMIL continue to
support the reactivation of joint border security and confidence-building units, a
component of the strategy for cross-border security in the Mano River Union
bringing together actors from security, administration and civil society. Despite
inadequate investment from member States, these units have achieved considerable
success, including by facilitating communication and coordination throughout the
Ebola outbreak. With political and financial support, the planned 22 units along the
borders of the Mano River Union countries could play a si gnificant role in diffusing
tension and addressing threats.

B.

Recommendations of the strategic assessment
51. Notwithstanding the prevailing stability and the considerable progress made
by national security institutions, a continued period of testing national capacity to
maintain stability independently of the peacekeeping operation would be important,
particularly in the context of the 2017 elections. Liberia should therefore remain on
the Security Council’s agenda under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations until 30 June 2018, with a United Nations mission implementing a mandate
focused on the tasks most essential for consolidating peace, specifically: (a) good
offices and political support; (b) in extremis logistical support for th e 2017
elections; (c) human rights; (d) security sector reform; (e) support for the rule of
law; and (f) in extremis support for Liberian security agencies in protecting
civilians.
52. To enhance mutual accountability between the Government and the
international community, UNMIL, working closely with other partners, should
elaborate a compact detailing shared expectations on which future support will be
conditioned.
53. My Special Representative will focus on conflict prevention in the context of
the electoral process and through the democratic transition, while continuing to
facilitate nationally owned processes such as national reconciliation and
constitutional and institutional reforms and addressing political blockages to human
rights and governance reforms, particularly with respect to land and governance. An
essential element of political support would be promoting more effective
communication between the Government and the people of Liberia; UNMIL Radio,
which reaches all 15 counties in the country and 90 per cent of the population, has a
critical role to play in that regard.
54. Within existing capabilities, the Mission could be mandated to fill, only on an
emergency basis, elections-related logistical gaps, particularly with respect to
accessing remote areas. Such in extremis assistance should not be factored into
national plans for conducting the elections.

16-20206

11/22

S/2016/968

55. The United Nations should retain a strong human rights presence focused on
supporting the national reconciliation process, a critical compo nent of which must
be accountability for past and current human rights violations and abuses while
engaging in monitoring, reporting and early warning activities, particularly in the
electoral context. It would also be important to support the development of national
capacity to promote, protect and advocate human rights, with an emphasis on
ensuring human rights compliance within the security sector; preventative, punitive
and protective measures to address sexual and gender-based violence; addressing
harmful traditional practices; and enhancing the protection of children.
56. With respect to security sector reform, the United Nations should prioritize
good offices and strategic advice, with an emphasis on areas that are not advancing
due to political blockages. The Mission should provide strategic-level mentoring of
the national security services, including in their electoral security planning and
preparations, and should support the Government in priority areas such as reviewing
the national security strategy, decentralizing security services, establishing oversight
and accountability mechanisms, updating the public expenditure review, tracking
small arms and light weapons and bringing about public safety reform.
57. The Mission should also prioritize good offices and strategic engagement in its
support for rule of law, focusing on working with national stakeholders to develop
and implement strategic reform plans and policies, on enhancing national oversight
and accountability mechanisms, including anti-corruption efforts, and on addressing
prolonged pretrial detention, advancing critical reform legislation and addressing
election-related litigation.
58. With the assumption by the Government of full responsibility for security as at
30 June 2016, the operational security role of UNMIL or its successor should
remain in extremis support for Liberian security agencies in protecting civilians in
the event of a deterioration that could risk a strategic reversal of stability in the
country, taking into account its capabilities and areas of deployment.
59. Consistent with the recommendations of the strategic review of Côte d ’Ivoire
conducted in February 2016, the two missions and respective United Nations country
teams, in collaboration with regional partners, should continue their inter-mission
cooperation and facilitation of bilateral cooperation with respect to border
stabilization, which should be handed over to national and regional stakeholders,
with the missions playing an advisory role for the duration of their respective
deployments.

III. Proposed adjustments to the United Nations Mission
in Liberia
60. All of the assessment mission’s interlocutors agreed that it is inevitable that
UNMIL should withdraw; however, there were divergent views regarding timing.
Most interlocutors, including the President, were of the view that the Mission
provides a security guarantee and has a deterrent effect that would be essential
during the electoral period and provides a moral authority that would bring
legitimacy to the electoral outcomes. Others were adamant that the presence of
UNMIL undermines confidence in the ability of national institutions to perform

12/22

16-20206

S/2016/968

their responsibilities of protecting the population and ensuring security in the
country, while providing a disincentive for sustained national efforts in critical
areas, and that therefore the Mission should depart.

A.

Current configuration of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
Military component
61. UNMIL has been progressively drawing down since 2006, reducing the
authorized strength of its military personnel from the peak of 15,250, to the current
strength of 1,240 by 30 June 2016. The Force, which is consolidated in Monrovia,
comprises one battalion (700 troops) and related enablers, specifically, five military
helicopters (160 personnel), a level II plus hospital (87 personnel), transport (44
personnel), engineers (80 personnel) and a support company (55 personnel), in
addition to 14 military police, 40 staff officers and 60 military observers.
Quick reaction force
62. The quick reaction force established in UNOCI pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2162 (2014) will continue to provide over-the-horizon support for
Liberia, including after its transfer to MINUSMA, in keeping with Council
resolution 2295 (2016). Under all options, the unit would deploy to Liberia in
situations risking a strategic reversal of stability, in support of the front-line
response of Liberian security institutions. The Mission would retain a Force
Commander to assume operational control of the quick reaction force if deployed in
Liberia, as well as sufficient mission support capacity to ensure its effective
deployment and operations.
63. The unit will be repatriated from UNOCI in February 2017. An advance
component of 250 personnel comprising a mechanized company with command and
support elements will deploy to MINUSMA by February 2017, while the remainder
of the unit, including helicopters, will be refitted and retrained in Senegal before
deployment to MINUSMA in May 2017. Only the advance component will be
available for operations in Liberia between March and August 2017.
Police component
64. The police component of UNMIL has been progressively drawing down, from
its peak authorized strength of 1,795 to its current authorized strength of 606
personnel, including 226 individual police and immigration officers and 380 officers
in three formed police units deployed to Monrovia, Gbarnga and Zwedru.
Civilian component
65. In accordance with General Assembly resolution 70/278, UNMIL has 1,011
civilian posts, including 560 national, 294 international and 157 United Nations
Volunteer posts. Under all options, the civilian component would be aligned with
the mandate recommended in paragraphs 51 to 59 above.

16-20206

13/22

S/2016/968

B.

Options for adjusting the United Nations Mission in Liberia
66. Taking into account the views of stakeholders, the prevailing security situation
and capacity of national institutions to maintain stability and the forthcoming
electoral period, the assessment mission considered three options as viable. Any
adjustment should take into account the need to preserve the gains made during the
13 years of UNMIL deployment. The options presented below are therefore
proposed with respect to the armed component of UNMIL. As a mitigation measure
in the event of a deterioration risking a strategic reversal of stability, any of the
options would benefit from security support in the context of inter -mission
cooperation, including the quick reaction force.
Option 1. Withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in Liberia and
establishment of a successor peacekeeping mission
67. Given the prevailing stability and the developing capacity of national security
institutions to maintain stability, the closure of UNMIL and the establishment of a
successor mission that would continue to support the Government of Liber ia in
consolidating peace would be possible, with the above-specified substantive
mandate. Military and police advisory capacity would be required for mentoring
national counterparts and to serve as headquarters in the event of a temporary
deployment of uniformed personnel from other peacekeeping missions. The
proposed authorized strength of the UNMIL force and police as at 31 March 2017
would be 21 and 100, respectively.
68. The timelines for implementing this option would be short, as it should be
effected in early 2017 to ensure that the successor is operational before the
elections. Proceeding with this option would carry the risk of causing a disruption
during a sensitive political period; moreover, it is not assured that such a successor
would generate the same confidence associated with the brand UNMIL, which
would be retained under options 2 and 3 below.
Option 2. Status quo
69. According to option 2, the armed components of UNMIL would remain at the
current authorized strength of 1,240 and 606 military and police personnel,
respectively, while the civilian component would be refined to reflect the above specified substantive mandate.
70. Option 2 would leave the most robust in extremis security response capability
and would be the least disruptive option. However, it would carry the risk identified
by interlocutors of undermining confidence in the ability of national institutions to
perform their sovereign responsibilities of protecting the population and ensuring
security in the country.
Option 3. Drawdown of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
71. Taking into account the absence of a military threat, the withdrawal of the
battalion and related enablers by March 2017 would be possible, leaving 28 military
personnel, specifically 14 advisers and 14 military observers. Commercial
alternatives would be identified to compensate for the withdrawal of military

14/22

16-20206

S/2016/968

enablers, particularly aviation and medical capacity. UNMIL would retain
in-country capacity to respond in extremis to public disorder, specifically two
formed police units consolidated in Monrovia as at April 2017, requiring improved
mobility and capacities. These units would provide deterrence, standby support for
national security institutions during the election period, protect United Nations
personnel and facilities and help consolidate the progress and investment in
Liberia’s security institutions. The number of the individual police and immigration
officers would progressively decrease, reaching 100 by March 2017 and 80 by
January 2018, and would remain at 80 until UNMIL closes in June 2018. The focus
would be on mentoring and providing advisory support to the middle and senior
management of the national police and other law enforcement services. The
proposed authorized strength of the UNMIL force and police as at 31 March 2017
would be 28 and 360, respectively.
72. Proceeding with this option would minimize the risk of a disruption during the
sensitive political period, taking into account remaining law and order challenges
and the persistent causes of conflict. It would also ensure effective good offices
during the elections and the subsequent democratic handover.
Support implications
73. Due to the poor infrastructure in Liberia, including a road network that
becomes impassable during the annual rainy season, there has been heavy reliance
on the UNMIL military enablers, much of which have been withdrawn during
drawdown. To enhance the local economy and prepare for downsizing, commercial
options will be optimized.
74. By March 2017, the field presence of UNMIL will be consolidated to
Voinjama and Zwedru, which are recommended to be retained under all the options.
However, UNMIL still reflects the legacy of a once -large peacekeeping operation,
and the support-related challenges to its closure will be significant. There are still
27 sites that require services and resources. Sites are closed in accordance with
United Nations environmental standards, with clearance from the Government.
Given the complexity and number of the sites, the closure process will require
sufficient time to ensure that the highest environmental standards are met.
75. As its field presence is reduced, UNMIL and the Government have made
arrangements to ensure continuous provision of UNMIL Radio. This includes t he
gifting of towers to the Government on the understanding that UNMIL Radio could
continue to use them, with the Government providing power and security, an
arrangement that is in place in several locations.
Safety and security of personnel
76. With the conclusion of the security transition, primary responsibility for the
protection of United Nations personnel and installations in Liberia was transferred
to the Government. The capacity shortfalls of the national security institutions do
not constitute a specific threat, but are rather constraints to consider when planning
United Nations activities and programmes, which in the future should take into
account areas where national security personnel are scarce or non -existent.

16-20206

15/22

S/2016/968

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
77. Between July 2015 and June 2016, 5,042 UNMIL personnel, including 3,291
contingent personnel, were trained in my zero tolerance policy for sexual
exploitation and abuse. Regular field visits were undertaken to ens ure that personnel
and communities are aware of the standards of conduct expected of United Nations
personnel, procedures for reporting misconduct, and disciplinary measures. UNMIL
also developed a community-based response and complaints mechanism. My
Special Representative issued a new standard operating procedure for reporting
misconduct on 1 October 2016. There has been one allegation of sexual exploitation
and abuse in 2016.

IV. Future of the United Nations in Liberia
78. Any decision on the future of the United Nations engagement in Liberia
beyond June 2018 is recommended to be deferred pending an assessment to be
conducted in consultation with the next government. In the meantime, efforts are
under way to enhance and intensify planning involving UNMIL and the United
Nations country team, in consultation with the Government, to facilitate a smooth
transition of the United Nations engagement in Liberia. Essential for the success of
the transition process is active Government involvement and con tinued
communication with the population.
79. The United Nations country team will conduct a capacity mapping to identify
the expertise and resources required to address priorities that will remain after the
withdrawal of UNMIL. UNMIL and the United Nations country team have
established a transition planning group that will develop and implement a concrete
and time-bound plan for the United Nations transition in Liberia, in keeping with
the sustaining peace framework outlined in Security Council resolution 2282
(2016), with an objective of fully leveraging the capacities of the United Nations
system. The Peacebuilding Commission should be actively engaged, and a transition
package from the Peacebuilding Fund could be formulated to assist. Engaging the
country team in the mandated tasks of UNMIL, supported by the Mission ’s budget,
is being pursued in keeping with the recommendations of the high -level panel on
peace operations (S/2015/446) and my response (S/2015/682), and will be
expanded.
80. After the withdrawal of the United Nations mission, the United Nations will
continue to address residual peacebuilding challenges through the United Nations
country team in line with an agreed peace consolidation plan consistent with the
mandates of the respective agencies, funds and programmes, and within the limits of
available resources. A $16.8 million joint programme on the rule of law, justice and
security, signed in October 2016, leveraging the comparative strengths of UNDP
and UNMIL, will facilitate the timely transition of jointly identified priorities to the
country team.

16/22

16-20206

S/2016/968

V. Financial implications
81. The General Assembly, in its resolution 70/278, appropriated $187.1 million
for the maintenance of UNMIL for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017.
Should the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of UNMIL beyon d
31 December 2016, the cost for maintaining the Mission would be limited to the
amounts approved by the Assembly.
82. As at 28 October 2016, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account
for UNMIL amounted to $41.3 million. The total outstanding a ssessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $2,154.6 million.
83. Reimbursement of troop/formed police costs has been made for the period up
to 31 July 2016, while partial reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 30 June 2016, in accordance with the
quarterly payment schedule.

VI. Observations
84. Just over 13 years ago, an agreement was signed in Accra that helped to bring
lasting peace to Liberia. Since then, the country has undergone a significant
transformation and is on the path to sustained stability, as a result of the
determination of the people and the Government of Liberia, with support from
regional and international partners. Once a failed State and t he epicentre of violence
and conflict in the region, Liberia has built new institutions based on democratic
principles and the rule of law. It also overcame the Ebola outbreak in 2014, which
threatened to reverse gains made since the end of the civil war. I wish to salute the
steadfast determination and commitment of the people and the Government of
Liberia to consolidating the hard-won peace.
85. However, Liberia remains fragile. The complex nature and magnitude of the
challenges inherited from the civil war and the dysfunctional pre-war State will pose
serious long-term obstacles for reconciling a divided population and building
essential national institutions, particularly in the security and rule of law sectors. As
a consequence, the country will require support for the foreseeable future from its
bilateral and other partners.
86. President Johnson Sirleaf has articulated an ambitious reform agenda aimed at
transforming Liberian state and society. However, as I have observed over the past
several years, the gains made will remain vulnerable to reversal as long as the
sociopolitical underpinnings of governance have not found common understanding
among all Liberians. Building credible and effective institutions, particularly in the
security and rule of law sectors, requires progress in overcoming the root causes of
conflict. It will take political will, determination and courage to prioritize the future
of the country, build a shared sense of nation, enhance governance and ensure the
inclusion and rights of all citizens, which are essential if lasting peace and
sustainable development are to take root.
87. A meaningful and comprehensive national reconciliation process must be at
the centre of a continued, long-term peace process. All Liberian citizens, including
civil society, political parties and religious, traditional and political leaders, should

16-20206

17/22

S/2016/968

be engaged in a serious process of addressing divisive issues that contributed to past
conflict and ensuring that there is timely accountability for impunit y. I call on the
Government of Liberia to demonstrate to its citizens that reconciliation is a national
priority, by articulating and actively pursuing a vision for reconciliation and by
putting some of its limited financial resources into reconciliation e fforts. I further
call on the Government to empower the institutions it has established to strengthen
the democratic dispensation and improve fraught state-society relations, including
commissions advancing, among other things, human rights, land reform, l aw reform,
governance and anti-corruption efforts. Equally essential is the timely adoption and
implementation of critical reform legislation, and citizen engagement in the reform
process.
88. Liberia reached a historic milestone on its path to lasting pea ce on 30 June,
when the Government fully assumed its sovereign responsibilities for protecting its
population and securing its territory. Since the conclusion of the security transition,
there has not been a single incident requiring an armed intervention from UNMIL, a
powerful demonstration that the country has turned the corner from instability and
dependency and is on the path of sustained stability. I welcome the Government ’s
commitment to professionalizing its security institutions. I further welcome t he
determination of national security personnel, all of whom expressed confidence in
their ability to perform their responsibilities, provided that logistics and other
operational support is forthcoming from the Government. It is essential to
communicate this significant achievement to the people of Liberia, to build their
confidence in their national institutions.
89. At the same time, it is critical that the efforts made in the security sector be
complemented by commensurate efforts to develop credible a nd functioning judicial
and corrections systems, which are lagging behind. The Government and its partners
should invest more resources in reforming the justice system, expanding its
accessibility, strengthening oversight and ridding it of corruption and a rchaic and
discriminatory laws.
90. I am encouraged by the good neighbourliness and security cooperation
fostered in the context of ECOWAS and the Mano River Union, and I call for
continued efforts in that regard. Such partnerships have been essential in resolving
the Liberian conflict and should be leveraged to consolidate peace.
91. Next year’s election — Liberia’s first truly democratic transition — will be
historic. I have full confidence in the ability of the National Elections Commission
to conduct these elections, which is well advanced in its preparations. All political
actors and their constituents should engage actively and constructively in t he
democratic process, while refraining from inflammatory rhetoric. It would be
important to learn lessons from the 2011 electoral process, which was accompanied
by controversy in the absence of national healing, by taking forward over the course
of the next year reforms that would enhance perceptions about the legitimacy,
transparency, fairness and inclusiveness of elections. I would call upon Liberia ’s
partners to provide critical assistance by deploying observers throughout the
electoral process, and I would also call upon the Government to maximize the time
before the elections to advance national reconciliation and reform processes.
Freedom of political and civic expression are paramount to a credible electoral
process and, in that regard, I would underscore the essential role in a democratic

18/22

16-20206

S/2016/968

society of empowered opposition parties and a free media, which allow all Liberian
citizens to have a meaningful stake in the political, social and institutional life of
the country.
92. The year 2017 will be critical for consolidating Liberia’s hard-won peace, the
sustainability of which will be demonstrated with the handover of presidential
power in early 2018. Notwithstanding the prevailing stability and good progress
made by national security institutions, it is essential that Liberia remain on the
Security Council’s agenda under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
at least through 30 June 2018. I therefore recommend, in line with the findings of
the strategic assessment, that the Council approve the presence of a United Nations
mission reflecting the priorities identified in paragraphs 51 to 59 above and consider
the options put forward in paragraphs 67 to 72 above. It is important to preserve the
legacy of all that has been achieved during the 13 years of UNMIL deployment.
93. Once the next Government is installed in 2018, a further strategic assessment
would finalize recommendations for the future of the United Nations engagement in
Liberia, based on continuous joint transition planning through 20 17, assessments of
the situation in the country and the priorities of the new Government. I take
seriously calls for enhanced mutual accountability between the Government and the
international community, and I will therefore prioritize the elaboration of a compact
detailing shared expectations on which future support will be conditioned.
94. We are working to reimagine the role of the United Nations in Liberia and will
continue working closely with regional and other stakeholders in this regard. The
continued support of the African Union and ECOWAS in complementing the work
of the United Nations remains essential.
95. I am enormously proud of the role played by UNMIL in facilitating peace in
Liberia, and I would like to thank my Special Representative, Far id Zarif, for his
excellent leadership, all United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel who have
served with UNMIL over the past 13 years and the United Nations country team
colleagues who have worked alongside them. I appreciate the invaluable support of
troop- and police-contributing countries, donor countries, regional and multilateral
organizations and non-governmental organizations. I wish to pay special tribute to
ECOWAS, which facilitated the restoration of peace in Liberia and the
achievements of UNMIL, without which the country might not now be entering its
final peacekeeping phase.

16-20206

19/22

S/2016/968

Annex
United Nations Mission in Liberia: military and police
strength as at 1 November 2016
Military component
Military
observers

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Bangladesh

3

4

–

7

4

Benin

1

1

–

2

–

Bhutan

–

–

–

–

3

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

1

–

–

1

–

Bosnia and Herzegovina

–

–

–

–

1

Brazil

1

1

–

2

–

China

1

3

124

128

Egypt

5

–

–

5

Ethiopia

3

2

–

5

–

Gambia

3

–

–

3

14

Germany

–

–

–

–

3

Ghana

7

4

55

66

India

–

–

–

–

Jordan

–

–

–

–

1

Kenya

–

–

–

–

13

Kyrgyzstan

–

–

–

–

2

Malaysia

1

1

–

2

–

Namibia

1

1

–

2

2

Nepal

2

2

16

20

5

Niger

2

–

–

2

Nigeria

9

4

698

711

Norway

–

–

–

–

3

Pakistan

4

6

88

98

–

Poland

–

–

–

–

3

Republic of Korea

–

–

–

–

6

Romania

–

–

–

–

1

Russian Federation

2

–

–

2

–

Serbia

1

–

–

1

–

Sri Lanka

–

–

–

–

4

Sweden

–

–

–

–

7

Switzerland

–

–

–

–

2

Togo

1

1

–

2

–

Turkey

–

–

–

–

2

Country

20/22

Formed
police units

140

Police
officers

4
–

25
121

7

–
119

15

16-20206

S/2016/968

Military component

16-20206

Country

Military
observers

Staff officers

Uganda

–

–

–

–

2

Ukraine

3

2

160

165

5

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

–

–

–

–

2

United States of America

2

4

–

6

–

Yemen

–

–

–

–

1

Zambia

1

–

–

1

14

Zimbabwe

1

–

–

1

11

Total

55

34

160

22

Troops

Total

Formed
police units

380

Police
officers

162

21/22

S/2016/968

Map

22/22

16-20206
