S/2016/757

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 September 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 1 September 2016 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Further to the letter dated 25 August 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of Malaysia to the United Nations, I have the honour to inform you that the
members of the Security Council have agreed to send a mission to South Sudan and
Addis Ababa during the period from 2 to 5 September 2016. The members of the
Council have agreed on the terms of reference for the mission (see annex).
Ambassador Samantha Power (United States of America) and Ambassador
Fodé Seck (Senegal) will co-lead the mission.
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Julio Helder Moura Lucas (Angola)
Mr. Shen Bo (China)
Mr. Ihab Moustafa Awad Moustafa (Egypt)
Mr. Alexis Lamek (France)
Ambassador Yoshifumi Okamura (Japan)
Mrs. Siti Hajjar Adnin (Malaysia)
Ambassador Phillip Taula (New Zealand)
Mr. Petr Iliichev (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Fodé Seck (Senegal)
Ambassador Juan Manuel González de Linares Palou (Spain)
Mr. Yuriy Vitrenko (Ukraine)
Ambassador Peter Wilson (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland)
Ambassador Samantha Power (United States of America)
Ambassador Luis Homero Bermúdez Alvarez (Uruguay)
Mr. Zael Alexis Fernández Rivera (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Gerard van Bohemen
President of the Security Council
16-15196 (E)

060916

*1615196*

S/2016/757

Annex
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to South Sudan
and Addis Ababa in September 2016, to be co-led by the
United States of America and Senegal
Mission to South Sudan from 2 to 5 September 2016
1.
To reinforce the messages contained in Security Council resolutions 2252
(2015) and 2304 (2016), presidential statements S/PRST/2016/1 and S/PRST/2016/3
and the statements to the press on South Sudan of 4 May and 1, 9 and 10 July 2016.
2.
To reiterate the full support of the Security Council for the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, in its efforts to foster peace and security in
South Sudan.
Political process
3.
To emphasize that there can be no military solution to the situation in South
Sudan and that the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan (the Agreement) is the framework for durable peace, reconciliation and
national cohesion in South Sudan.
4.
To express the Security Council’s concern about the state of the political
process and engage the Transitional Government of National U nity and civil society,
including women’s representatives, on the impact on South Sudan’s communities
and their views about next steps.
5.
To inquire about upcoming political reforms and action in the fields covered by
the Agreement, including institutional affairs, security arrangements, humanitarian
conditions, the economic situation, and justice and accountability.
6.
To encourage the Transitional Government of National Unity to create an
enabling environment for all parties to work through the Transitio nal Government of
National Unity to genuinely commit themselves to the full and immediate
implementation of the Agreement, in order to foster a swift improvement of the
situation of the South Sudanese people.
7.
To urge the parties to work together in the Transitional Government of
National Unity to resolve their differences in the spirit of cooperation and to remind
the political leaders of South Sudan of their responsibility for national unity and
reconciliation and to take concrete steps towards nation -building.
8.
To express support for the efforts of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission and regional organizations to help to address the political and security
crisis.
Security situation
9.
To engage the Transitional Government of National Unity, consistent with
Security Council resolutions 2252 (2015) and 2304 (2016), presidential statements
S/PRST/2016/1 and S/PRST/2016/3 and the statements to the press of 4 May and
1, 9 and 10 July 2016, and to express the Security Council ’s serious concern about

2/5

16-15196

S/2016/757

the rampant violence and the systematic impeding of the ability of UNMISS to
operate ahead of the report of the Secretary-General to the Council on progress.
10. To express the Security Council’s grave alarm about the security situation,
including its concern over the ongoing violence and its dire humanitarian
consequences, as well as to express concern over widespread sexual and gender based violence and ethnic clashes throughout the country, and to urge an immediate
end to fighting throughout the country.
11. To underscore the urgent need to halt all forms of sexual and gender -based
violence, to hold accountable those responsible for crimes of sexual and genderbased violence committed during the recent clashes in Juba and throughout the
country during the conflict, and to prevent further attacks. To further urge the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition to
take concrete, specific and time-bound steps towards implementing their respective
joint communiqués with the United Nations, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2252 (2015).
12. To reiterate to the Transitional Government of National Unity that attacks
against civilians and United Nations premises and personnel are unacceptable and
may constitute war crimes, to emphasize the importance of transparent
investigations by the Transitional Government of National Unity into such crim es,
and to stress the importance of members of military forces and any other individuals
being held accountable for their actions.
13. To reiterate its strong condemnation of all human rights violations and abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law, and to underscore to the
Transitional Government of National Unity the pressing need for accountability for
violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian
law in South Sudan, including ongoing violations and abuses that have been
reported since the Agreement was signed in August 2015 and since the outbreak of
violence in Juba in July 2016, in order to break the prevailing cycle of impunity, and
to encourage the Government of South Sudan to cooperate with the Comm ission on
Human Rights in South Sudan created by the Human Rights Council.
14. To receive information from the Transitional Government of National Unity,
civilians, internally displaced persons, including those in the UNMISS protection of
civilians sites, and members of civil society, including women’s organizations,
about conditions on the ground and the ability of civilians to move around safely
and securely in South Sudan.
15. To express grave concern at the threat to peace and security in South Sudan
arising from the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons.
16. To underline that the Security Council expressed in its resolution 2290 (2016)
its intent to impose any sanctions that may be appropriate to respon d to the
situation, which may include an arms embargo and the designation of senior
individuals responsible for actions or policies that threaten the peace, security or
stability of South Sudan, and further stated in its resolution 2304 (2016) its intent t o
consider appropriate measures, including an arms embargo, in case of political or
operational impediments to operationalizing the Regional Protection Force or
obstructions to UNMISS in performance of its mandate due to the actions of the
Transitional Government of National Unity.

16-15196

3/5

S/2016/757

Mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
17. To assess the level of cooperation between the Transitional Government of
National Unity and UNMISS in the fulfilment by UNMISS of its mandate to protect
civilians under threat of physical violence, to monitor and investigate human rights
violations and abuses, to facilitate the conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and to support the implementation of the Agreement.
18. To demand that the Transitional Government of National Unity comply with
the obligations set out in the status-of-forces agreement between the Government of
South Sudan and the United Nations, and immediately cease obstruction of
UNMISS in the performance of its mandate, including allowing unhindered freedom
of movement.
19. To urge the Transitional Government of National Unity to engage with
UNMISS to deploy the UNMISS Regional Protection Force and to stress the need
for the Transitional Government of National Unity to provide support as needed for
the UNMISS Regional Protection Force to fulfil its mission.
20. To express its intention to review the results of ongoing consultations between
the Transitional Government of National Unity and the States of the region
referenced in the communiqué of 5 August 2016 of the second extraordinary summit
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development “IGAD plus” group on the
situation in South Sudan and to consider potential action, including any appropriate
updates to the mandate of the Regional Protection Force, arising from the resu lts of
those consultations.
21. To assess the ability and willingness of UNMISS to fulfil its mandate to
protect civilians under threat of physical violence, including civilians in the
protection of civilians sites, and humanitarian personnel, and to under score to the
Government of South Sudan that the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians in South Sudan remains with the Transitional Government of National
Unity.
22. To reiterate to all parties the need to allow, in accordance with relevant
provisions of international law and United Nations guiding principles of emergency
humanitarian assistance, full, safe and unhindered access of relief personnel,
equipment and supplies, timely delivery of humanitarian assistance and the
importance of holding accountable those responsible for blocking, looting or
otherwise interfering with humanitarian assistance and aid workers.
United Nations Mission in South Sudan forces
23. To stress the need for UNMISS to make full use of its authority to use all
means necessary to carry out its mandate as set out in resolution 2252 (2015).
24. To stress the importance of ensuring adequate protection of UNMISS and
other United Nations personnel in the light of the attacks against UNMISS
personnel and premises, so that UNMISS can effectively implement its mandate.
25. To stress the need for proper command and control, as well as for proper
knowledge of the rules of engagement.

4/5

16-15196

S/2016/757

Mission to Addis Ababa on 5 September 2016
26. To engage regional partners on the political and security dimensions of the
crisis in South Sudan and consult with them on the deployment of the UNMISS
Regional Protection Force.
27. To receive a briefing on the efforts of the African Union to establish the
Hybrid Court for South Sudan.
28. To support and encourage continued engagement by regional partners to
address the political and security crisis in South Sudan.

16-15196

5/5
