United Nations

A/RES/57/187

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 104

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/551)]

57/187. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on the activities of his Office 1 and the report of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the
work of its fifty-third session 2 and the conclusions and decisions contained therein,
Recalling its previous annual resolutions on the work of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees since its establishment by the
General Assembly,
Expressing its appreciation for the leadership shown by the High
Commissioner, and commending the staff and implementing partners of the Office
of the High Commissioner for the competent, courageous and dedicated manner in
which they discharge their responsibilities,
1.
Endorses the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its fifty-third
session; 2
2.
Welcomes the important work undertaken by the Office of the High
Commissioner and its Executive Committee in the course of the year and notes in
this context the conclusion on the civilian and humanitarian character of asylum, 3
the conclusion on reception of asylum-seekers in the context of individual asylum
systems 4 and the progress achieved with respect to recognizing the important
contribution of host developing countries; welcomes also the importance attached to
cooperation with the New Partnership for Africa’s Development; 5 welcomes further
the active engagement of the Office of the High Commissioner in the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee Task Force on Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/57/12).
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/57/12/Add.1).
3
Ibid., chap. III, sect. C.
4
Ibid., sect. B.
5
A/57/304, annex.
2

02 55064

A/RES/57/187

in Humanitarian Crises and the drafting of a policy on sexual exploitation, and
encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to continue combating such
practices; and welcomes the renewed efforts made by the Office of the High
Commissioner to promote durable solutions for refugees;
3.
Notes that the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 6 and
the 1967 Protocol thereto 7 have continuously served as the cornerstone of the
international refugee protection regime, and welcomes in this context the
Declaration adopted at the Ministerial Meeting of States Parties to the Convention
and/or its Protocol, held at Geneva on 12 and 13 December 2001, 8 to commemorate
the fiftieth anniversary of the Convention, as an expression of their collective
commitment to full and effective implementation of the Convention and the
Protocol and to the values they embody;
4.
Reaffirms that the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol thereto remain
the foundation of the international refugee regime and recognizes the importance of
their full application by States parties, notes with satisfaction that one hundred and
forty-four States are now parties to one instrument or to both, encourages States not
parties to consider acceding to those instruments, underlines in particular the
importance of full respect for the principle of non-refoulement, and recognizes that
a number of States not parties to the international refugee instruments have shown a
generous approach to hosting refugees;
5.
Notes that fifty-four States are now parties to the 1954 Convention
relating to the Status of Stateless Persons 9 and that twenty-six States are parties to
the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, 10 and encourages the High
Commissioner to continue his activities on behalf of stateless persons;
6.
Welcomes the contribution of the process of Global Consultations on
International Protection to strengthening the international framework for refugee
protection and to equipping States better to address the challenges in a spirit of
dialogue and cooperation, and welcomes in this connection the Agenda for
Protection; 11
7.
Reiterates that international protection is a dynamic and action-oriented
function, carried out in cooperation with States and other partners, inter alia, to
promote and facilitate the admission, reception and treatment of refugees and to
ensure durable, protection-oriented solutions, bearing in mind the particular needs
of vulnerable groups;
8.
Re-emphasizes that the protection of refugees is primarily the
responsibility of States, whose full and effective cooperation, action and political
resolve are required to enable the Office of the High Commissioner to fulfil its
mandated functions;
9.
Urges all States and relevant non-governmental and other organizations,
in conjunction with the Office of the High Commissioner, in a spirit of international
_______________
6

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
8
HCR/MMSP/2001/10, annex I.
9
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 360, No. 5158.
10
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/57/12/Add.1),
annex IV.
7

2

A/RES/57/187

solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing, to cooperate and to mobilize
resources with a view to enhancing the capacity of and reducing the heavy burden
borne by countries that have received large numbers of refugees and
asylum-seekers, and calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to
play its catalytic role in mobilizing assistance from the international community to
address the root causes as well as the economic, environmental and social impact of
large-scale refugee populations in developing countries, particularly least developed
countries, and countries with economies in transition;
10. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance and the purely
humanitarian and non-political character of the function of the Office of the High
Commissioner of providing international protection to refugees and seeking
permanent solutions to refugee problems, recalls that these solutions include
voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and feasible, local integration and
resettlement in a third country, reaffirming that voluntary repatriation remains the
preferred solution, supported by necessary rehabilitation and development
assistance to facilitate sustainable reintegration;
11. Emphasizes the obligation of all States to accept the return of their
nationals, calls upon States to facilitate the return of their nationals who have been
determined not to be in need of international protection, and affirms the need for the
return of persons to be undertaken in a safe and humane manner and with full
respect for their human rights and dignity, irrespective of the status of the persons
concerned;
12. Recognizes that adequate and timely resources are essential for the Office
of the High Commissioner to continue to fulfil the mandate conferred upon it
through its statute, 12 and by subsequent General Assembly resolutions concerning
refugees and other persons of concern, and urges Governments and other donors to
respond promptly to the global appeal issued by the Office for requirements under
its annual programme budget;
13. Requests the High Commissioner to report on his activities to the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002

_______________
12

Resolution 428 (V), annex.

3
