S/2014/265

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 April 2014
Original: English

Letter dated 11 April 2014 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that, under the presidency of Nigeria, the
Security Council is scheduled to hold a briefing on the prevention o f and fight
against genocide. The briefing will be held on Wednesday, 16 April 2014, under the
item entitled “Threats to international peace and security”. In order to help steer the
discussion on the subject, the delegation of Rwanda has prepared the atta ched
concept note (see annex).
I should be grateful if the present letter and the annex thereto could be issued
as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) U. Joy Ogwu
President of the Security Council

14-29814 (E)

150414

*1429814*

S/2014/265

Annex to the letter dated 11 April 2014 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Threat to international peace and security: prevention of and fight
against genocide
Concept note

I.

Introduction
1.
On Wednesday. 16 April 2014, the Federal Republic of Nigeria will organize a
Security Council briefing entitled “Threat to international peace and security:
prevention of and fight against genocide”.

II.

Context
2.
The briefing will be organized on the occasion of the twentieth
commemoration of the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, during which more
than a million people were killed in a hundred days, including Hutu and others who
opposed it. The genocide, which took place from April to July 1994, was
preventable. Despite reports indicating that genocide was being planned, and even
up to the time when there was evidence that the genocide was taking place, United
Nations efforts failed to translate into meaningful preventive action.
3.
The United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda largely withdrew as the
genocide started. The mass killing progressed unimpeded, as the Security Council
was unable to agree on an appropriate course of action. On 8 November 1994, the
Security Council adopted resolution 955 (1994), by which the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda was established to prosecute persons responsible for the
genocide. The Tribunal will complete its work by the end of July 2015.
4.
The genocide in Rwanda happened despite the fact that, in 1951, more than
four decades earlier, the Genocide Convention, in which signatories agreed to
suppress and punish perpetrators who slaughtered victims simply because of their
nationality, race, ethnicity or religion, came into force. This genocide took pla ce
even when the international community had ascribed to the oft -chanted “Never
again”.

III.

Scope of the briefing
5.
The briefing on the prevention of and fight against genocide will be an
opportunity for the Security Council to discuss lessons learned from the failure of
the international community to prevent the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in
Rwanda as the world continues to face new challenges in conflict management,
peacekeeping and the prevention of genocide and crimes against humanity. As an
organ of the United Nations with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Council, with insights from briefers, will
re-evaluate the resolve and mechanisms in place to prevent such ho rrendous crimes
from happening.

2/4

14-29814

S/2014/265

IV.

Background
6.
The prevention of genocide has been a core goal of the United Nations since
its inception in the aftermath of the Second World War. In 1946, at its inaugural
session, the General Assembly, in its resolution 96 (I), declared th at “genocide is a
crime under international law which the civilized world condemns”. The Assembly
invited Member States to enact domestic legislation for the prevention and
punishment of genocide and recommended that international cooperation be
organized between States for this purpose. In the same resolution, the Assembly
requested that a convention on the crime be drafted for consideration at the next
regular session of the Assembly. The resulting Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide was adopted by the Assembly on 9 December
1948. It is regarded as the first “modern human rights treaty”, a adopted even before
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
7.
Despite the adoption of the Genocide Convention, however, it is widely
recognized that, in the six decades since the Convention came into force in 1951, the
record of the United Nations in preventing genocide has been abysmal. Not only did
genocide take place in Rwanda and in Srebrenica but also violent conflicts, with
signs of potential genocide raging throughout the world. Ongoing efforts to prevent
genocide and crimes against humanity at the United Nations level have continued to
focus on improving the capacity of the United Nations system, the political will of
key Member States, and learning lessons from the failures of the recent past,
without however reaching their full potential.
8.
The twenty-first century came with new initiatives by the United Nations and
its Member States to further prevent and fight genocide. In 20 02, the International
Criminal Court was created by States parties to the Rome Statute. The Court, which
shall be complementary to national criminal jurisdictions, exercises jurisdiction over
the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes of
aggression. The Security Council, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, can also refer a situation to the Prosecutor of the Court.
9.
In 2005, at the World Summit, Heads of State and Government endorsed the
“responsibility to protect”, which, while acknowledging the responsibility of States
to protect their populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, gave to the international community, through the United Nations,
the responsibility to use appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful
means to protect those populations (General Assembly resolution 60/1, paras. 138
and 139). The Heads of State and Government gathered at the World Summit also
envisaged taking collective action, in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter,
and in cooperation with relevant regional organizations as appropriate, b should
peaceful means be inadequate and national authorities fail to protect their
populations.

__________________
a William Schabas, “The Genocide Convention at fifty”, United States Institute of Peace special

report, Washington, D.C., January 1999.
b “The right of the Union to intervene in a Member State pursuant to a decision of the Assembly

in respect of grave circumstances, namely war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity”
was erected as a core principle of the African Union (article 4 (h) of the African Union
Constitutive Act, available from www.peaceau.org/uploads/au-act-en.pdf).

14-29814

3/4

S/2014/265

10. In relation to the responsibility to protect, the Secretary-General issued two
important reports proposing tools for genocide prevention. In July 2010, he issued a
report on early warning, assessment and the responsibility to protect ( A/64/864)
and, in July 2013, he released a report entitled “Responsibility to protect: State
responsibility and prevention” (S/2013/399). In the meantime, the Secretary-General
established the Office of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and
Office of the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect.
11. Nonetheless, over the past decade, some of the initiatives taken by the United
Nations and its Member States to prevent and fight genocide, such as the
International Criminal Court and the responsibility to protect, encountered various
challenges in their implementation and created controversies among United Nations
Member States.
12. In combination with all those efforts, the key question today relates to the
unity and capacity of the international community, including the United Nations, to
help protect populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing through preventive action. Linked to that is whether such capacity
is adequate or there are areas that need sustained improvement.

V.

Proposed issues to be discussed
13. Members of the Security Council are invited to consider the following issues
during the briefing on the prevention of and fight against genocide:
(a) Evolution and assessment of the United Nations preventive capabilities
since the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, including achievements and
challenges;
(b) Identification of areas of strength that might be more explicitly utilized
in support of the prevention measures, areas in which there are opportunities for
improvement, and the potential for United Nations involvement in contributing to
longer-term structural prevention;
(c) Assessment of the United Nations early warning mechanisms, the
responsibility to protect and regional cooperation to prevent genocide;
(d)

Responsibility and capacity of States in genocide prevention;

(e) Accountability and justice as preventive tools, including through
national, international and mixed criminal courts and tribunals;
(f) Reflections on the current United Nations capacity to prevent genocide
and crimes against humanity, in the light of the current crises and related atrocity
crimes.

VI.

Format and outcome
14. The meeting will take the form of a briefing. The Deputy Secretary -General
and the former Permanent Representative of New Zealand to the United Nations and
President of the Security Council in April 1994 will be invited to the briefing. The
expected outcome document is a resolution.

4/4

14-29814
