UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

2l23
NEW

COUNCIL

YEAR

rd

MEETING:

9 MARCH

1979 UN

LERARY

,prj

1 3 I%3

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2

123)

....................................
Adoption of the agenda . ..-............................................
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13115)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

WPV.2123

1
1

1

NO-E
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Record of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a-system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and De&ions of the
Securijy Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

Held in New York on Frid?y, 9. March 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United. States of
America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2123)
1.. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter &ted 23 February 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Natiorfs
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/131 15)
l7te meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption of tbe agenda
The age&

was adopted.

The situation in tbe occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of JOrdan to the United Nations addressed
to the President of tbe Security Council (S/13115)
1. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Security Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Egypt, India, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Pakistan, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
Yemen and Yugoslavia in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
darticipate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan)
and Mr. Blum (Israel) took places ft the Council table
and Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Shemirani
{Iran). Mr. AI-Ah (Irae), Mr. T&i (Lebanon), Mr. Naik
(PakFrtan), Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr. El-Choufi (Syrian
Arab Republic). Mr. Era& (Turkey), Mr. Al-Had&d (Yemen)
and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has before it
document S/13150, containing a letter dated 8 March from

the Permanent Representative of Kuwait; in which he
requests that the representative of the Paiestme Liberation
Organization be invited to participate in the discussion.
3. This proposal is not made pursuant to rule 37 or ruii: 39
of the provisional rules of procedure but, if approved by the
Council, the invitation to participate in the debate will
confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization the same
rights of participation as those conferred on a Member
State when invited to participate pursuant to rule 37.
4. Does any member of the Security Council wish to
speak on this subject?
5. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): Mr. President, the United States deiegation.asks that you’put to the
vote the question of the character of the Council’s invitation
to the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in
the discussion of the question before us.
6. The United States has consistently stated that we would
not oppose a hearing for the Palestine Liberation Organization under the traditional rule 39 of the Security Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, but we cannot agree that it
should participate in this debate with the same rights as
those of a Member State.
7. The PRESIDENT: As no other member of thecouncil
wishes to speak at this stage, I take it that the Council is
ready to vote on the proposal.
A vote was taken by show of ham&.
Infavour: Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
Against: United States df America.
Abstaining: France, Norway, Portugal, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The proposal was adopted by 10 votes to 1, with 4
abstentions.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terzi (PaZestine
Liberation Organization) took a place at the Council table.
8. The PRESIDENT: I should also like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
9 March from the Vice-Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian

People addressed to the President of the Security Council.
..That letter reads asfollows:
, :

other for almost three decades, is to be heard or seen no
more in .the flesh. He was vibrant, proud, dynamic and
totaily,dedicated to the ideals of the Charter and to the
causesof humanity. But Jamil Baroody’s soul rests comfortably in the assurance that he fulfilled his mission in life and
gave unequivocal expression to his conscience to the very
end, as becomes a man of his integrity and stature. May
God bless his soul.
I.
‘15. DitEcult and long are the paths which we tread, dark
and hidden are our pathless destinations. These sober verses
most succinctly and pointedly portray the systematic martyrdom of the occupied territories and their indigenous
Palestinian and other Arab victims. I can think of no issue
in the entire broad spectrum of Middle East conflict that is
as loaded with potential and inevitable disaster as the subject of our current complaint and debate-the systematic,
ruthless, heedless and ongoing policy and practice of Israeli
colonization and despoliation of the West Bank, whose
heartland and immortal soul is Holy Jerusalem, as well as
the Gaza Strip, the Golan Heights and the Sinai Peninsula,
in forcible bargaining ransom and captivity.

,“I shall be glad ,if you will permit me under the provision of rule’39 of the Security Council’s provisional rules
of procedure to participate in the proceedings of the
Security Council when it meets to discuss the item ‘The
situation in the occupied Arab territories’ and to address
the Council on behalf of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Bights of the Palestinian People.”
9. On previous occasions, the Security Council has extended invitations to representatives of other ‘United Nations bodies in connexion with the consideration of matters
on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in this
matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation,
pursuant to rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to
the Vice-Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Bights of the Palestinian People.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Roa-Kouri (ViceChairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People) took the place reservedfor
him at the side of the Council chamber.

16. The issue involves, fundamentally, the very survival of
the Palestinian people or their eventual perdition in the
remnants of their homeland. It is literally a sinking ship
signalling an SOS before it descends irretrievably into the
rocky sea-bed. The mast of the ship on the horizon of the
occupied territories is fast fading away into the distant
twilight, and it has reached the point where it is vanishing to
the point of invisibility and surgical metamorphosis.

10. The PRESIDENT: The Council is meeting today ‘in
response to a request from the representative of Jordan.
That request is contained in document S/13115. Members
of the Council have before them the following other documents: S/13132, containing a letter dated 2 March from the
.Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Bights of the Palestinian People addressed to
the President of the Council; S/13145, containing a letter
dated 5 March from the Charg6 d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Senegal addressed to the SecretaryGeneral; S/13 149, containing a letter dated 7 March from
the representative of Jordan addressed to the SecretaryGeneral.

17. I am’circulating a few maps as well as a few explanatory papers which portray, better than any words ever
could, the terrifying dimensions and the magnitude of the
lsraeh occupation authomies cannibaiization, erosion and
dismantling of the Palestinian people’s dwarfed and remaining enclaves in their Palestinian ancestral homeland. The
members of the Council will immediately grasp that the
little maps are studded with signposts and numbers of
settlements which have already been constructed on confiscated Palestinian lands. These signposts and numbers cover
the period ending 31 December 1978. Since continuing
Israeli colonization is almost a daily occurrence, it is overtaxing for laymen at the Mission to make a timely updating,
in appropriate aggregate clarity, of the emasculation which
is continually taking place.

11. The first speaker is the representative of Jordan, on
whom I now call.
12. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): As this is the first occasion
on which I have spoken before the Council this month, I
wish to extend to you and to friendly Nigeria my most
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the current month of March and to
wish you every successin your lofty office. I am confident
that your seasoned diplomacy will stand you in good stead.
13. I cannot miss this occasion to extend my heartfelt
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Abdalla
Bishara of Kuwait, for his exemplary performance as President for the month of February, which witnessed one of the
most turbulent, gruesome and dangerous challenges in the
annals of the Security Council. Astronomers. of old attributed such turbulence to over-activity of sunspots. With a
steadily compromised ozone layer, we seem to be getting
more vulnerable to their impact on our mother earth.

18. In the month of January my Government’s instructions were to initiate the complaint with the three new
additional settlements: Nuwei’meh, a suburb of Jericho and
a major water resource; a new settlement in the Kfar Etzion
complex, between Bethlehem and Hebron; and Huwwara,
a few miles to the east of Nablus. In the interim these have
been superseded by newer ones either already constructed,
under construction or in the offing. But the map circulated
to the Council, even without the additional signposts, is as
sordid, horrendous and dark as malignant out-of-control
cancerous cells, rashes of bubonic plague which have eaten
away and continue to erode any viable or meaningful existence for the Palestinian people in their occupied homeland,
and, indeed, any future tenable existence at all.

14. As I look around this prestigious chamber I feel a very
deep and heartfelt sense of sorrow that an illustrious colleague, an elderly and wise statesman to whom the Council
has listened and whom it has seen around more than any
2

_

19. Since 1967 we have been requesting,pleadingwithand’
urging the General Assembly and the Security Council to
take decisive measures to bring the Israeli usurpers, highway robbers and warmongers to their senses-these words
,are not adjectives, but they are descriptive-and to desist
and rescind all those measures which flagrantly and blatantly violate international law, the inalienable rights of the
indigenous people and the fourth Geneva Convention of
1949,’ which is both foithright and categorical in providing
for the safeguarding of the rights of the civilian population
under occupation.

perverted, primitive: and obsessed orientation-its
technology notwithstanding-masquerading
in the name of
religious .and racist exclusiveness and fanaticism, totally
oblivious of the glorious movement of humanity’s liberation over the past three decades, a movement that represents a hallmark of our United Nations accomplishments.
24. I turn from generalities to specifics. What, exactly
have the Israeli occupation authorities perpetrated up to the
end of 1978, and beyond7
25. Israel has so far expropriated, according to my
Government’s statistics, 1~62$000 dunums of- land-i
dunum is 1,000 square metres. Israeli statistics concede the
confiication of 1.5 million dunums. Even accepting Israeli
figures, we seethat the confiicated lands constitute 27.3 per
cent of the total area of the tiny West Bank. Our own figures
would, of course, come to 29 per cent.

20. The Security Council and other United Nations
bodies have been consistently responsive to our pleas in
words and resolutions, for which we are most grateful, but
incredibly ineffectual and paralysed in actions and deeds.
Their masterly inaction and complacency have already
created an untenable and impossible situation which renders any talk about a peaceful resolution of the over-all
conflict chimerical, meaningless and downright deceptive.
We may well have reached a point of no return geared to the
abyss of a collision course towards disaster. It is perfectly
understandable to talk about Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) in the abstract as a feasible
framework for bringing about a peaceful resolution to the
Middle East cot&t. But what is not understandable is the
failure to recognize. in spite of repeated warnings that the
Israeli occupation authorities have over the past 11 years
preempted and torpedoed the letter and spirit of the said
resolutions on the ground.

26. The confiscated lands, buildings and properties fall
into the following categories.
27. First, the so-called State domains, which are, in fct,
the communal possession of the various town and village
centres and which have been utilized by them for countless
centuries. Thus the 60,009 dunums confiscated at Khan
ul-Ahmar, 10 miles from the River Jordan and where the
Israeli occupation has constructed an industrial complex
with complete infrastructure and housing, belong indisputably to the villagers of Eizariyan, Abu Dees and Silwansuburbs of Jerusalem. It is there that the villagers have been
cultivating and grazing for centuries.

21. The Israelis are undiiguisedly determined to seize the
land and resources and to dispose of the Palestinian people
when there is nothing left for them to survive on. T’he
resolutions have for all intents and purposes been butchered, as have all previous United Nations resolutions,
notably General Assembly resolution 181 (II) and 194 (III),
upon whose inherent and iegal validity Israel wasconditiontiy admitted to membership in the United Nations after
;olernnly pledging to honour and to implement them, only
:o renege having achieved its objective of being admitted to
he United Nations.

28. Secondly, co&cation of the lands and properties of
the so-called absentee owners. These are all Palestinian
West Bank inhabitants who happened to be outside the
country when the June 1967 war broke out. They have been
denied repatriation to their homes and homelands, and yet
the Israelis call them absentees.
29. Thirdly, foreclosure and confiscation of lands in the
West Bank, even when the owners are right there, on the
spurious, notorious and inimical grounds of so-called security and military needs. What security or military grounds
can be served by depriving a villager of his life-sustaining
livelihood is a question that only the Mafia-Israeli military
commanders can answer.

22. When the very survival and continued existence of the
remnants of the Palestinian people on the remnants of their
ancestral homeland stand in the gravest jeopardy, when an
uninterrupted historical and treasured legacy dating back to
at least 8,000 years of recorded history is committed to
demise, and when one of Islam’s three holiest places has
been committed by the Israeli invaders to strangulation
prior to destruction, then our response is that when it
reaches the point of “to be or not be”, the whole Arab world
and the 800 million adherents of the Islamic faith, as well as
all peace-loving peoples everywhere, will see to it that in
God’s measured time those fiendish and retrogressive policies of blatant aggression will not be countenanced or
allowed to pass unredeemed, no matter how long or how
much it takes to undo them.

30. It is noteworthy to recall that when recently the villagers of Nabi Salih-to the west of Jerusalem-whose
lands had been expropriated by the military dictatorship on
the ground that the villagers did not possess title deedsbrought an action before the Supreme Court, thev produced documentation and evidence of uninterrupted possession, documentation that included tax payment receipts.
When the villagers won the case, the Israeli Government
ceased the confiscation of other lands on the ground of
validity of possession. All its notices of expropriation to the
victims have since been based on grounds of security of
military needs, over which the courts have no jurisdiction
whatsoever. I believe that one of those old military decrees
are in the files that we have distributed to the members of
the Council. They are in Hebrew, and we ma& a brief
translation of the orders.

23. It is becoming clearer every day that it is well-nigh
impossible to reason with a politically and emotionally
1United Nations, Z’reu~y Series, vol. 75, p. 287.

3

3 1. Fourthly, forcing the farmers to substitute their lands
for more marginal ones, thus resulting in further land fragmentation, dispersal and flight from the land to the slavelabour market of the Israeli economy or emigration for the
third or fourth time in a lifetime.

population along the way. At least, that is how Sharon
calculates. I have an interview given by General Sharon
which I hope I will have an opportunity to read to the
Council. For, since there is an ever-expanding universe, why
not an infinitely expanding Jerusalem? At present it constitutes one fifth of the entire West Bank.

32. Fifthly, there have been instances of outright forgeries
in collusion with the occupation authorities, where individuals who neither owned nor had any entitlement to a piece
of land had sold it on false pretences. The Arab and Israeli
newspapers published several instances of such calculated
fraud. It was really a scandal.

39. Racist and religious exclusiveness is best proved by the
fact that after the 1967 war the Israeli authorities advised
that no construction or settlement should take place in the
western parts of Jerusalem, which are far more spacious but
which are already usurped and under Israeli control, but
should take place in the Palestinian Arab Eastern sectors in
order to close the ring and choke the Palestinian inhabitants.

33. The close to one third of the West Bank that has so far
been expropriated has not spared a single area or location.
Upwards of 79 settlements-today,
we discovered that
there are 80 with the establishment of Matityahu on 500
dunums-and residential areas colonized by the Israelisof which there were 68 up to the end of 1978-have been
constructed on 347,874 dunums of private lands, and their
breakdown is indicative, beyond any shadow of a doubt, of
the over-all strategy and strategic plans that the Israeli
usurpers are bent on achieving, time and the availability of
sufficient immigrants being the only constraints. Money is
evidently abundant from outside countries in the clutches of
Zionist distortion.

40. Secondly, in Ramallah and Bireh townships there are
35,600 dunums upon which 12 settlements have been
constructed.
41. Thirdly, in Hebron, in the towns of Bethlehem and
Jericho 116,000 dunums have been colonized in 12 settlements.
42. Fourthly, in Nablus, in the cities of Tulkarm and Jenin
20,860 dunums have been colonized in 14 settlements. That
represents part of the Likud policy of Israel’s creeping
expansion from the west into the Palestinian Arabs’ remaining habitat in the east. I shall elaborate later on the strategic
plans of both the labour coalition and the Likud.

34. The geographic breakdown of coionization on parts
of the 1.5 million dunums of land is as follows: Jerusalem
and its environs: 94,564 dunums. The Israeli settlers in Arab
Jerusalem are estimated at 40,000 to 50,000 intruders. But
numbers, ominous though they may be, fail to convey the
full tale.

43. Fifthly, in the Jordan Valley 80,700 dunums have
been colonized in 19 settlements. I should add here that but
for the town of Jericho and a few adjacent agricultural
Palestinian Arab villages such as ‘Uojah, the whole af the
Jordan Valley in the West Bank from south to north, from
Beisan to the Dead Sea is firmly settled by Israeli colonizers.
Not only have they bored deep water wells which turned-the
existing Arabs wells dry or excessively saline but they have
also been pumping as much water as they needed to maximize their exploitation of thii fertile off-season valley at the
expense of the Palestinian farmers. My Government’s tigures indicate that there are already over 90,000 Israeli colonizers in Arab Jerusalem, its environs and the rest of the West
Bank.

35. I show the Council a map of Jerusalem as it was in
1948, and it showsconclusively that West Jerusalem-apart
from the Jerusalem of. 1967-belonged predominantly to
the Palestinian population. This is a map that was drawn
under the supervision of the then British Chief Justice Fitzgerald. I request that this be circulated among the members
of the Council.
36. By Israeli colonization, Palestinian Arab East Jerusalem, merely a small portion of Palestinian Arab Jerusalem
of 1948, which included over 70 per cent of western misnamed “Israeli Jerusalem”, has been expanded fifteenfold.
It stretches at present from the doorstep of Bethlehem in the
south to the twin towns of Ramallah and Bireh in the
north-a stretch of 40 kilometres.

44. I have spoken about land and people in as broad and
as abridged a presentation as I possibly could to convey the
message without imposing excessively on your precious
time.

37. As if that were not enough, General Sharon has disclosed his designs to increase Jerusalem’s population to 1
million. Where will this avalanche of people settle? General
Sharon reckons on the following possibilities.

45. I feel in duty bound, however, to acquaint the Council
with another dimension of the plight of our people under
occupation, and one which many believe goes a long way
towards explaining one of the ultimate aims of Israeli coloni&ion. The sickening repetition by the Israeli aggressors
that it is on security grounds is not even worth replying to
because one of the foremost objectives of Israeli planners is
to exploit the water resources of the West Bank which
amoun’s to 895 million cubic metres.

38. First, the compulsive fading away of the 100,000
Palestinian Arab Jerusalemites, weary and exhausted by the
strangulation of an untenable and ghetto-like existence, or
so he calculates. Furthermore, if East Jerusalem’s boundaries have been expanded with impunity to Bethlehem and
Ramallah, the difficulties should not be insurmountable to
expand them much further to Hebion in the south and to
Nablus in the north, incorporating the lands, residential
quarters and villages of an ever-more depleted and stagnant

46. Considering that the consumption of water in the
West Bank did not exceed 120 million cubic metres in 1977
because of Israeli control of Palestinian wells by the installa4

tion of meters on existing wells, the destruction d others
and the refusal to give any permits for additional drillingexcept of course to the Israeli colonizers-in addition to the
stagnation if not the gradual depletion of the existing population, it will be seen that a substantial surplus of unutilized
water, amounting to 630 to 750 million cubic metres of
water tit for irrigation, domestic consumption and industrial uses, remains in the West Bank.

of cutting off the West Bank’s nouulated areas from anv
physical contact with East Jordan & contiguous territori&.
The fa.ct that Palestinians are occasionally allowed to visit
their closest kin on the West Bank is part of the lucrative
tourist plans, after the capture of Holy Jerusalem and its
Holy Places, which at present bring into Israel’s coffers
close to $1 billion per annum. Agricultural exports are
permitted in order to prevent them from competing and
beating the highly subsidized Israeli products. This belt of
the Jordan Valley is known in political terms as the “Allon
line” or plan, with its accompanying wire fences, electronic
equipment and colonization.

47. In 1977 the water resources from various sources
in the 1948 Israeli-held territories were estimated at
1,650,000,000 cubic metres according to the figures presented by the Israelis to the United Nations Conferenceon
Desertiflcation held at Nairobi in September 1977. Thirtysix per cent, or the equivalent of 610 million cubic metres is
procured from Lake Tiberius and the fountainhead of the
Yarkun Riverin Palestine, both of which derive water from
the watershed of Syria, the River Jordan and its tributaries.
The confluence runs in two lines across the centre of the
country to the south and thence to the Negeb at a capacity
of 290 million cubic metres per annum. The remaining 64
per cent is derived from water wells bored in the mountainous regions, the coastal area and other accumulations.

53. The second belt at present comprises nine agricultural
and industrial complexes, the biggest being the Khan ulAhmar industrial town, 10 miles from the Jordan River.
Those colonies are located on the highlands of the Jordan
rift, starting at the Jerusalem-Jericho road and connecting
with the first belt of settlements at the West Bank’s northern
armistice line with Israel. A new so-called Allon Plan Road
was constructed to connect the colonies on the highland
with those in the Jordan Valley. Large water pipes are
bringing water down the hills to those colonies from the
EinFara water spring which used to supply Jerusalem’s
water needs when our main source up to 1948, Ras el-Ein in
the plains of Palestine, was cut off from us.

48. With the manifold increase in the Israeli population as
a consequence of vast immigration and the expansion of
agricultore and industry, the consumption of-water for
agriculture, industry and domestic usesof Palestine-tumedIsrael, has increased from 426 million cubic metres in 1948
to 1,600 million cubic metres in 1977.

54. A primary objective of those two belts-apart from
sheer colonization and economic exploitation-is
to contain the Palestinian population by completing their encirclement from the north, west, south and east.

49. Consequently, since the early 1970s Israel has been
consuming all the available water resources.This year water
consumption will approximate 1,820 million cubic metres.
In 1985 consumption is expected to reach between 2 billion
and 2.1 billion cubic metres. With an expected deficit of
between 400 and 500 million cubic metres-assuming that
agricultural consumption remains constant-the Israeli
authorities decided long ago to carry out a massive hijacking of the water resources of the West Bank, together with
the land and the people, and to suck the blood and water of
the Palestinian people in order to satisfy their own avarice
and expansion.

55. The third belt of colonization. in accelerated imnlementation by the present Likud Government, is the e&blishment of a chain of colonies along the entire length of the
western highlands of the northern, central and southern
parts of the West Bank. This is designed to meet the terrorist
Herut Party’s strategic objectives on the West Bank, which
Begin, the alien from another continent, never tires of calling part of “greater Israel”, in speaking of the liberated
terrritories. That third belt is moving the former Israeli
armistice line right inside the Palestinian populated areas
and hinterland. It is also designed to vivisect the populated
areas of the West Bank into smaller areas. The containment
of the Palestinians would be facilitated by enclosing them
from all sides.

50. Anyone in his senseswho is beguiled into thinking that
the Israelis will ever voluntarily relinquish the occupied
territories must be either ignorant of their plans and mtentions or simply glossing over them pretending that they do
not exist and timidly refusing to confront their implications
for the survival of the Palestinian people. The Israelis are
behaving like vampires and vultures which prey on the
remains of the victims. The last thing that they want is to live
and let live. As the Palestinians adamantly refuse to fade
away, the Israeli occupation authorities have devised an
over-all strategy to contain what they regard, not as fellow
human beings but as impediments to be removed.

56. To supplement this plan of control several lateral
highways have been constructed or are under construction
to connect 1948 Israel with the three belts. One highway
connects Latrun on the Jaffa-Jerusalem road with Qalandii, 15 kilometres from Jerusalem, where a 61-industry
complex has been constructed. Another, in the southern
region of the West Bank, is already open and asphalted
half-way to the Dead Sea. A third highway called “TransSamarian Highway” would bisect the northern regions of
the West Bank and is at present under construction.
Another lateral highway farther north is still in the planning
stage.

51. I shall try to explain the strategic objectives of the
policy of settlement and colonization.

57. On 18 January 1979 Begin’s Government allocated
some $40 million for expanding and speeding up the settlements, as well as for constructing power, water,‘sewage and
telephone lines in that third belt of colonies.

52. First, there are at present three substantial belts of
settlements. The first and one of the earliest is almost the
whole of the Jordan Valley on the West Bank, with the aim
5

,

58. As for the high-rise residential fortresses which forma
ring around our Holy City of Jerusalem, one of -the main
objectives is to create in the inhabitants of Jerusalem a
psychological feeling of living in aghetto- which is already
there-in the hope of causing the Palestinians of Jerusalem
to emigrate and leave a monolithic Israeli possession of the
entire city.
59. The Israeli Government coalition blocs on 29 January
1979 approved a special draft legislation to compel all foreign embassies to transfer to Jerusalem. We are confident
that none will comply with that illegality, whose consequences would result in fundamental reappraisal of many countries’ relati&hips
with those which may comply, in
violation of solemn resolutions of the United Nations. But
Zionist blackmail has no limits and no regard for other
States’ national interests. They have already started a campaign which will be intensified in May in this host country to
achieve their end.

figures, there’are 25 setflements in the Gaza Strip and Sinai
and 27 settlements in the Golan Heights. My colleague, the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
which has two excellent research centres on Palestinian
studies, could enlighten the Council on the over-all colonixation of Palestine.
65. The Israeli indulgence in these aggressive and reprehensible policies mirrors the manner in which the Israeli
aggressors view the occupied territories and their inhabitants as objects to be exploited, and not as human beings
whose inherent and inalienable worth must be respected in
spite of their temporary adversity.
66. Even the environment and ecology-God’s
great
creation-are viewed with disrespect and derision, which
only usurpers and aliens to the land are prone to perpetrate.
67. How would the Council react ,if I were to recall to
members-I
am ‘sure they have read about it-that the
Israelis have already drawn up a notorious plan to bring the
Mediterranean Sea to traverse and inundate regions of the
occupied West Bank and downhill to the River Jordan,
sacred to hundreds of millions, and thence to the Dead Sea
for dumping. The Israelis are seriously studying this ecological crime to generate electricity and bring Mediterranean
saline waterways and ports to the Jordan Valley. Does it
very much matter to them if in the process large areas of the
occupied West Bank are laid to waste, if the River Jordan
becomes so saline as to be unfit for human, animal and
plants, and if the Dead Sea bursts its shores and drowns
large areas of the East Bank? It may seem like fantasy or
clever engineering-but at what cost to the Holy Land and
its Palestinian and Jordanian people?

60. In the meantime, their desecration of Al-Haram alShareef area, and particularly the endless deep diggings
below the foundations of the Al-Aqsa Holy Mosque, the
fmt Qibla in Islam, threatens that most sacred Islamic
sanctuary with eventual collapse-and the process is continuing.
61. Similarly, the holy sanctuary of Al-Haram alIbrahimi in Hebron, which for 14 centuries has been an
Islamic mosque and was never for one day a Jewish synagogue has, for all intents and purposes, now been transformed into a Jewish synagogue. Almost daily, night and
day, the settlers at Kiiat Araba and Israelis from other
parts of Palestine break into the mosque, molest worshippers and shout obscene language at the Moslem worshippers and attendants. During the past two months an
intensified campaign was begun by the Jewish colon&s,
under the protection of the occupation authorities, to complete the transformation of that 14-century-oId mosque into
a synagogue and to deny the Moslems even the right to
worship, especially on Saturdays. The main and spacious
prayer court of the mosque has already been occupied. The
head of the Supreme Islamic Council has described the
situation as intolerable and has launched an urgent appeal
for action.

68. Having outlined to the Council the magnitude and
manifold aspects of this cursed Israeli aggression, what a
pale and futile mockery becomes any talk about live and let
live-coexistence is possible only if one of the two parties
does exist-about peace and stability in the Middle East
and far beyond, how shallow and meaningless become
references to Security Council resolutions, General Assembly resolutions, let alone other magical frameworks for peace.
69. Holy Jerusalem will never be alienated from the
hundreds of millions who revere it as an integral part of
their religious and historical legacy; the Palestinians will
never forsake their ancestral homeland. Elemental justice,
the rule of law in international relations and a scrupulous
observance of Security Council and other United Nations
resolutions. are the only guarantee of regional, as well as
world, peace and security.

62. It is the butcher’s knife operating systematically and
relentlessly to vivisect, isolate and cut into bits and pieces
what used to be a contiguous West Bank and an Arab
Jerusalem.
63. I have confined my remarks to the all-out colonization
of Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank. Our latest
reports indicate that 27 new additional settlements are being
planned-the only impediment to implementation being
the lack of people and time. General Sharon’s target is to
achieve parity in the occupied territories between the Palestinian population and the Israeli settlers. As I said, money is
abundant from other nations’ taxpayers and exploitation.

70. It is for these compelling reasons that my Government
urges the Council to act forcefully and in unison to compel
Israel to desist from any further cannibalization of the
Palestinian and. other Arab occupied lands and people.
Furthermore, we urge the Council to serve notice on Israel
that continued failure to heed the Council’s resohnions
would be met by the application of Chapter VII of the
Charter, which provides for appropriate sanctions against
deftint and recalcitrant Members.

64. My colleagues, the representatives of Syria and Egypt,
would be better qualiied to acquaint the Council with the
magnitude of Israeli colonixation in the Gaza Strip, Sinai
and the Golan Heights. According to my Government’s
6

?I. What is at stake is nothing less than literally the very
survival of the Palestinian people in their homeland and,.
hence, the possibility or otherwise of achieving a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East. There was a time when
States were obsessed with the survival of Israel. The time is
long overdue when the world should become concerned
about Israel’s conquests and aggrandizement and be seized
of the fate of the Palestinian people.

news only two nights ago. Mr. Begin was addressing a
2,000-member audience in New York of leaders of the
major Jewish organizations in America, He said that during L
his four-day stay in Washington even he himself was,
amazed by the great power which the AmericanJewish
community wielded there. But then he added: When the
time comes don’t hesitate to use that influence.”
78. I must say, I was nonplussed by this-blatant and open
indiscretion and, I would say, travesty. Here is the Prime
Minister of a foreign country enticing American citizens to
go over the heads and subdue the legitimate decision
makers of a super-Power, or even if it was not a superPower, of any foreign Government, if that Power did not
conform fully with Begin’s tune.

72 MY delegation urges the Security Council to agree on
three steps which are consonant with its own resolutions
and solemn responsibilities and which should therefore be
acceptable.
73. First, the Council should resolve that an immediate
moratorium be imposed and meticulously observed by the
Israeli occupation authorities on further Israeli colonization and expropriation of Palestinian and other Arab
occupied lands. This is indeed an acid test of whether or not
the Council is seriously concerned about the survival of the
Palestinian people. The Secretary-General should be entrusted, through an already existing United Nations presence in the old Government House in occupied Jerusalem,
which can be augmented by a few personnel, with day-to&y monitoring and reporting, to ensure compliance with
the resolution of the Council. This would be just a preliminary first-aid effort to stop the blood-letting. We must
emphasize within this context that the occupied territories
have no *‘protecting State” and are totally at the merciless
whim of the occupation authority.

79. If an ordinary American citizen like Billy Carter is
hounded by various agencies of the United States Govemment, including a grand jury, is it not pertinent for an
onlooker, a foreign observer-and I can even be regarded as
a journalist-who
has no right to meddle in the affairs of
other countries to ask: why is it that those investigative
bodies have not seen tit to probe the great and undue
influence which a relatively small segment of the American
people evidently wield, as Mr. Begin boastfully asserts in
Washington? The revelations might well be stunning. Is it
all innocent, legal and totally consonant with the established laws of the land? Are there people above the law and
immune to its provisions? Does Mr. Begin claim to possess
extraterritorial historical rights in this great country, as he
always claims he has over the tiny West Bank and other
occupied Arab territories? I am sure that millions of people
all over the world are eagerly awaiting an answer to this
unique puzzle.

74. Secondly, the Council should resolve to send a threemember or live-member commission from amongst its
membership to investigate the situation on the spot, and to
report back to the Council, not later than 1 May or the end
of May, on the authenticity or otherwise of our complaint.
No courts, national or international, worthy of their name,
should shy away from at least investigating a very grave and
genuine complaint by an aggrieved party gripped with
alarm over its survival and destiny.

80. Incidentally, only yesterday afternoon I received a
copy of a letter from one who seems to be one of those
millions who are awaiting an answer to the puzzle I have
just posed. The letter is from an American citizen of Palestinian extraction and was addressed to the President of the
United States. With the Council’s indulgence, I shall read it
out.

75. Thirdly, if the findings of the Council commission
should confirm the authenticity and substance of the complaint, it should become logically inescapable that the
Council should exercise the powers vested in it by the
Charter, including Chapter VII, to ensure compliance.

[ne speaker read out the letter contained in document
S/13149, annex IV.]

8 1. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on whom I now call.

76: I am certain that the Security Council will one day be
seized of this most alarming problem, but under conditions
more dangerous and sanguinary. Perhaps a timely intervention now would be preferable to such an eventuality. After
all, we are all seeking a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace. And besides, has it not been the Council’s responsibility to implement Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and other United Nations resolutions in all their
aspects? It is 11 years since the former resolution was
adopted. What has come of that? Or are we to assume that
there is an invisible omnipotent power-it is becoming
more visible every day-which seems to carry more weight
than the collective power and will of the highest executive
organ of the United Nations?

82. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, let me begin by
paying my respects to you as President of the Security
Council for this month.
83. We stand today at a sensitive stage of the negotiations
towards the attainment of peace in the Middle East. Israel
has clearly demonstrated the earnestness of its commitment
to the peace effort. Last September, a framework for peace
in the Middle East, based on Security Council resolution
242 (1967), was agreed upon at Camp. David, and, since
then, remarkable progress has been made in the direction of
peace, showing that the principles contained in the framework are constructive and sound, indeed more fruitful than
any peace effort which our region has known in the last 30
years,

77. Perhaps it is enlightening in this context to convey to
the Council excerpts of what I heard on the CBS evening
7

Jewish sovereignty.” With those words, quotations from
the principles of the Herut movement, headed by Menathem Begm-the current Prime Minister of Israel-I
believe I have, in a few words, diagnosed the evil that the
Security Council will deal with in this series of meetings.

84. ‘Jordan was invited to join the peace negotiations. It
rejected this invitation and continues to do so. Instead, it
allied itself with the enemies of peace. It attended the Arab
summit held at Baghdad last November and subscribed to
its bellicose-declarations and designs. Since then, it has gone
out of its way to demonstrate its loyalty to the so-called
rejection& Arab States and all they stand for.

93. Mr. President, on behalf of the Palestinian people and
its representative the Palestine Liberation Organization, I
wish to thank you, and through you, the members of the
Council who voted in favour of inviting us to participate in
the deliberations of this Council. To you, a devoted militant
in the struggle against all forms of racism, particularly
apartheid, I should like to express our sincere hope that
under your guidance the Council will reach a decision and
find the means ta put an end ta the prolonged illegal accupation and the ensuing misery, an end to the denial of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people which engenders
legitimate resistance, including armed resistance, an end ta
bloodshed and the explosive situation that is not only a
threat to peace and security in occupied Palestinian towns
and villages, but also a threat that reaches out ta the entire
Middle East and the world. Yes, the Security Council is
dealing with a very explosive situation. The Zionist racist
forces of occupation are set upon a course leading ta the
elimination of the Palestinian from his homeland-virtual
genocide. From the outset let me make it clear that what has
really been happening was the vision-ta us the nightmare-of the founder of Zionism, Theodor Herzl. In his
teachings, he predicated the “spiriting away” of the Palestinians. Thus, what the Council will be considering is a
constant in the racist Zionist ideology, policy and practices.

85. That is the reason whv Jordan has reauested the
debate which is taking place-here to&y. For ihe last few
weeks it has publicized its intentions in the Jordanian press,
radio and television. Even the most cursory monitoring of
its media reveals that it has made no secret of the fact that it
wants a debate calculated to throw difIiculties in the way of
the peace initiative in the Middle East. The sudden urgency
which it has claimed for the debate this week has been
occasioned only by the momentous talks which it knew
would be held .in the Middle East now. It is no coincidence
that the Council was pressed into meeting on the very eve of
the arrival in Jerusalem of the President. of the United
States.
86. Jordan’s intentions can only be deemed subversive to
the promotion of international peace and security-antithetical to everything that should guide the Council in the
fulfilment of its mandate under the Charter of the United
Nations, its principles and purposes.
87. There are some, no doubt, who recognize the significance of this moment in the peace process, but none the less
may find it diicult to resist the temptation to try to gain
certain political advantages by participating in this debate.
Such tactics can scarcely be regarded as helpful and hence
can only be regretted.

94. It is not my intention to recall all that the United
Nations, in its different organs and agencies, has been
through as a result of Israel’s persistent policy and practices,
and its complete disregard of and contempt far the United
Nations. The Council has been seized of this situation several times. In March 1976 it considered a draft resolution
which read, inter aI&

88. <The Jordanian initiative is mischievous and obstructive to the cause of international peace. The acrimonious
and scurrilous style of the statement just delivered by the
representative of Jordan-not
to speak of what I would
term, for the sake of courtesy towards him, gross inaccuracies-only confumed what was evident in advance;
that is, the real intentions underlying this initiative. Israel
will not lend a hand to Jordan’s transparent design.

[ZXe speaker read outparagraphs I to 3 of draft resolution
S/12022.]

At the end of the deliberations and voting, the result of
the vote was as follows: 14 votes in favour and one against.
Since a permanent member of the Council cast a negative
vote, the draft resolution was not adopted [Z899th meeting].
Obviously, the negative vote wasthat of the United States of
America. This definitely encouraged Israel ‘to ‘pursue its
policy and practices. The Council convened again in May
1976 to consider the situation. No resolution was adopted.

89. It should be within the power of the Council to resist
manipulation and to allow the current peace processwhere all the issues will find their rightful place and appropriate solution-to succeed.
90. Israel will follow the deliberations of the Council
closely. It reserves its right to participate and will set out its
position fully at a less inopportune moment in an altogether
inopportune debate.

95. As a result of the persistent Israeli policy and practices, the Council had ta canvene once again to consider the
same matter, in October 1976. During the consultations it
transpired that the United States would maintain its solidarity with the forces of illegal occupation. Instead of adapting
a resolution, the Council, at its 1969th meeting, authorized
the President to make the fallowing statement:

91. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I
now call.
92. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
“The Hebrew homeland, on both banks of the Jordan
River, is a historical and geographical whole.” ‘The partition of the homeland is an illegal act and does not bind the
Jewish people.*’ “ The task of this generation is to reunite
the divided parts of the homeland and establish on them

“Fallowing the request submitted by Egypt an 20
October 1976, the Security Council held four meetings
between 1 and 11 November to consider the situation in
the occupied Arab territories, with the participation of
8

other members of the Council, it was in no position to cast a
courageous vote and uphold what the morals and traditions
of the United States dictate.

the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization. After consulting all the members, the President of
the Council states that the Council has agreed:
“1. To express its grave anxiety and concern over the
present serious situation in the occupied Arab territories
as a result of continued Israeli occupation.

99. The situation was further aggravated. At its thirtysecondsessionthe General Assembly decidedto consider,
as a matter of priority and urgency, an item entitled:
“Recent illegal Israeli measuresin the occupied Arab territories designedto change the legal status, geographical
nature and demographiccomposition of thoseterritories in
contravention of the principlesof the Charter of the United
Nations, of Israel’s international obligations under the
fourth Geneva Convention of 1949and of United Nations
resolutions,and obstruction of efforts aimedat achieving a
just and lasting peace in the Middle Past”. By an overwhelming majority of 131 positive votes to one negative
vote-that of Israel-the Assembly adopted resolution
.32/5, reading in part as follows:

“2. To reaffirm its call upon the Government of Israel
to ensure the safety, welfare and security of the inhabitants of the territories and to facilitate the return of
those inhabitants who have fled the areas since the outbreak of hostilities.
“3. To reaffirm that the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War is
applicable to the Arab territories occupied by Israel since
1967. Therefore, the occupying Power is called upon
once again to comply strictly with the provisions of that
Convention and to refrain from any measures that violates them. In this regard, the measures taken by Israel in
the occupied Arab territories which alter their demographic composition or geographical character, and in
particular the establishment of settlements, are strongly
deplored. Such measures, which have no legal validity
and cannot prejudge the outcome of the efforts to
achieve peace, constitute an obstacle to peace.”

“Dererminesthat all such measuresand actionstaken
by Israel in the Palestinianand other Arab territories
occupiedsince1967have no legalvalidity and constitute
a seriousobstruction of efforts aimedat achieving a just
and lasting peacein the Middle Past;
“...
“Calls upon Israel to comply strictly with its intemational obligations in accordance with the principles of
international law and the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Personsin
Time of War, of 12 August 1949”.

I shall limit myself to reading that part of the President’s
statement.
96. At that samemeeting the then representativeof the
United States made the following statement:
“Mr. President,the United Stateshasjoined the other
membersof the Security Council in the consensusstatement which you have read out becausewe believethat
statementaffirms severalimportant principles in regard
to the occupied territories. First is the principle that the
fourth Geneva Convention appliesto the presentsituation in the occupied territories. Under that Convention
and under international law the occupying Power has
rights as well as responsibilities.Secondly, we have supported and we continue to support the principle that
personsdisplacedin the 1967war shouldbe permitted to
return to their placesof habitation at the time of that
war. Finally, we welcomethe concern in that statement
for the sanctity of the Holy Places,which we considerto
be a particularly sensitiveand important matter.”

Naturally, the United Statescould not decidewhether what
the international community consideredto be illegal was
also illegal according to the jurists and politicians of the
Government of the United States.It just abstained-again,
a gestureof encouragementto Israel.

I still cannot understand why the representative of the
United Statescould not have voted in favour of a resolution
embodying the sametext, but of courseit is beyond me to
judge the action of a sovereigncountry and a permanent
member of the Council.

101. As if the United Nations was not really ample
enough, international and different national organizations
sought to find out the truth. l?zeSunday Timesof London
in-depth study is a very well known document. The reports
of Amnesty International are also very well known. The
SwissLeaguefor Human Rightsvisited the occupied Palcstinian territories in June and July 1977to form a concrete
idea concerningthe situation of the inhabitants of the occupied territories. The Swissdelegationreported that forms of
torture in Israeli prisons included, among other things, the
following: burning by applying lighted cigarettebutts to any
part of the body, beating with sticks, canesor bludgeons,
forcing bottles or other objectsup the rectum or the vagina,
pulling fingernails, forcing an individual to lap his food
directly off the floor. All thesethings were reported by the,
SwissLeaguefor Human Rights.

100. I shallsparethe Council the long list of resolutionsof
the General Assembly on Israeli practices affecting the
human rights of the population of the occupiedterritories.
The reports of the SpecialCommittee to Investigate Israeli
PracticesAffecting the Human Rights of the Population of
the Occupied Territories are self-explanatory and portray
the reality. The Committee has repeatedly been denied
accessto the occupied territories.

97. Be that asit may, the attitude of the United Statesdid
encouragethe so-calledhard-liners in Israel-the hawkish
hawks; I know of no Zionist dovesin the Zionist movement.
This encouragementwas to a certain extent reflected in the
elections held in Israel, electionsthat brought Menachem
Begin and his Fasciststo power.
98. It had becomeclear that through the despotismof the
veto the United States had rendered the Security Council
ineffective. Although the United Statesfully agreedwith the
9

102. And, in the United States, in February 1978 the
National Executive Board of the National Lawyers Guild
adopted a resolution wherein, inter alia, it condemned
“Israel’s illegal occupation of the West Bank and
Gaza and the violations there being committed of the
civil and political rights of the Palestinian people, including: geation of settlements by citizens of Israel in the
West Bank and Gaxa; numerous incidents of torture
committed by police, military and intelligence authori:
ties of detainees during interrogation”-of
which the
Lawyers Guild had substantial evidence-“demolition
of houses and other forms of collective punishment for
the acts of individuals; numerous instances of deportation of detainee inhabitants from the West Bank and
Gaza; detention of persons without charges for long
periods; operation of severely overcrowded prisons; failure to allow reunion of family members’*.

“Israeli restrictions on governmental, medical, educational and social welfare institutions in the West Bank
and Gaza reflect a policy of suppression of selfgovernance. This policy is consistent with the aforementioned Israeli aim of incorporating the West Bank
and Gaza into Israel. Further, this policy exceeds the
authority of an occupying Power under the fourth Geneva Convention, which permits no interference with
local institutions save for security considerations.”
106. It is no secret that the racist Zionists control the
occupied Palestinian territories by military rule. Foreign
domination and repression engender resistance by the
victims, who exercise their inalienable right to resistincluding armed resistance. In occupied Palestinian territories, the forces of occupation still apply a set of laws called
the Defence (Emergency) Regulations which were first
imposed in Palestine during the British Mandate in September 1945. Dov Yosef, a Palestinian Jewish lawyer, and later
an Israeli Government minister, had the following to say:
“With regard to the security regulations, the question
is: Will we all be subject to official terrorism?“.
Another Palestinian Jewish lawyer, Yaakov Shimshon
Shapirah, who la,ter became Israeli Minister of Justice, had
the following to say:
‘The regime built in Palestine on the defence regulations has no parallel in any civilized nation. Even in Nazi
Germany there were no such laws . . . It is our duty to tell
the whole world that the defence regulations passed by
the Government of Palestine destroy the very foundations of justice in this land.”

103. The Lawyers Guild sponsored a visit to the Middle
East in July 1977. Adelegation of 10 members examined the
conditions of the Palestinian people living under Israeli
military occupation. A report was consequently prepared.
It represented the conclusions of all the members of the
delegation except one, and may I say here that the delegation was composed of a cross-section of American citizens,
some of the Jewish faith, some of Arab ancestry, some with
no such linkage. And, on the issue of illegal Israeli settlements, the report reads as follows:
“Israeli promotion of settlements’ in the West Bank
and Gaxa constitutes a violation of article 49 (6) of ‘the
fourth Geneva Convention. Although settlement policy
must be evaluated in the light of various motivations,
ultimately Israel’s policy must be evaluated and condemned in the light of repeated assertions by its leaders
that the settlements are intended to establish the new
borders of Israel. The annexation of East Jerusalem, in
violation of article 47 of the Convention, is representative of Israel’s desires . . .
“Beyond that, the settlements represent a serious
obstacle to peace, since the Palestinians perceive them as
Israel’s attempt to create permanent institutions.”

Yes, it is our duty as Palestinians to tell the whole world, and
particularly the Security Council, that Israel applied the
Defence (Emergency) Regulations against the Palestinian
Arabs in the territories occupied in 1948 until 1966, and
soon after the 1967 aggression it put those regulations into
effect in the rest of the occupied Palestinian territories,
namely, the West Bank and Gaxa.
107. I do not wish to cite all atrocities. Let it suffice for me
to quote the following as reported on 25 May 1978 in The
New York Timesby Anthony Lewis:
“Every family on the West Bank has its stories of
arbitrariness on the part of the occupation authorities:
the doctor humiliated by soldiers on the steps of his
hospital, the students detained without charge just long
enough to miss their exams and lose a year of school, the
lawyer forbidden without explanation to publish verbatim reports of judges’ decisions. Israelis.say they have to
act firmly for security reasons . . .
‘6. . .
“Some West Bank Palestinians think the occupation,
with its frictions and humiliations, is really designed to
make the intelligent and sensitive among them want to
get out-end ease the way for a permanent Israeli hold
on the territory.‘*

104. In 1969, 10,000 Bedouins were dispossessed of
250,000 acres in the southern Gaza region by Israeli forces.
On 22 December 1977, that is, eight years later, the Israeli
daily AI-Hamishmar described the situation of the Bedouins
in the Gam region as follows:
“North of Yamit.. . Bedouin families are being
chased away. They were forced to take apart their huts
and move to the palm-grove, close to the sea. Bulldozers
have covered the Bedouins’ plantations and blocked up
water-holes. . . The Bedouins then were forced to the
other side of the fence and are now enclosed by this fence
on all sides . . .*’-some sort of a concentration camp“It seems to be the authorities’ intention to concentrate
the Bedouins along the beach so-as to expel them later
more easily. . .‘* -and that would be sending them out
to sea.

I believe that Anthony Lewis has pinned the point exactly.

105. Now, on the issue of local institutions in theoccupied
Palestinian territories, the report of the American National
Lawyers Guild concludes:

108. Even the United States Department of State has
admitted violations of human rights by Israel. A member of
10

the United States Foreign Service had the conrage to
denounce publicly Israeli violations of human rights. The
United States Department of State tried to muzzle heranother flagrant violation of human rights. Why try to tell
the truth?
109. If I have described the attitude of the Government of
the United States as being an encouragement to the racist
Zionists so that they are enabled to pursue their persistent
policy and continue to be a threat to international peace and
security, to prolong their illegal occupation and to deny the
inalienable rights of almost 4 million Palestinians, it is
because the Government of the United States admits that it
has paid Israel from United States federal funds more than
$US 12,815 million during the period 1949-1978. Naturally,
the United States is free to spend the taxpayers* money the
way it chooses. But when the financial crisis of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East becomes acute, the Government of the
United States demands that its so-called contributions
should be matched by equal sums from other sources. It is
when the victims of aggression need help until their injustice
is redressed and they regain their rights that the funds of the
United States are “depleted”.
110. Let us review the pattern of the stalled assistance
by the United States to Israel. Of the almost $US 13 billion,
$US 177.5 million were granted to help settle immigrantsnew hordes of invaders who will colonize the territories
occupied since 1967-since the item “immigrant assistance” was introduced in 1972-if I am not mistaken. To
another item, entitled “Aid housing guarantee”, there was
allotted the sum of $US 175 million-of
which $150 million
was definitely granted after 1972. Minimal sums, some
might think, but not really so when almost $US 8 billion
were granted as “foreign military sales credit*‘. They call it
credit, but the truth’is that about 50 per cent of those loans
are “forgiven”. Those $US 8 billion are in addition to
another $US 3 billion labelled *‘security supporting assistance”, given mostly in the form of grants.

larwith the biions ofdollars they have been giving to Israel
in order to obstruct efforts for peace in the area. As spots
they reveal nothing, but let us look at the exact pattern of
these colonies. Members can see this brown belt on the map.
That connects the northern side of the West Bank to the
southern side of the West Bank. It is a Maginot Line, or a
Siegfried Line, or whatever you want to call it. It is primarily
intended to prevent the Palestinian Arabs from having any
contact with the rest of the Arab world and further to
strengthen this belt, the Allon Government-and
our colleague from Jordan has told us in detail what the Allon plan
was-installed another belt, there, a green one.
114. What is really saddening is that these orangecoloured spots on the map are not Jaffa oranges. No, they
are high-rises, fortresses that the Zionists have built around
Jerusalem to strangulate Jerusalem and to isolate it from
the rest of the Palestinian territories. As if these high-rises
and these two belts were not enough, Menachem Begin’s
Government, which is now talking about peace of courseand on one of the signs I saw in Cairo yesterday the word
“peace” was written “piece”, and I am sure they were really
thinking of the pieces into which Palestine wasbeing tomhas made this new bluish belt. That bluish belt would
minimize the Palestinian Arab territories here. It would
prevent the physical expansion of the Palestinians from the
inhabited areas here on the map from going a little further
to the west and that eventually would enlarge the purely
Judenreich. I am sorry I have to speak in that language but
this is a racist ideology I am discussing. This would be the
purely Jewish area all the way to the sea. This will be a
mixture with these settlements and some Palestinian Arabs,
#those who really can survive.
115. In addition to all that, they have constructed the
roads you seeon the map to connect the territories from the
coastline all the way to the Jordan River.
116. There is something still more alarming. The map
shows you how it looks now. The water resources in the
Jordan valley have all been expropriated. Only a few days
ago at the Nuweimeh camp, which was a refugee camp, the
Israelis authorized the establishment of a new colony. By
controlling the water resources at Nuweimeh and Ain elSultan the plain of Jericho, where 200.000 Palestinians and
more have lived, would be left without any water. That is
what we call the process of strangulation, of eliminating the
Palestinians by thirst. You see here some black squares on
the map. The black squares are deep wells, deeper than the
original wells that the Palestinian Arabs had. By digging
deeper wells, the Arab well, which is relatively shallow, will
dry up and will be saline.

111. The Government of the United States is subsidizine
an illegal occupation and “lactating” it. The United State;
Government is creating the explosive situation that we have
at hand. The Government of the United States is equally
responsible; it is a partner of the Israeli Zionists.
112. The representative of Jordan has presented a comprehensive, detailed report on the creeping expansionism
and annexation of Arab territories by the Zionist racists. To
this end, the World Zionist Organisation, from its offices in
New York, has budgeted 850 million Israeli pounds to
strengthen the settlements, and 15 per cent of that sum is
earmarked to strengthen the illegal settlements in Yamit.
Are we to recall Hitler’s Zebensraum or the invasion of
Poland for “security reasons”? I shall facilitate the task of
members of the Council and use visual aids.

1 lx’ That is what I thought I should bring to your attention in order to facilitate our deliberations and explain
exactly what is the so-&led future of the Palestinians under
Israeli rule.
118. The complete disregard for United Nations principles and resolutions is consistent with Zionist ideology,
policy and practices.

113. As you can see on this map, this is the West Bank and
you see those black spots here. Sometimes I like to use
humour: these are not beauty spots but are mines called
“settlements”. They are mines on the road to peace. They
are mines that are provided by the United States, in particu-

119. As has been explained, territorial expansionism conflicts with the demographic imperatives of zionism. Nazism
11

was based on_iude?trein, Zionism is based on Judertreich or
.Tudenstaat. In theccase of both nazism and zionism, it is

territories. But let us assume that we demand this and
they demand that and we do not reach an agreement,
then the existing situation remains.”

‘racistexclusionism.
120. In November 1977 the General Assembly determined that measures taken by Israel in the Palestinian and
other Arab terrritories occupied since 1967 had no legal
validity. It called upon Israel to comply strictly with its
international obligations in accordance with the Geneva
Conventions. In the same month of the same year, President
Sadat of Egypt visited occupied Jerusalem and the world
was traumatized and left under sedation while the Israeli
forecs of occupation proceeded with their plans to annex
the territories and to entrench themselves therein.

123. In-November 1978, Begin made it clear when he told
the Knesset:
“We left no doubt, and we stated, that after the fiveyear transition period, when the question of sovereignty
comes up for decision, we shall assert our right to sovereignty over Judaea, Samaria and Gaza. If an agreement
is reached against the background of counter-claims,---;
very well. If no agreement is arrived at, the result will be
that the autonomy arrangements of Israel’s security will
continue to remain in force.”

121. Instead of the plan to achieve the “final solution” of
the Palestinians as proposed by Koenig, an Israeli officialnamely by engineered emigration, or “thinning out” or
“spiriting away” of the Palestinian Arab populationBegin devised a plan in December 1977. In accordance with
that plan, which later became part of the Camp David talks,
the fate of the population would be separated from that of
the land: the population would have some “‘self-rule”, but
the land would continue to be effectively controlled by
Israel. Continued military occupation of the West Bank and
Gaza would be ensured. The question of sovereignty would
technically be “held in abeyance”, but Israel would meanwhile reaflii its claims and reserve its “right” to reassert
them in the projected negotiations on the future of the
territories, and would stand ready in those negotiations to
veto any competing claims. The spectre of admitting the
Palestinian population of those territories into the social
and political body of Israel would be exorcized, and the
burdens and costs of maintaining direct Israeli military rule
over the daily life of a hostile population would be
alleviated.

That is the Zionist mentality with which we are dealing.
124. The Israeli Government requested an interdepartmental commission to study the implications of Camp
David. According to the blueprint, published by the Jewish
Telegraphic Agency on 12 February:
6‘. . . the Israeli military government would continue
on the West Bank and Gaza and would be the legal
source of authority for the autonomy authorities. The
military government would retain control of ‘State lands
which comprise. . . one ftith of the combined area of the
West Bank and Gaza Strip and would also control the
water sources for those territories. The military govemment and the Shin Bet, Israel’s secret service, would
continue to be in charge of internal security. The autonomous councils would be barred from printing currency,
issuing passports or levying customs duties, but would be
empowered to levy local income taxes.
“The blueprint also recommended firmly that certain
basic elements should not be open to negotiations. These
include that the autonomous authority would apply only
to Arabs, not to Jewish settlers in the occupied territories, and that Jewish settlement activities would continue
under Israeli supervision. It made clear that the autonomous authorities would be barred from any moves that
could lead to the evolution of a Palestinian State.”

122. False hopes were entertained to the effect that
through bilateral negotiations peace would be achieved.
Those hopes were dispelled immediately after the Camp
David encounter. On 20 September 1978, Dayan made a
statement in which he said:
“Let us say that Jordan demands that we remove the
settlements or that we split up Jerusalem or that we hand
over East Jerusalem to its sovereignty, and if Israel does
not want to, then it will not do so. . . . Then, one of two
things: either Jordan will agree to give up this demand, or
we will not sign a peace agreement with it. If we do not
sign a peace agreement with it, the situation now prevailing will continue.. .
“If we hold negotiations and do not arrive at a new
agreement, the existing situation will remain valid. . . .

125. The leaked portions of the blueprint recommended
that the army pull back to specified areas, as called for in the
Camp David framework, but that training exercises would
be continued in all parts of the West Bank in accordance
with the army’s needs. The military government’s oftices
would be withdrawn from its present location in accordance
with Camp David, but the military government would continue its over-all presence and would function as before in
all areas outside of the autonomous localities.

“It is not inconceivable that, during the negotiations,
the Arabs will put forward such proposals or demands of
the sort that we will not be prepared to accept. If we do
not accept them, there will be no agreement. If there is no
agreement, the situation will remain as it is now. . . .
“What was agreed upon’*-at Camp David--“was
that there would not be an independent Palestiniaa State.
If they propose any Arab sovereignty, it was stated that
Israel would demand full Israeli sovereignty over those

126. I just thought I would let the Council know what is
meant by this “process for peace”. To us that process is one
of elimination by strangulation.
127. In 1967 the Israeli militarists attacked the neighbouring Arab countries and occupied Arab territories-in addition to the occupation of Jerusalem and the rest of
Palestine. The Security Council met and a special session of
the General Assembly was convened; a number of rcsolu12

tions were adopted, among them Security Council rsolution 237 (1967). As a matter of fact that resolution is very
seldom referred to; nobody knows what has happened to or
what is resolution 237 (1967). Is it because that resolution
deals with Palestinian and other Arab human beings and
life?

contemptuous acorn and disregard. The Charter of the
United Nations has vested powers in the Council to deal
with those who treat it with contempt. The remedy is there.
Will the Council prescribe the remedy and cure the malady7
Will it prescribe a formula to bring about the long-desired
comprehensive just peace, or will it again be rendered ineffective through a veto by the United States, thus leading to a
prolongation of the present state of crisis and the prolongation of the plight of-the Palestiman people?

128. However, the General Assembly has defined and
affirmed the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people in
its resolution 3236 (XXIX). Those rights are the right to
self-determination without external interference, the right
to national independence and sovereignty, and the right of
the Palestinians to return to their homes and property from
which they have been displaced and uprooted.

135. My people are determined to resist all attempts to
eliminate them. We are determined to ensure and guarantee
our survival. We shall adopt all legitimate means, including
those of armed struggle, to that end. We sincerely hope the
Council will help us by eliminating the cause of our plight. It
is within your power, Mr. President, and that of the Council
to implement the provisions of the Charter and compel the
Israeli forces of occupation to withdraw completely and
immediately from all the occupied territories and to enable
the Palestinian people, under the leaders-hip of their-m-.
sentative, the Palestine Liberation Organization, freely to
exercise their inalienable national rights in their homeland-Palestine.

129. A formula has also been approved by the General
Assembly for a comprehensive and just peace in the Middle
East. That formula appears in resolution 3375 (XXX).
130. The General Assembly went even further when, in its
resolution 33/2& it pronounced its dictum on the “behind
the scene” attempts to liquidate the question of Palestine
and to trespass on the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. In part A of that resolution, the General Assembly:

136. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

“Declares that the validity of agreements purporting
to solve the problem of Palestine requires that they be
within the framework of the United Nations and its
Charter and its resolutions on the basis of the full attainment and exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the right of return and the right to
national independence and sovereignty in Palestine, and
with the participation of the Palestine Liberation
Vrganization.“.

137. Mr. ELARABY (Egypt): Mr. President, I should like
at the outset to associate my delegation with the previous
speakers who extended to you their warm congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council during this month. We do hope that the Council, under
your wise and able leadership and with your long and
distinguished diplomatic
experience, will reassert its
Charter-prescribed responsibilities and rise to the challenge,
thus proving to the world that despite previous shortcomings it is the best guardian of international peace and
security.

13 1. The General Assembly has endorsed the recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
132. In all its conferences and at all levels, the non-aligned
movement has repeatedly emphasized the prerequisites for
a comprehensive peace. They are: first, the question of
Palestine lies at the heart of the conflict in the Middle East;.
secondly, the Palestinian people should be enabled to exercise freely its inalienable rights in Palestine, including the
-rights of return, selfdeterminatton and the establishment of
the Palestinian independent sovereign State; thirdly, Israel
should unconditionally withdraw all its forces from all territories occupied at least since June 1967.

138. I should also like to extend my delegation’s heartfelt
appreciation to the representative of Kuwait, Ambassador
Abdalla Bishara. Last month he admirably presided over
the deliberations of the Council during a serious and grave
crisis. He earnestly and energetically strove to reach an
accepted resolution of the conflict in South-East Asia, but
that was not attainable because, as he stated in his closing
statement, it was an attempt to square the circle.
139. The Security Council is meeting again today to consider the situation in the occupied Arab territories. The
representative of Jordan has presented in a lucid and comprehensive manner the gravity of the wide-ranging dimensions of the Israeli policy in Jerusalem and in the occupied
Arab territories. He advanced facts and figures. His well
documented presentation depicts a gloomy picture, yet, it
merely reflects and reflects accurately the ordeal and plight
of the Palestinian people, who have been denied their inherent inalienable rights.

133. The inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by
force is not merely a principle; it should be sacrosanct. And
in- view of the serious deterioration of the situation in the
Middle East, on 7 March the Co-ordinating Bureau of
Non-Aligned Countries issued a ,communiquC [S/Z3151]
reiterating the belief of the Foreign Ministers as expressed in
the Belgrade declaration.
134. Finally, it is our earnest and sincere conviction that
the Security Council will be involved in such deliberations
as this dealing with derivatives for as long as it does not deal
with the core of the matter and resolve it. Israel and its main
supporter, the Government of the United States, will continue to treat the Council and the United Nations with

140. Indeed, what the Council is considering today transcends all man-made geographical and political boundaries.
The Council’s actions, deliberations or inactions, will affect
13

profoundly not only the fate of a whole people, but also the
deep religious f&rmgs and the spiritual heritage of hundreds
of millions of Moslems and Christians acrossall continents.

time in October of the ,same -year [S/22218]. What
prompted Egypt to request the convening of the Council
was to remind this body and the international community
as a whole of the deteriorating situation in the area in the
hope that the appropriate measures to redress the injustices
would be implemented. After lengthy debate, in which I
must admit all members of the Council and many other
Members of the United Nations demonstrated genuine concern, the Council reached a unanimous decision on 11
November [1969rh meeting] in the form of a statement by’
the President on behalf of its members. In that statement,
the Councilexpressed its grave anxiety and concern over the
serious situation in the occupied Arab territories as a result
of continued Israeli occupation. The members of the Council emphasized again what was adopted in previous resolutions and deplored the failure of Israel to show any regard
for those resolutions.
,.,
144. Egypt’s efforts were confined to the Security Council. The General Assembly as well as the other competent
organs within the United Nations system have been called
upon to redress the grave and deteriorating conditions in
the occupied territories. During the thirty-second session of
the General Assembly, Egypt requested the inclusion of an
item on the illegal Israeli measuies ,in’ the occupied Arab
territories designed to change the legalstatus, geographical
nature and the demographic composition of those territories in contravention of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, of Israel’s intematidnal obligations under
the fourth Geneva Convention of “1949 and of United
Nations resolutions. The General A$sembiy’s response to
Egypt’s request was most gratifying: tb” Assembly adopted
resolution 32/5. At the thirty-third session, it adopted resolution 33/l 13 B by an overwhelmmg majority. The Assembly determined that all such Israeli measures and actions in
the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since
1967 had no legal validity and called upon Israel to comply
strictly with its international obligations.

141. Several organs in the United Nations have dealt with
the various aspects of the item under discussion. The General Assembly adopted numerous resolutions concerning
the settlements, human rights, and the applicability of inter-.
national conventions in the occupied territaries. Likewise,
the Council dealt from the very beginning with these issues,
starting with its resolution 237 (1967), when it called on the
Government of Israel to ensure the safety, welfare and
security of the inhabitants of the areas where military operations had taken place and to facilitate the return of those
inhabitants who had fled the areas since the outbreak of
hostilities. The Council also, in its resolution 248 (1968),
called again on Israel to desist from acts and activities in
contmvention of resolution 237 (1967), a call which was
repeated in resolution 259 (1968). Concerning Jerusalem,
the Council was very clear and firm. In resolution 252
(1968), the Council deplored the failure of Israel to comply
with General Assembly resolutions concerning Jerusalem
and then considered that all legislative and administrative
.measures and actions taken by Israel, including expropriation of land and properties which tended to change the legal
status of Jerusalem were invalid and could not change that
status. The Council also urgently called upon Israel to
rescind all such measures and to desist forthwith from
taking any further action which tended to change the status
of Jerusalem. In fact, the Council went even further in its
resolution 267 (1969), when it censured “in the strongest
terms all measures taken to change the status of the City of
Jerusalem”, and in its resolution 271 (1969), when it condemned the failure of Israel to comply with past resolutions.
All those resolutions and condemnations went unheeded.
This led the Council again to put Israel on notice in clear
and unequivocal terms in resolution 298 (1971).
142. It is clear that the Council has pronounced in no
uncertain terms the will of the international community.
The Council adopted resolutions, sometimes unanimously
and without a single dissenting vote, affirming the unique
legal and spiritual character of Jerusalem and urgently
calling upon Israel to desist from all such measures and
actions, and declared all Israeli measures as totally invalid
which could not change the juridical, political, and demographic status of the Holy City. Those resolutions were all
disregarded. Resolutions which carry the weight and the
authority of the Security Council, the organ vested with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, were never implemented. What is even
more alarming is that the Council is acquiescing in the face
of non-compliance with its long list of repeated resolutions,
a matter that directly affects its authority and seriously
erodes its credibility.

145. In this context Egypt also continued its efforts in
other competent United Nations organs. Only last month
Egypt’s Minister of State for Foreign Affairs addressed an
urgent message to the Chairman of the Commission on
Human Rights, in which he drew the, attention of the Commission to recently published reports describing torture
inflicted on Arab detainees in Israeli prisons. The Commission addressed a strong message to Israel.z The Commission
also adopted two resolutions condemning Ismeli policies
and practices in the occupied Arab territories.3
.
146. Notwithstanding the stream of resolutions by tne
Security Council, the General Assembly and other competent organs, the situation in the occupied territories is
rapidly deteriorating. Every day the Israeli authorities are
systematically carrying ‘out their well-planned, and even
well-publicized, designs to build new. settlements, expand
existing ones, expropriate lands, demolish houses and expel
inhabitants and render them homeless. If we apply the
principles of international law to those Israeli measures, we

143. This is a long and sad record of non-compliance and
defiance. It is regrettable that Israel did,not heed the decisions of the Security Council and alter its policies. Israel
continued to establish more settlements, expropriate more
land, arbitrarily detain more inhabitants and encroach
further on Arab rights in Jerusalem, in an attempt to change
thii situation. Egypt raised this question in the Council
twice, the first time in May 1976 [S/l206q and the second

’ O@ciaI Records C$ rhe Economic ad Social Council.
meni No. 6, chap. XXIV, sect. B, decision 2 (XXXV).
‘Ibid,
sect. A, resolutions
1A and B (XXXV).

14

1979. Supple-

find that international law is explicit and thXt the illegality
of these Israeli actions is beyond doubt.

wage war. To question the sincerity df Egypt’s policy will
not.advance the cause of peace nor liberate people or territories from the yoke of occupation. Past experience in our
region is a glaring testimony conferring the validity of this
fact.
152. In conclusion, I should like to reiterate once more
that Egypt’s policy is and will remain always based on the
attainment of a comprehensive just peace in the Middle East
through the termination of the Israeli occupation of all the
Arab territories, including Arab Jerusalem, and the restoration to the Palestinian people of all their inalienable rights.
Vision and courage are needed, and every sincere effort
must be exerted and supported in order that a just peace
prevail in this vital and sensitive area of the world to enable
the peoples of the region to devote their energies and resources to progress, development and prosperity. It is high
time that the world, represented in the Council, should take
all appropriate measures to ensure the speedy achievement
of this lofty objective.

147. Binding international instruments universally accepted by all civilized nations strictly prohibit theexpropriation of properties, thedemolition of homes and the transfer
of population. It might be relevant at this juncture to recall
certain provisions of the regulations annexed to The Hague
Conventions and the fourth Geneva Convention. Article 55
of The Hague regulations stipulates:
“The occupying state shall consider itself merely as the
administrator and usufructuary of the public buildings,
real estate, forests, and farms belonging to the hostile
government and situated within the occupied territory. It
shall protect this property and administer it in accordance with the rules governing usufructs.“’
148. Turning now to the fourth Geneva Convention, we
find that, though Israel is a party to the Convention, and the
General Assembly has affirmed in many resolutions the
applicability of the Geneva Convention to the occupied
Arab territories, the Israeli Government refuses to abide by
its provisions. Article 49 stipulates, inrer alia, that:

153. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

“The occupying Power shall not deport or transfer
parts of its own civilian population into the territory it
occupies.”

154. Mr. TUl?NI (Lebanon): Mr. President, I wish at the
outset to thank you for calling on me and to associate
myself with those who have congratulated you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month There are many ties between our country and
Nigeria, and we are confident that in dealing with the
difficulties facing us this month we shall find your guidance
very precious to us all.

149. Egypt’s position w$h regard to Jerusalem and on the
establishment of Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab
territories is a matter of record. No further elaboration on
my part is required on this point. It is evident to us that the
entire world is fully united in its opposition to these Israeli
practices.

155. There can also be a holocaust of the land. Yes, a
holocaust. That must be the expression to use, since we are
still addressed in terms of “Judaea and Samaria”. For what
else, if not a holocaust, is the bulldozing of the Holy Land,
and particularly the beloved citv of Jerusalem?

150. Conditions in the occupied Arab territories are worsening;‘tension is rapidly mounting and the whole area is
fraught with danger, with far-reaching and ominous implications for world peace and security. The Council is once
more called upon to face its responsibilities and to act in a
decisive.manner. Egypt fully realizes that the injustices and
sufferings throughout all the occupied Arab territorieswhether in Sinai, the Golan Heights, the West Bank or
Gaza-emanate from one source: Israeli occupation. To
bring a prompt and urgent end to occupation in accordance
with the principles of international law and justice and
consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and resolutions is Egypt’s paramount
objective. Egypt is committed to the achievement of a just,
durable and comprehensive peace. Egypt is committed, as
President Sadat only yesterday reaflirmed, “to enable our
Palestinian brothers to realize their national rights and
regain their freedom*‘. President Sadat also stated yesterday
that “Egypt is determined to build peace based on a solid
edifice of legitimacy and the rule of law”.

157. We know that this debate is going to be long, tedious,
and probably acrimonious. Yet this question remains, as a
constant challenge: Can we, through this supreme instrument of peace, the Security Council, save the land and the
people? This question of course acquires particular importance as our debate happens to coincide-a fact we cannot
ignore-with intensive efforts at reaching a peaceful settlement df what is now called the Middle East question.

151. Egypt has no illusions and fully realizes that the road
to peace is no easy task. It is long; it could be protracted,
arduous and many times very frustrating. Yet, we are not
discouraged. Egypt has embarked on a peace process with
full-knowledge that to wage peace is more difficult than to
’ &me@ Endowmentfor International Peace,The Hague Conventions cmdDec1ararion.t of 1899and I907fNew York, OxfordUniversity
Press,1915).

158. It is our firm belief that, however worthy those
efforts may be, and even if they are successful, the whole
issue will ultimately have to return to this very body. For are
we not unanimous in saying that peace in the Middle East is
indivisible and must therefore, in the words of my Egyptian
colleague, be comprcnensive? And where else, outside the
United Nations, can we hope to reach a comprehensive
settlement?

156. My colleague from Jordan has presented the casein a
manner that leaves us all with very little to add. Indeed, I
have no specific facts or figures to add to what he has
contributed to this debate, or to what has been brought to
the attention of the Council by various sources, and particularly by the represenative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.

1.5

159. I shall not dwell any further on this matter as I believe
it is, at this stage, beyond the specilic object of our debate.
Later, at an appropriate time, and depending on foreseen or
unforeseen developments, the Council may find it necessary
to examine possible measures of conservation which will
prevent the dynamics of war-through settlements and
other similar and related activities-from altering the personality of Jerusalem and the Holy Land in such a manner
as to make peace impossible and the return of territory
almost immaterial and unreal, and probably insignificant,
in both human and physical terms.

out 2,000 years the temples have derived the substance of
their life from the very being of the believers who constitute their human context.”
162. That was not, of course, a call for holy war-which
some may consider very fashionable nowadays-but, on
the contrary, in the very words with which the Patriarch
concluded his address, an invitation to brotherly love:
“There-in Jerusalem-shall we lay the foundations
of a new civilization for all the peoples of the world, a
civilization based not on exploitation but on peace and
justice, which alone can ensure a fruitful and brotherly
meeting of nations.”

lg.’ Given the verv snecial character of Jerusalem. I
should like to speak now as a Christian, a Christian Arab
from Lebanon, a citizen of a country and a member of an
ancient church for whom the faith of Jerusalem has the
dimension of an’ encounter between the human and the
divine. I speak not to contribute further arguments or facts
to a case already too well known, but only in testimony.
“How can we forget thee, 0 Jerusalem, when thou
art humanity’s Mehraje to God, and the symbol of
the spiritual values that descended upon us from His
holy inspiration?

163. There have been many resolutions which the Security
Council and other bodies of the United Nations have examined, approved, rejected or forgotten-and
there will be
more. But whatever may be the fate of resolutions, Jerusalem will survive. So let us all join in the one act of peace
which can bring us all nearer to God and to the best of
humanity.
164. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is .the ViceChairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

“In thee, 0 Jerusalem, Moslems and Christians and
Jews, in their common yearning for eternal peace, find,
each according to his religion, a sacred community in
their obedience to God and their concern for man.”

165. Mr. ROA-KOURf
(Vice-Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People) (imrpre~arioonf
Spmtish): I am grateful to
you, Mr. President, and to the other members ,of the Council, for allowing me to speak at this time, which is fraught
with peril and threat for the Arab peoples of the territories
illegally occupied by Israel, including Palestine and the city
of Jerusalem, whose international status is being gravely
diminished brutally and deliberately by the authorities of
the Zionist State.

161. Such were the words of the Patriarch of Antioch, His
Beatitude Elias IV, to the Islamic summit conferenceconvened
at Lahore on 23 February 1974. The Patriarch, leading a
unique delegation of prelates and laymen from all churches,
addressed that historic conference in the following terms:
“To your esteemed conference we have comefrom the
ancient churches of the East, prompted by the spirit of
friendship and amity which has bound us to you, generation after generation. For, by God’s mercy and providence, there has developed in our countries more than a
common humanity: a oneness that cannot be destroyed.
Hence, we are conscious that it is our destiny to carry to
the Christian world abroad the message of Palestine, to
kindle its sacred fire wherever it is fading, voicing this
message loudest where people deafen their ears or close
their eyes to its reality and truth.
‘Need we say how nostaglic we all are for this particular beauty and nobility of Jerusalem, which emanated
from a holiness that no other city has ever had, the
holiness of the Word which was given her and which she
has always sought-a holiness which had been the
blessed custody of her Arab inhabitants, who are now
subjected to tyranny and many of whom have been
forced to emigrate from the most beloved city7
“The continuity of the tradition which the Palestinians
have kept asa cherished trust is an imperative call-a call
for a Jerusalem delivered, which will be again the home
of its people. For to us the preservation ofstones, be they
sacred shrines, cannot be more important than the living
presence of people. For the presence of God is where
people live in constant devotion.
“To us in particular, the significance of the Holy
Places has acquired its plenitude by the fact that through-

166. As is borne out by the countless complaints of Arab
and Palestinian citizens living in the usurped territories, the
Israeli authorities have adopted increasingly repressive
measures against the Palestinian inhabitants since 1967 in
accord with their declared intent to establish permanent
domination over those territories.
167. Our Committee, like the General Assembly and the
Security Council, has received repeated complaints of illtreatment, torture and other forms of persecution in&ted
upon Palestinian detainees in the occupied zones. The Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories has heard the testimony of victims of these vicious acts,
which have been confirmed by Israeli lawyers, and there
have been numerous reports of concrete casesof violations
of human rights in the occupied Arab territories.
168. In the letter I addressed to you, Mr. President, on 2
March of thii year [S/Z313zJ, I referred to the recent press
releases based on official documents of the State Department of the United States which confirm those cases of
torture and ill-treatment in the territories illegally occupied
by Israel. The reports clearly refute the assertions of the
Israeli Government that such practices represent isolated
incidents.
16

169. This is not the first time in history that such procedures have been resorted to in an attempt to imDose the
yoke of foreign domination upon peoples.The recent past
bears witness to the indescribable monstrosities committed
by Nazi Fascists in their insane desire to subject the world to
their oppressive and inhuman yoke, using the crude pretext
of lebensraum, Aryan supremacy and the necessity for a new
order.
170. The Zionist State, which since it came into being has
trampled underfoot the rights of the Palestinian people in
their own country, expropriating their goods, homes and
lands and expelling them from them, is now trying to annex,
per saecda saecuhum, the territories occupied illegally,
manu milirari, in 1967. In this respect the interview granted
to the reporter Dov Goldstein of the Hebrew newspaper
Ma’ariv on 26 January of this year by the Minister of
Agriculture of Israel, Mr. Ariel Sharon, is revealing. It
reads:
“Question: What decisions must the Government
adopt before it can sign the peace agreement?
“Answer: It must decide upon the establishment of
belts of settlements in Judaea and San+ia. I am speaking
of three belts yf settlements. We visited one today. Israel
has no strategc depth at all on the coastal strip. Twenty
kilometres to the east of the green line we must establish
cities and settlements: Haris, a city of 150,000 inhabitants; Kaddoun, a city of 50,000 inhabitants; Kamei
Shorn&n, a city of 30,000 inhabitants; live and flourishing settlements in Reihan, Sanour, Ma’aleh Nahal,
Haris, Elkana, Tapuah, Nabi Salih and others. And not
settlements alone. Also, roads and highways that will
ensure territorial continuity between the cities and the
settlements. And not highways alone, but an extensive
infrastructure, military barracks, firing ranges, and areas
for combat exercises. A second belt, deployed against the
eastern front, Israel established a series of settlements in
the Jordan Riit. The Jews are too few, far too few to be
able to survive. We must add many settlements and send
many people to them. The settlements must likewise be
interconnected and connected with the first belt. A third
belt. Jerusalem will not be the capital of Israel unless it
has a Jewish majority. The answer is to build satellite
cities around Jerusalem-in Gush Etzion, Tekoah, Maaleh Adumim, Rimonim, Kohav Hashahar, Beit El,
Givon. In the course of 20 or 30 years we must be in such
a position that metropolitan Jerusalem and the towns in
its environs will have a population of 1 million Jews. This
decision must be taken now. It & not a matter for idle
speculations, nor even of the sites I should like. I am
referring to questions that are vital for the survival and
security of Israel. There must be a decision to take the
lands that are needed to implement this plan without any
delay whatsoever.”
171. Those intentions were stated as early a+ 1948, when
Yigal Ailon, the Palmach leader, revealed the strategic
importance of the settlements. At that time he said:
“The strategic considerations which had underlain the
plan of Zionist settlement decided, in large measure, the
fate. of many regions of the country, including areas
largely or entirely settled by Arabs, such as Tiberias,

Tsemah. Beit Shi’an. Acre. Haifa and Jaffa, all of which
were surrounaed by Jewish villages.
“Those areas of Jewish settlement further inland, in the
heart of Arab-controlled territory, constituted forward
bases whose main function was to hold out at all costs until
the advance of the main body of troops could extricate
them.“5
The Palmach leader went on to cite, as the second-state aim
of maintaining isolated outposts in enemy territory, the
mounting of an offensive to connect the settlements. The
Israeli military historian Colonel Larch also described the
outlying settlements as “defensive barriers and potential
offensive bases of the State which was about to be established”. As lawyers might say, “Confession makes proof
unnecessary”.
172. Members of the Security Council have before them
three maps and other documents annexed to the letter that I
sent to the President which give full testimony of Israel’s
plans to establish its permanent dominion over the occupied territories, thus denying the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people. As reported in that communciation,
such actions are a violation of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, and in violation of resolutions of
the Security Council and General Assembly, and thus
represent a grave threat to international peace and security.
173. In addition, the Zionist State continues to undermine
the legal status of Jerusalem-as
we have said. This situation, which has been repeatedly denounced before world
public opinion and in this lofty forum, has been the subject
of a special condemnation by the orthodox inhabitants of
Jerusalem. In a letter addressed to the Secretary-General on
26 February last [see S/Z3Z3Pl, Rabbi Uri Blau, Neturei
Karta of Jerusalem, made the following dramatic appeal:
“As citizens of Jerusalem, who have never accepted
the annexation of the Holy City into the Zionist State, we
implore you to call upon the Zionist authorities to cease
immediately the construction of this stadium and the
highway, which can irrevocably change the innate character of Jerusalem, which is a holy city to all mankind,
and to desist from its campaign of terror and intimidation against the religious community, permitting them to
enjoy the elementary human rights which they have had
for hundreds of years and which certainly antedate the
establishment of the Zionist State in the Holy Land.”
174. I hardly believe I need go on quoting facts and violations perpetrated by the Israeli Zionists against the inhabitants of the occupied Arab territories and the legal status of
Jerusalem. What I have already reported is sufficiently
eloquent and it all comes from unimpeachable sources.
Furthermore, the Council has a vast inventory of the illegal
acts committed by the Zionist occupiers since 1967.
175. Yet I believe it essential to recall that, despite several
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and despite
the overwhelming support given by the international community to the cause of the Palestinian people, no just solu5 Quoted

in English

by the speaker.

’

..
tion of the Palestinian problem has been found, a problem
which continues to seriously affect the situation in the Middle East of which it is the central element and thereby
aggravates the threat that looms over international peace
and security.
176. Our Committee sees it as obvious that it is not possible to establish a just and lasting peace in that region unless,
among other things, there is a just solution of the problem
of Palestine on the basis of the exercise of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to return
and the right to independence and national sovereignty in
Palestine, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.
177. We likewise consider that every effort and all deliberations and conferences on the Middle East held under
United Nations auspices to resolve the existing conflict must
have the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization, which is the only legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, on a footing of equality with the other
participants. Accordingly, any agreements that might claim
to resolve the problem of Palestine must be within the
framework of the United Nations and of its Charter and
resolutions, on the basis of the exercise of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, in the manner and conditions that I have mentioned.
178. Had the recommendations of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
been applied,6 included as they are in various resolutions of
6 Official Recod
of the General
plement No. 35, part II:

Litho

in United

Nations,

Assembly,

New York

nCirt~-first

Session

.

the General Assembly and of the -Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the Population of the Occupied Territories, illegally occupied by Israel since 1967, the situation that we are now
considering, which is characterized by a dangerous deterioration that includes, furthermore, the erosion of the legal
status of Jerusalem, would never have reached such levels of
abuse and arbitrariness. Unfortunately, any action by the
Security Council has been paralysed by the veto of one of its
permanent members, the United States of America, and it
has not adopted the measures that the General Assembly
has urged it to take on the matter.
179. At the present time, and considering the particularly
objectionable and alarming aspects of Israeli actions in the
occupied Arab territories against the Palestinian people and
against the international status of the city of Jerusalem, the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People entertain the sincere hope that Council
members will implement the recommendations and measures contained in General Assembly resolutions 3 l/20 and
32140 A in the aspects that concern it.
180. The United Nations cannot remain impassive before
a situation that vitally affects an entire people whose inalienable rights we have justly recognized and which constitutes
an affront to human dignity and to everythingthe United
Nations represents. It is up to the Security Council to
prevent a repetition of such vicious acts by Israeli rulers and
to see to it that the inherent rights of the Palestinian people
are restored.

Sup-

The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

00400

79-70002-October

1982-2,250
