S/2003/928

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 October 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 1 October 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 26 September
2003, which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-53828 (E)

031003

*
0
3
5
3
8
2
8
*

S/2003/928

Annex
Letter dated 26 September 2003 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations
In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
monthly report on SFOR operations for August 2003 (see enclosure). I would
appreciate your making the present report available to the Council.
(Signed) Lord Robertson of Port Ellen

2

S/2003/928

Enclosure
Monthly report to the Security Council on the operations
of the Stabilization Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1 to 31 August 2003), there were just over 12,100
troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia.
2.
The overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remained stable during the
period under review.
Security
3.
The Republika Srpska trial against 18 defendants in the ORAO Aviation
Bureau Case, originally planned for 28 July 2003, was postponed until 15 September
2003. The defendants were indicted for illegally producing and exporting weapons
to Iraq, in violation of a United Nations embargo. The trial was postponed because
the majority of the defendants apparently did not receive their summons on time.
They were, however, present for the opening of the trial.
4.
On 12 August, in the early hours, an empty charter bus belonging to a man
from Travnik was destroyed in Sarajevo by an explosive device. No injuries were
reported, but several other vehicles were damaged. The motive for the attack
remains unknown. This was the fifth explosion in Sarajevo over a seven-day period.
On 13 August, the European Union Police Mission (EUPM), the Minister of
Security and various other interested parties held a meeting to discuss the recent
spate of explosions on Sarajevo. It was reported two days later that the police had
identified the perpetrators of the bomb attacks and had launched a search for four
people who they believed could assist them in their inquiries.
Attacks against SFOR and SFOR operational activities
5.
There were no significant acts of violence directed against SFOR personnel
over the reporting period.
6.
SFOR continues to contribute to the maintenance of a safe and secure
environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina; collect weapons and ammunition in the
framework of Operation Harvest; and monitor possible terrorist-related threats
throughout the country.
7.
On 6 August, SFOR headquarters released the results of Operation Harvest for
the period January-July 2003. Although the statistics show decreases in the number
of small arms, explosives and other items in comparison with 2002, the number of
rounds of ammunition, mines and hand grenades turned in so far in 2003 have
increased. In particular, the 27,515 hand grenades surrendered represent a 26 per
cent increase over 2002. The SFOR spring Harvest campaign has placed special
emphasis on hand grenades and the effort seems to have been productive.
8.
The total number of items collected during the month of August under
Operation Harvest included 552 small arms (rifles, pistols and revolvers); 252,093
rounds of ammunition with a calibre less than 20 mm; 1,403 rounds of ammunition
with a calibre between 20 mm and 76 mm; 13 rounds of ammunition with a calibre
greater than 76 mm; 3,984 hand grenades; 286 mines; 14,983.9 kilograms of
explosives; and 2,472 other items (mortars, mortar rounds, rifle grenades, attack

3

S/2003/928

rockets and hand-made ordnance). SFOR continues to collect weapons held illegally
throughout the country and pursues its information campaign to encourage weapons
to be handed in voluntarily.
9.
On 13 August, SFOR conducted an operation to detain Ratko Mladic in
Kasindol in Srpska Sarajevo. SFOR units surrounded the residence of Mladic’s
mother, who had died on 12 August, and established inner and outer perimeters to
deny access or departure of persons from the area. SFOR personnel spoke to
Mladic’s daughter and wife, who expressed dissatisfaction with the operation and
assured the SFOR representatives that Mladic was not present. Approximately 40
persons were present at the residence. The family and crowd eventually bowed to
the inevitable and reacted in a fairly positive and cooperative manner. Mladic’s
daughter agreed that the house, garage, vehicles and surrounding area be searched.
Members of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and local
Republika Sprska police were present during the entire operation, which was
concluded by 2 p.m. No injuries or damage to property were reported.
10. On 20 August, the Dynamic Response 03 (DR03) activation order was released
and the transfer of authority of forces has begun. DR03 is scheduled to take place
from 26 August until 24 September 2003 in the SFOR and KFOR areas of operation
but will impact the entire Balkans joint operations area since forces will be deployed
through Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.a The rapid
deployment and integration concepts would be the first of many over the horizon
forces concepts which DR03 sought to validate. DR03 will use the layered approach
to employment of the reserve forces, with operative reserve force employment
beginning on 2 September 2003 and strategic reserve force employment on
9 September 2003.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
11. During a press conference held on 21 August, the Republika Sprska Army
(VRS) Chief of Defence Staff outlined proposals to close 32 accommodation sites in
the Republika Sprska as well as a reduction in the number of ammunition depots
from 19 to eight. Furthermore, it was stated that surplus arms that could not be sold
would be destroyed with the help of SFOR.
12. On 14 August, the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina completed its
review of the conscription policy within the Federation. It has now been confirmed
that military service in the Federation Army will be reduced from six to five months.
Furthermore, Defence Minister Miroslav Nikolic stated in a press release that he is
considering a further reduction for a four-month service.
13. On 29 July, the Deputy SFOR Commander met with the VRS Chief of General
Staff to discuss the VRS action plan to reduce the number of ammunition storage
sites. The plan called for the relocation of ammunition from 11 sites planned for
closure to three storage sites in Mrkonijk Grad, Pale and Trebinje. SFOR would
assist VRC in relocating and destroying ammunition, providing transport and
engineering/demolition support, if required. Following safety inspections of the new
sites, VRS would determine whether ammunition should be moved or destroyed and

a

4

Turkey recognizes the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

S/2003/928

would then transport ammunition to the new sites and establish records of storage in
accordance with North Atlantic Treaty Organization standards. A similar approach
was being considered to reduce the number of weapons storage sites.
14. On 9 August, open sources reported that VRS intended to auction a significant
arsenal of weapons, including 105 tanks, 42,048 infantry weapons, 21 air defence
missiles, over 1 million mine parts and more than 13 million other munitions.
According to the SFOR spokesman, the auction would commence under the strict
supervision of SFOR, who had approved all weapons on the advertised list of items
for sale. The auction was part of the VRS effort to reduce the size of its arsenal by
the end of 2003 in accordance with the Office of the High Representative and
SFOR-directed defence reforms.
15. During the reporting period, the Entity Armed Forces (EAF) carried out
normal training activities, in compliance with the military provisions of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. There were no reports of missing weapons from weapons storage
sites in August.
16. During the period under review, there were a total of 129 EAF training and
operations activities (35 VRS and 94 Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Army
(VF), and 180 movements activities (134 VRS and 46 VF). A total of 453 EAF
mine-clearing activities were monitored. SFOR also carried out 51 inspections and
verifications of weapons storage sites: 28 VRS, 8 VF-H and 9 VF. Two VRS
weapons storage sites were closed in August.
Cooperation with international organizations
17. Within capabilities and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations working in theatre.
Outlook
18. Operation Dynamic Response started successfully and Operations Harvest and
Discovery continued to yield excellent results, with over a quarter of a million
rounds of ammunition and nearly 4,000 hand grenades collected. Local authorities
are showing enthusiasm and initiative in their efforts to participate in Harvest
operations. Defence reform continues to be a major issue, with the problems
concerning the maintenance of the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina now
becoming impossible to ignore.

5
