S/2000/344

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 April 2000
Original: English

Letter dated 24 April 2000 from the President of the Security
Council to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The members of the Security Council have agreed on the terms of reference of
the Security Council mission (see annex).
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
United States of America (Ambassador Richard Holbrooke — Head of Mission
France (Ambassador Jean-David Levitte)
Mali (Ambassador Moctar Ouane)
Namibia (Ambassador Martin Andjaba)
Netherlands (Ambassador A. Peter van Walsum)
Tunisia (Ambassador Saïd Ben Mustapha)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (Ambassador
Jeremy Greenstock)
It is the intention of the mission to depart New York on 2 May 2000 with a
planned return from Lusaka on 8 May 2000. To that end, I would be most grateful if
appropriate officials could be advised in order to make the necessary arrangements
for the mission.
(Signed) Robert R. Fowler
President of the Security Council

00-40250 (E) 240400
`````````

S/2000/344

Annex
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
1.
The Security Council encourages the efforts of the parties to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement (S/1999/815) to fulfil their commitments and underlines the
Council’s dedication to the full implementation of the Agreement and relevant
Council resolutions regarding the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
2.
The Security Council considers that the full deployment of phase II of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) in adequate conditions of security, access and cooperation, as authorized
under Council resolution 1291 (2000) of 24 February 2000, is a critical element of
the international community’s support for the peace process.
3.
Concerned by developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since
the signing of the Agreement, the Security Council mission is visiting the region to
facilitate the parties’ agreement on concrete ways to ensure the rapid and full
implementation of the Agreement and of resolution 1291 (2000).
4.
The mission will focus on the conditions necessary for the full deployment of
MONUC including, inter alia: the need for strict adherence to the ceasefire,
including cessation of the seizure of new territory and the re-supply of arms to the
field; an adequate status-of-forces agreement; reliable guarantees of security and
freedom of movement for United Nations personnel; the relocation of the Joint
Military Commission (JMC) to Kinshasa and its establishment as a permanently
sitting body; the development of the working relationship of MONUC and JMC; and
concrete progress by all sides on the disengagement of forces, as agreed by the
parties on 8 April 2000.
5.
The mission will also emphasize: the need to strengthen the role of the
Facilitator of the Inter-Congolese National Dialogue and his ability to organize and
facilitate the Dialogue; the need to harmonize the Lusaka implementation timetable
with the MONUC deployment schedule; the requirement to facilitate humanitarian
assistance; and the need for early progress on a plan for the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement of armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
6.
The mission will report back to the Security Council, at which time it will
make recommendations for further Council actions, if appropriate. The report of the
mission will focus on progress made on all aspects of the Agreement and the
implementation of relevant Council resolutions regarding the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
7.
The mission intends to meet representatives of all the signatories to the
Agreement. It will ask President Chiluba to convene a meeting of the Heads of State
signatories to the Lusaka Agreement.

2
