32

General Auembly--8eventb Ses•ion

644 (VII). Racial discrimination in Non-Self.
Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Having regard to the principles oi the Charter and
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights emphasizing the necessity of promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms
for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or
religion,
Having regard to the princi?le recognized in Chapter
XI of the Charter that the interests of the inhabitants
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories are paramount,
Recogni::ing that there is a fundamental distinction
between discriminatory laws and practices, on the one
hand, and protective measures designed to safeguard
the rights oi the indigenous inhabitants, on the other
hand,
1. Rcrommcnds to the Mcmhers responsible for
the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories
the abolition in those Territories of discriminatorv laws
and practices contrary to the principles of the Charter
and of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
2. Recommends that the Administering Members
should examine all laws, statutes and ordinances in
force in the Non-Self-Governing Territories under
their administration, as well as their application in the
said Territories, with a view to the abolition of any
such discriminatory provisions or practices;
3. Recommends that, in any Non-Self-Governing
Territory where laws are in existence which distinguish
between citizens and non-citizens primarily on racial
or religious grounds, these laws should similarly be
examined;
4. Recommends that all public facilities should be
open to all inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, without distinction of race;
5. Recommends that where laws are in existence
providing particular measures of protection for sections
of the population, these laws should frequently be
examined in order to ascertain whether their protective
aspect is stil1 predominant, and whether provision
should be made for exemption from them in particular
circumstances ;
6. Recognizes that the establishment of improved
race relations largely depends on the development of
educational policies, and commends all measures designed to improve among all pupils in all schools understanding of the needs and problems of the community
as a whole;
7. Calls the attention of the Commission on Human
Rights to the present resolution.
402nd plenary meeting,
10 December 1952.

645 (VD). Educational, economic and aoeial
policiH in Non-Self-Governing Terrltorlee
The Gtmera! A..-.rem.bly,
(.,:HiJ,fr,,,:11q th:,i. the Comrnittee on Information

from Non-Self-Governing Territories is invited 2 to
submit to the General Assemb1y at its regular sessions
reports containing such substantive recommendations
as it may deem desirable, relating to functional fields
generally,
Considering that in 1950, 1951 and 1952 the General
Assembly approved 3 special reports prepared by the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories on educational, economic and social conditions, and invited the Secretary-General to communicate these reports to the Members of the United Nations
responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories for their consideration,
Recognizing that these reports express general views
and objectives to be taken into account in the formulation of policy,
1. Expresses the hope that the Members concerned,
when transmitting information under Article 73 e of
the Charter, will furnish annually as complete information as possible on any action taken to bring the
reports of the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to the attention of the authorities responsible in the Territories for the implementation of educational, economic and social policy,
and on any problems which may arise in giving effect
to the general views expressed in these reports ;
2. invites the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories in its annual reports
to the General Assembly to consider the information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter in the
light of the views expressed in the s~cial reports on
educational, economic and social conditions.
402nd plenary meeting,
10 December 1952.

646 (VU). Renewal of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territorlea

.

The General Assembly,
Having established, by resolution 332 (IV) adopted
on 2 December 1949, a Committee ori Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Recognizing the value of the work performed by
this Committee,
Recalling its decision set out in resolution 332 {IV)
to "examine in 1952 the question whether the Special
Committee should be renewed for a further period, together with the questions of the composition and terms
of reference of any such future Special Committee",
HO'lling re-examined the terms of reference of the
Committee and the provisions for its composition as
set forth in resolution 332 (IV), and the provisions
relating to the work of the Cor;nmittee set out in reso'
lution 333 I IV),
1. Decides to continue the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories on the same
basis for a further three-year period;
• See resolution 219 (Ill).
• Stt resolutions 445 (V), 565 (VI) and 643 (VII).
