S/PV.8765

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8765th meeting

Thursday, 8 October 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Kridelka
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Aougi
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2020/952)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-25962 (E)
*2025962*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.8765

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/952, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Return to the Security Council Chamber
The President (spoke in Russian): Before we
adopt the agenda for today’s meeting, I would like
to congratulate all members on returning to the
Security Council Chamber. The last meeting we held
in the Chamber was under the Chinese presidency in
March (see S/PV.8745). I want to thank all members
for supporting the decision for us to return to the
Security Council Chamber. The Economic and Social
Council Chamber was very hospitable, but we needed
to return to our home, and we have done that today.
I want to thank the Secretariat for its support for our
joint decision.
I wish to say that, while we have set up plastic
dividers, our health and safety depend first and
foremost on us. We should act responsibly. For
example, just before this meeting, I underwent a test for
the coronavirus disease. I am pleased to say that it was
negative. I would urge members to undergo such a test
as often as possible for their own safety and for that of
everyone in the Chamber.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2020/952)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Annadif is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/16

begin

08/10/2020

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Annadif.
Mr. Annadif: It is always an honour for me to
introduce the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2020/952), especially at a time
when the country is going through a critical moment
in its history.
The period from June to mid-September covered
by the report was marked by significant sociopolitical
developments. During my virtual meeting with the
Council on 27 July, I noted the main causes of the
current crisis being as follows: first, the weakening of
central institutions, the loss of confidence in political
actors and the rise of religious leaders; secondly, the
delay in the implementation of the Agreement of Peace
and Reconciliation and the worsening socioeconomic
situation; and, thirdly, the deterioration of the security
situation, in particular in the centre of the country,
which has led to human rights violations that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) often documents,
transmitting recommendations to the Government, but
which unfortunately do not lead to concrete action.
The situation led to a paralysis in Mali’s
institutions, notably the Constitutional Court and the
National Assembly. It was in this context of deadlock
that the mutiny of 18 August led to the resignation
of President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita. The coup de
force was condemned by the entire international
community, including the Secretary-General and
the Security Council. In addition to condemning this
unconstitutional change, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) decided to suspend
Mali from all of its institutions and declared sanctions,
including the closure of borders, an air embargo and
the suspension of financial transactions until a civil
transition were put in place.
Since then, days of national consultations were
organized from 10 to 12 September and led to the
adoption of a transition charter, which complements
the current Constitution. As provided for in the charter,
a President of the Transition has been appointed in
the person of Bah N’Daou, a retired Colonel Major
and former Minister of Defence. The head of the
junta, Colonel Assimi Goïta, has was appointed
Vice-President of the Transition in charge of defence
20-25962

08/10/2020

The situation in Mali

and security. Both were sworn in on 25 August before
the Supreme Court. A Prime Minister was appointed on
27 September by the President of the Transition in the
person of Moctar Ouane, former Minister for Foreign
Affairs, in accordance with the transition charter.
(spoke in French)
In his speech on the occasion of his swearing in, on
25 September, President Bah N’Daw listed a number of
priorities that he hoped to would be achieved during the
transition, which he hopes will be smooth.
Those priorities include, first, strengthening the
capacities of the Malian Defence and Security Forces
in terms of equipment and training.
The second priority is the fight against impunity,
which he expressed with the now famous phrase: “I
cannot guarantee that there will be zero corruption, but
I commit to ensuring that there is zero impunity.”
The third priority is to organize free and
transparent elections, which will be key to the return to
constitutional order in the country.
The fourth priority is the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which
resulted from the Algiers process.
The Government, which was formed on 5 October,
is made up of 25 members, in accordance with the
recommendations of the inclusive national dialogue,
of which four are women — equivalent to 16 per cent
of the Government, unfortunately far below the 30 per
cent quota required by law — and 21 are men, including
four members of the military.
I am pleased to report to the Council that it is the
first time since the signing of the Agreement, in June
2015, that the signatory movements have officially
entered the Government in Mali. This progress is
highly symbolic and significant. It is the result of
the openness of the new authorities and signatory
movements, who were encouraged by our good offices
in order to build trust. Thanks to this trust, the Peace
Agreement is included in the preamble to the charter,
and its implementation is enshrined as one of the
Government’s tasks. Therefore, it is with genuine relief
that the people of Mali and neighbouring countries,
including ourselves, have welcomed the lifting of the
ECOWAS sanctions following the statement of the
interim President on 5 October.

S/PV. 8765

As members will have noted, the year 2020 in
Mali has been marked by much tumult and political
uncertainties. The country was without a Government
for more than four months, and the challenges have
multiplied, particularly with the coronavirus disease
pandemic and its socioeconomic impact. This situation
has also led to a considerable delay in the implementation
of the Peace Agreement and has aggravated the
humanitarian crisis, which was already latent.
However, MINUSMA, as well as the agencies,
funds and programmes of the United Nations, remained
committed throughout this period and continued their
activities, including support for the strategy for the
stabilization of central Mali.
Similarly, as part of its adaptation plan, MINUSMA
has continued its patrols and the installation of its
temporary bases in the interest of protecting civilians
and supporting the Malian security and defence forces.
This is how Operation Seka facilitated the return of
Malian armed forces to Labbezanga, in the Gao region
bordering the Republic of the Niger.
With the formation of the new Government and
the lifting of sanctions, we can now hope for the swift
establishment of the national transitional council,
which will serve as the legislative body throughout the
18-month transitional period.
Indeed, the holding credible elections that can lead
to a return to constitutional order depends on political,
institutional, electoral and administrative reforms as set
out in the transition charter. From this point of view, the
transition constitutes an opportunity for Malian women
and men to bring their country from this infernal cycle
punctuated by a regular succession of coups d’état.
The United Nations must also seize this opportunity
to continue supporting and assisting throughout this
important phase for a way out of the crisis in Mali, in
coordination with the entire international community,
in particular the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States.
The success of the transition is therefore within
reach. The ball remains in the court of Malian women
and men. They must mount a surge at the national level.
For its part, MINUSMA is more engaged than ever by
their side.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Annadif for his briefing.

20-259623/16

S/PV.8765

The situation in Mali

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
want to thank Special Representative Annadif for his
briefing and for his work as Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). I also commend the work of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union, which mobilized
efforts from within hours of the onset of the political
crisis in Mali.
France welcomes the transition in Mali. The
authorities in charge of the process have been appointed,
and we wish them every success. A transition charter
has been published. France welcomes the release of
individuals detained since 18 August. And, lastly, we
welcome the lifting of sanctions by ECOWAS and we
would endorse its call for the dissolution of the Comité
national pour le salut du peuple.
This transition must lead to the holding of open,
free and fair elections within the next 18 months and
the re-establishment of constitutional order. France
urges the new authorities to use this period to lay
the groundwork for constitutional reforms to build a
stronger and more legitimate democracy in accordance
with the expectations expressed by the Malian people. It
is crucial that the process include all of the stakeholders,
including women and young people, in accordance with
resolution 2531 (2020).
I want to highlight three priorities for the
months ahead.
First, we must continue our fight against terrorism.
The new momentum begun in January, following the
Pau summit, our partners in the Sahel have made gains
in a number of areas. Despite events in Bamako, the
Malian army has stayed the course. The Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel is ever-more selfsufficient and effective. It still needs support. Terrorist
groups know how to adapt. Humanitarian assistance
and development activities must support security
achievements in the spirit of the integrated approach
supported by the coalition for the Sahel. France
welcomes the involvement of the European Union and
its member States.
Secondly, the implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation In Mali must resume without
further delay. Following progress early in the year,
4/16

08/10/2020

the process has been at a standstill since June. France
would like to reiterate that there is no alternative to this
Agreement for a long-term reconciliation among the
Malian people.
When renewing the MINUSMA mandate, the
Security Council identified priority actions for the
reintegration of former rebels into the national armed
forces; institutional reform; the development of the
northern regions; and the participation of women. This
road map is clear, and the Malian people must seize the
opportunity of having MINUSMA at the ready to help
in these tasks. The participation of the signatory groups
to the Agreement in the transitional Government is an
encouraging sign in that regard.
Finally, the third priority is stabilization in
the centre of Mali. It is essential that international
humanitarian law be respected by all concerned,
and that the transitional authorities work to establish
a framework for dialogue, reconciliation, the fight
against impunity and respect for human rights. France
notes the opening of an investigation into the violence
of recent months and urges the authorities to complete
it in an impartial and independent manner so as to bring
those responsible to justice.
In support of those efforts, MINUSMA continues
its protection of civilian work. But to fully achieve
those goals, MINUSMA’s adaptation plan must be
implemented, including through the provision further
helicopters. I call on Members States to meet these
urgent needs.
In this decisive period, we must reaffirm our
support for MINUSMA and for the priorities that we
have entrusted to it. It is also important to explicitly
encourage it to support the transition. At the end of
this meeting, France will propose a draft presidential
statement reflecting these points.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the African
members of the Security Council, namely, South Africa,
Tunisia and the Niger, as well as Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines (A3+1).
At the outset, I would like to warmly congratulate
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, and thank him for his briefing and his unwavering
commitment to the stabilization of the situation in Mali.
20-25962

08/10/2020

The situation in Mali

The deteriorating sociopolitical situation in Mali
following the protests that led to the events of 18 August
with the change in constitutional order are cause for
concern for our countries. In the light of the negative
impact that these developments could have on the
stability and social, economic and security situations
in Mali, and specifically on the implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) imposed sanctions.
Today we are happy to note the progress achieved
towards normalization in Mali, including the publication
of a transition charter, taking account of the decisions
of the Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS
regarding the progressive return to constitutional order
in the country. These positive developments allowed for
ECOWAS sanctions to be lifted.
Nevertheless, important tasks await the transition,
namely, the fight against terrorism, the restoration of
peace and security throughout the country, institutional
reforms conducive to restoring social peace in the
country and the full operationalization of the Northern
Development Zone.
The Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali remains the best framework for these necessary
and urgent institutional reforms and these priority
tasks. Its implementation must be a priority. Continuing
to implement the strategy for the stabilization of central
Mali is also vitally important if the challenges in central
Mali are to be overcome. To that end, we call on all
Malian political stakeholders to resolutely commit to a
genuine and inclusive dialogue within the framework
of the agreement and the ECOWAS process in order to
comprehensively address the challenges that Mali is
currently facing.
The A3+1 commends the ECOWAS communiqué
of 5 October 2020. It expresses its full support to Mali
and calls upon Mali’s various stakeholders to support
the new Malian civil authorities and to restore State
control and authority across the nation and ensure the
resumption of the provision of vital social services.
We commend the continued efforts of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in the implementation
of those priorities as enshrined in resolution 2531
(2020), including its contribution to reconciliation and
social cohesion in both central and northern Mali. Its
vital support, which allowed for the redeployment of

S/PV. 8765

the new, reconstituted Malian Defence and Security
Forces, must be commended despite the challenges that
remain to be met.
In that respect, in order to build on the progress
already made, it is vital that we step up our efforts to
resolve all remaining challenges so that the reconstituted
and redeployed units can play their role and contribute
more effectively to security in northern Mali, including
in Kidal, and to facilitating the return of State authority
in those regions.
In the same vein, the A3+1 commends the
commitment and mediation efforts made by ECOWAS
over recent months. This reflects its ownership and its
leadership in the process of the peaceful resolution of
the multidimensional crises that have the region in their
grip. We encourage ECOWAS to continue to support the
Malian people in the implementation of the road map
in coming months. The quest for peace and stability in
Mali requires that ECOWAS, the African Union and
the United Nations must work closely together and pool
their efforts to achieve lasting peace. The maintenance
of peace, security and stability in Mali is vital to
bringing about peace, security and calm throughout
West Africa and beyond.
Because the events of 18 August in Bamako are not
new to the Malian people, there is a need to review the
Malian political and governance model and the manner
in which international development partners operate in
the country. Development plans and programmes must
be people-centred and foster inclusive participation and
full ownership on the part of the Malian people. To that
end, the Malian people must be the principal actors in
restoring stability in their country.
In terms of security, Mali and the Sahel remain
vulnerable to the atrocities of terrorism. Violent
extremism, intercommunal violence and organized
transnational crime require greater attention. We
remain worried by the continued attacks on civilians,
MINUSMA peacekeepers and the Malian forces, and
we condemn them. We reaffirm that the perpetrators of
those heinous crimes must be brought to justice.
We will continue to reaffirm that peace is a global
public good. The threats to security in Mali and
in the Sahel are spilling over borders and can have
catastrophic repercussions on the rest of the African
continent and the world as a whole. The efforts of
the Sahelian States must be supported appropriately,

20-259625/16

S/PV.8765

The situation in Mali

both bilaterally and multilaterally, especially in their
collective undertakings.
The Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
Joint Force has made it possible to carry out several
large-scale operations since its creation in 2017, in
keeping with its mandate. In order to be more broadbased and decisive, its efforts require predictable and
sustained support.
The
A3+1
commends
the
international
community’s support, in particular that of MINUSMA,
for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We are encouraged by
the progress made within the framework of resolution
2531 (2020) on improving support for the Joint Force.
That will have an immediate operational impact on
the Force.
However, given the provisions of resolution 2491
(2019), which specifically state that support for the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force must not interfere in MINUSMA’s
performance, and given the recent sociopolitical and
security in Mali, which requires that MINUSMA
redouble its efforts and focus on the core tasks of its
mandate in order to achieve its strategic priorities,
we believe that it is high time for robust support to be
extended to the Joint Force through a dedicated support
office, as has been suggested by the Secretary-General
on numerous occasions.
In conclusion, the humanitarian situation in
Mali and the Sahel remains of grave concern. The
consequences of the coronavirus disease, flooding and
food insecurity, which have increased at an alarming
pace, require urgent funding of the humanitarian
response plan for 2020. As of 31 August, only 35 per
cent of the $474 million needed for its implementation
had been received.
In order to tackle sustainably the many challenges
facing the region, we must adopt a holistic approach to
address the immediate challenges facing Mali and the
region in general, namely in the areas of development,
poverty and unemployment.
Against that backdrop, we call on Mali’s
international partners to step up their efforts to
support Mali at this particularly delicate stage for the
country in order to contribute to stabilizing the country
and ensure its transition towards a fully stable and
prosperous democracy.
6/16

08/10/2020

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his briefing.
I listened attentively to the remarks made by
other members of the Security Council, especially the
representative of the Niger on behalf of the African
members of the Council and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines. I think that many of their views merit our
high-level attention.
The recent situation in Mali has triggered
widespread attention on the part of the international
community. China has been following closely the
recent developments in Mali. We are pleased to
note that the President and Vice-President of the
transitional Government have been sworn in and that
the Prime Minister has been appointed. The Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) issued
a communiqué on 5 October on its decision to lift
the sanctions on Mali. We welcome these positive
developments and commend the efforts of the Malian
stakeholders and ECOWAS on their commitment to a
peaceful resolution of the crisis.
That said, in order to restore peace and stability in
Mali, many challenges remain. The implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is
stalled. In central and northern Mali, the security and
humanitarian situation have deteriorated, compounded
by new and complex factors related to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). It is our sincere hope that all
parties in Mali will put the interests of the country and
the people first, remain on the track of dialogue and
cooperation and build on the positive momentum, so as
to form the transitional government without delay and
advance the transition in a steady manner.
As to the focus for the next steps, we believe that it
is important to continue to implement the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Since the agreement
was signed, in 2015, considerable progress has been
achieved thanks to the efforts of all Malian stakeholders.
However, much remains to be done. We urge the
transitional Government and Malian stakeholders
to renew their commitments to the agreement and to
advance its implementation in conjunction with the
transitional process through, inter alia, institutional
reform; disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
and the consolidation of State authority.
Fighting terrorism is another priority. The
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2020/952)
points
20-25962

08/10/2020

The situation in Mali

to the increased frequency of terrorist activities,
with terrorist organizations capitalizing on current
fragilities, thus aggravating the security situation in
northern and central Mali. Those trends are cause for
heightened vigilance.
We encourage the transitional Government to work
more closely with the international community and
employ all the means available to fight terrorism and
violent extremism. China endorses the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) through its continued support of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel within the
parameters of its mandate.
Sustainable development must continue to move
forward in order to eliminate the root causes of
instability. Just now, the representative of the Niger
stressed, on behalf of the African members of the
Council, that we need to take a holistic approach. I
fully agree with that. I also think that it is important
for Mali’s transitional Government to increase its
commitments to, and investment in, socioeconomic
development, including efforts to secure tangible
results in the Northern Development Zone and provide
health care, education and other essential services to
its people in order to effectively improve their standard
of living. We call on the international community
to act and assist Mali in its fight against COVID-19,
support its economic and social recovery and help it
achieve independent and sustainable development at an
early date.
At the international and regional levels, there must
be increased support and greater synergy. That means
we need to continue to support African countries in
finding African solutions to African problems and
support the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union in their important roles to
help advance Mali’s transition.
We applaud the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and MINUSMA for continuing to
perform their duties under complex circumstances, and
support their ongoing vital activities to maintain peace
and stability in Mali. We urge Malian stakeholders to
increase coordination with MINUSMA and ensure the
safety and security of peacekeepers.
As we speak, Mali finds itself at a crucial juncture.
Malian parties must use this transition as an opportunity
to open a new chapter for national peace, stability and
prosperity. Together with the rest of the international

S/PV. 8765

community, China stands ready to continue contributing
to peace and development in Mali.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam,
the two other States members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations on the Security Council.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), for his insightful briefing. We
welcome Ambassador Issa Konfourou, Permanent
Representative of Mali, to this meeting.
We reaffirm our support for the unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Mali. We are
concerned that since the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation on Mali, the Malian people have yet to
fully enjoy peace and stability.
We closely follow recent developments in Mali
and take note of the appointment of the President and
the Prime Minister of the transitional Government
in Mali. We join other Member States in welcoming
and supporting the tremendous efforts by leaders of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to stabilize the situation and prevent
violence. We also welcome the 5 October declaration
of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government on Mali.
We also commend MINUSMA’s efforts, particularly
those to enhance its early-warning and rapid response
capacities. We welcome the continued support it
provides to the Government of Mali in its response
to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and its redeployment of the reconstituted units of the
Malian forces to northern Mali. We also take note of
the progress of the catch-up phase to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in Mali.
However, we remain concerned about the security
situation, especially in central Mali, due to terrorism
and intercommunal violence. The number of terrorist
attacks on civilians, peacekeepers and security forces
has increased in the north and centre of Mali. We
would like to extend our deepest condolences to the
Government and the families of those who lost their
lives in terrorist and extremist attacks. We reiterate that
such attacks are unacceptable and their perpetrators
must be brought to justice.

20-259627/16

S/PV.8765

The situation in Mali

A successful transition requires tremendous efforts
to tackle challenges such as food insecurity, organized
crime and abuses linked to the spread of violent
extremism, terrorism and the spread of the COVID-19
pandemic. In that regard, we would like to make the
following points.
First, we urge the transitional Government and
parties concerned to strengthen mutual trust, work
together to promote reconciliation and carry out a swift
transition to civilian rule. It is also important that they
resolve their differences through dialogue and honour
the 2015 peace agreement. The meaningful participation
of women in the early stages of the political process
must be ensured.

08/10/2020

uniformed personnel for their commitment to peace and
stability in Mali, especially in this very difficult time.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): At the outset, I would like
to express Estonia’s full support to the work of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and Special Representative Annadif. I
also wish to think Mr. Annadif for his excellent briefing.
Estonia notes positively the formation of the
transitional Government in Mali. We call on all the
parties to ensure that it is operational and to start
preparing for the elections ahead. It is important to
refrain from any build-up of tensions and for all parties
to work together. The rule of law and constitutional
order in Mali must be restored without any delay.

Secondly, we stress the urgent need to ensure the
safety of the Malian people and to continue fighting the
COVID-19 pandemic. The transitional Government and
other stakeholders should also uphold their obligations
and responsibilities to implement international
humanitarian law and protect women and children
in Mali.

The role of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union is
essential in easing the tensions in the political crisis in
Mali. We commend ECOWAS for its swift reaction and
continuous engagement in supporting the restoration
of constitutional order in Mali, and welcome their
announcement on Tuesday on the lifting of sanctions.

Thirdly, we call for a coherent and integrated
approach to the security, humanitarian, and
socioeconomic development challenges in Mali,
including with regard to addressing the impacts of
climate change. There should be more workshops,
capacity-building seminars and training courses for
women and youth on sustainable development. It is
also necessary for all parties to take decisive action
to address the most urgent humanitarian needs and
destabilizing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The Algiers Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
on Mali remains the basis for a political solution and
peace in Mali. We are encouraged by the positive tones
that the transitional Government has taken regarding the
implementation of the Agreement, and we now urge the
parties to follow up their promises with concrete steps.

Fourthly, we call for support and the continued
implementation of MINUSMA’s adaptation plan in
order to enhance the Mission’s ability to project force
throughout Mali. In addition, we stress the importance
of the redeployment of the reconstituted units of the
Malian armed forces, especially in the north. It is also
essential that the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel continue to receive the support needed to
carry out its tasks.
Lastly, we reiterate our support for the efforts of the
United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS and the
international community in facilitating the transition
process and promoting stability in Mali.
We commend the tireless efforts of Special
Representative Annadif, United Nations civilian and
8/16

The tasks ahead of the transitional Government are
not going to be easy since many challenges to achieving
lasting peace in Mali remain. We urge all Malian parties
to address the grievances of the society in earnest. It
is important to implement the much-needed reform
agenda and deal with the structural challenges. In this
regard, the full and meaningful participation of women
in political processes remains of key importance.
We remain concerned about the overall deterioration
of the security situation in the country. The growing
number of clashes between the terrorists and other
armed groups are only further exacerbating the plight
of civilians. Estonia continues to support Mali through
various international platforms. At the same time, it
is important to stress that lasting peace in the country
can be achieved only through full engagement and
cooperation between the Malian parties.
Estonia strongly condemns all violations of human
rights in Mali, and we call on the authorities to conduct
full investigations and hold perpetrators accountable.
20-25962

08/10/2020

The situation in Mali

The allegations against the national security forces and
the authorities need to be taken especially seriously. A
lasting solution can only be built on trust between the
people and the Government.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I join others
in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his
valuable briefing.
Let me begin by saying that the United Kingdom
very much welcomes the establishment of the civilianled transitional Government in Mali. We commend the
decisive action taken by the Economic Community
of West African States in response to events in Mali
in August and the strong role of the subregion in
supporting the progress made since then.
The last time we met to discuss Mali, on 19 August,
the United Kingdom called for a return to civilian
government as soon as possible to deliver for and engage
with the frustrations of the long-suffering Malian
people. We therefore echo the Secretary-General’s
call for the transitional authorities to take ownership
of implementation of the 2015 Algiers Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The 2015 agreement
remains the bedrock of building stability and peace in
the country.
I am pleased to hear from Special Representative
Annadif that a signatory group has entered
the Government, and I am pleased to hear that
implementation of the agreement is a key part of the new
Government’s mission. But let us be frank — there has
simply not been enough progress on the political track
since 2015, neither have the former Government and
its Ministers nor the signatory groups taken seriously
enough their obligations to deliver on that agreement.
Meanwhile the people of Mali have suffered and
peacekeepers in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
have paid with their lives.
I therefore wish today to pass a clear message to
the new Government of Mali and to all the signatories
of the 2015 agreement. There is no time to waste.
There can be no more evasion of responsibilities. They
must now demonstrate that they are serious — serious
about securing the country and serious about providing
services to their people who need them, especially in
the north and in the centre.

S/PV. 8765

I see in the Chamber today the representative of
Mali, and I look forward to hearing from him later.
He is an excellent colleague and always has important
things to say. But I would just like to say to him — and
I hope he can report this to his Government — that by
our next meeting I hope he will be able to tell us about
substantive progress on the following five issues.
The first issue is the implementation of the 2015
peace agreement. I do not mean words about an
intention to do so, but actual steps in that direction. I
want to echo the representative of Estonia’s words on
the importance of the participation of women.
Secondly, concrete steps must be taken to return
the State to the north and the centre of the country and
to provide services to the people who live there.
Thirdly, the catch-up phase of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process must
be completed.
Fourthly, reports of human rights violations and
abuses must be investigated, and action must be taken
against impunity.
Fifthly, political, administrative, electoral and
institutional reforms must be undertaken to prepare the
grounds for elections.
None of us expects miracles in three months, but
I think we need to see action on all those strands and
evidence of progress. We are there to support Mali.
The United Kingdom will be following up both in New
York and in Bamako. We continue to play our part. Our
bilateral spend in the Sahel is now over $100 million a
year, which is primarily humanitarian in nature, and,
through multilateral channels, we contribute a third of
$390 million a year. Furthermore, the United Kingdom
will deploy a long-range reconnaissance task force to
MINUSMA this year.
With respect to MINUSMA, may I just say that
we welcome the progress made by the Mission under
trying circumstances, including the difficulties and
challenges presented by the coronavirus disease. The
rationale for mission adaption to increase MINUSMA’s
flexibility and mobility of operations remains strong.
MINUSMA will, of course, continue to have a vital
role to play in supporting implementation of all of
the points I have just made. But we will look to the
Malian authorities, of course, primarily, working with
MINUSMA, to reinvigorate the process.

20-259629/16

S/PV.8765

The situation in Mali

Let me end by saying again that we are in the
Chamber to support Mali. We are here to support the
people of Mali and the Government of Mali. We are
here to support the country’s transition. But we expect
to see tangible progress in the next reporting period.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his briefing and for his
leadership and that of his team during the current
political crisis in Mali. It is especially great to see him
in the Chamber today. I thank him for being here.
The leadership of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) have played vital roles
in stabilizing the political situation created by the
18 August overthrow of Mali’s elected president. The
United States condemns these actions and immediately
halted our security assistance in Mali in response.
Since August, progress has been made to return to
constitutional order, but let me stress: the establishment
of a transitional Government in Mali is only the first
step. We urge the transitional Government to honour all
its commitments to ECOWAS.
The Security Council should be prepared to
use the tools available to it should the transitional
Government fail to uphold its commitments. We will
not accept military control over civilian authorities,
delays to elections or elections that are not credible.
Former officials and all others detained without judicial
process must be released. Free and fair elections must
be held within 18 months. Elections must also include
the full, effective and meaningful participation of
women, internally displaced persons and refugees,
youth populations and marginalized northern groups.
The central provisions of the 2015 Algiers
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali remain
relevant to the country’s long-term stability and that of
the region. The transitional Government must adhere
to its commitment to moving implementation of the
framework forward, and we hope to see continued
regional engagement, including by ECOWAS. We also
expect the transitional Government to ensure greater
meaningful participation of women at all levels and
in processes and institutions that support and monitor
implementation of the Algiers accord.
We remind all actors that obstructing or delaying
implementation of the agreement is grounds for listing
10/16

08/10/2020

by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2374 (2017) concerning Mali. We urge MINUSMA to
continue its support for and cooperation with the 2374
Committee and the Panel of Experts.
Recent events clearly indicate further need to
address Mali’s long-standing governance shortcomings.
The transitional Government will need to follow through
on its commitments to improving governance and to
supporting Mali on its path towards democratic rule
and sustainable peace. Malian citizens must believe that
their Government is legitimate, equitable and willing
to meet their needs. This means ensuring justice and
accountability for human rights violations and abuses
committed by security forces. If that commitment is
absent, no degree of international engagement is likely
to succeed.
Now more than ever, we recognize MINUSMA’s
vital role in protecting civilians and stabilizing the
country. We look forward to MINUSMA helping Mali to
hold free and fair elections, supporting the transitional
Government to achieve its stated goals, including fully
implementing the Algiers accord, and extending the
rule of law. We expect further progress in the Mission’s
protection work in the centre, especially responding
to early warnings with specific protection for women
and children. We also expect MINUSMA to continue
its efforts to facilitate the return of the State presence,
State authority and basic social services in the centre,
which are key to the Mission’s long-term exit strategy.
Finally, allow me stress that the United States
remains a steadfast partner of the Malian people.
The United States Special Envoy for the Sahel visited
Bamako last week to underscore that point with the
new authorities, as well as to signal our continuing
partnership with the Malian people. Two weeks ago,
Secretary Pompeo announced nearly $152 million to
help people displaced by conflict in the Sahel, of which
approximately $54 million is for Mali.
Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
efforts of the Russian presidency of the Security Council
to enable us to resume our meetings in the Chamber.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Minister Annadif for his
briefing. I would like to take this opportunity to thank
him and all United Nations staff in Mali for their tireless
efforts in often difficult and dangerous circumstances.
In that regard, I would like to point out that Belgium
20-25962

08/10/2020

The situation in Mali

continues to provide specialist troops to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). There are currently
95 military personnel, in close cooperation with our
German partners. The fact that Belgian soldiers serve
in Mali today under the German flag is a fine example
of the unity of our European Union (EU). I will address
five points in my statement.
First, Belgium has condemned the seizure of
power by the military on 18 August. Mali faces an
additional challenge as it struggles to emerge from the
multidimensional crisis affecting it and the region. It is
positive that the Economic Community of West African
States reacted immediately and decisively, resulting
in the latest welcome developments. The appointment
of a civilian President and Prime Minister, as well as
the formation at of a Government to implement the
Transitional Charter, which has now been published, are
important steps on the path back to constitutional order.
Today’s release of the officials detained since 18 August
is a step in the same direction. It is a positive gesture.
Belgium wishes the transitional authorities every
success in their work and hopes that they will be able to
meet the expectations of the Malian people. My country
is ready to support them in carrying out the tasks
set out in the Charter. The organization of credible
elections within 18 months and the constitutional and
institutional reforms, including the important security
sector reform, are in my view a particular priority. In
that regard, Belgium, together with its EU partners, is
currently looking at the modalities for resuming the
operations of the military European Union Training
Mission in Mali and the police EUCAP Sahel Mali
mission in Mali.
Secondly, it is crucial that the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
continue. I welcome the Malian statements to that
effect. Moreover, the struggle against terrorism and
in support of development must not be put on hold. I
would like to recall that, in addition to the necessary
security measures, combating terrorism also involves
strengthening the legitimacy of the State. That could
be bolstered by decisively combating impunity and
the resolve to respect human rights in all situations.
The publication of the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry on Mali will certainly serve
to initiate both reforms and criminal proceedings.
Similarly, I encourage our Malian partners to bring
to a successful conclusion the investigations into the

S/PV. 8765

alleged abuses committed by the defence and security
forces against civilians. That must lead to trials. In that
regard, it is deeply regrettable that, to date, no trials
have been held against alleged perpetrators of crimes
against MINUSMA peacekeepers.
Thirdly, the situation in central Mali remains of
great concern. We call for a reformed State to redeploy
as soon as possible and to perform its statutory role of
protecting its weakest citizens. Self-defence militias
and terrorists are increasing in number for many
reasons — the lack of security, justice, education and,
above all, quality jobs, including for young people. In
that regard, I would like to take this opportunity to
commend the work of MINUSMA, in cooperation with
other actors.
That brings me to my fourth point. We regret that
few women have been appointed to the new Government
despite the fact that Malian legislation provides for
a minimum of 30 per cent women Ministers. The
meaningful participation of women is crucial to the
success of each of the three points I mentioned above
and to finding a way out of the crisis and a longterm solution.
Finally, I would like to stress the importance of
maintaining and strengthening humanitarian access in
order to reach those in need. Countless people continue
to suffer, particularly due to the lack of access to basic
social services, and it is important that such assistance
reach them. In that context, I would like to draw
attention to the contents of the two events organized
last month by the Niger, Belgium and the European
Commission’s Humanitarian Aid Office. It is clear from
those discussions that climate change exacerbates the
plight of the populations in the Sahel. Through those
side events and the meeting convened by the presidency
of the Niger, we have tried to further raise global public
awareness of this disaster and its impact. In conclusion,
I would like to stress that Belgium will remain Mali’s
friend by supporting it on the path to strengthening its
democracy, sustainable development and security.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me first say that
the Security Council has come home. I thank you,
Mr. President, for all your efforts. I think it is good
that we are back in the Chamber and that we are able
to see and talk to each other. I thank you very much for
your initiative.
With regard to Mali, let me first thank the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and,

20-2596211/16

S/PV.8765

The situation in Mali

08/10/2020

indirectly or directly, my colleague from the Niger
for what ECOWAS has done in terms of engagement
and mediation. Let me also welcome the transitional
arrangements. As colleagues before me have said,
what is important is that those arrangements now be
implemented not only in terms of timelines but also in
terms of the transition to a civilian leadership. I believe
that we have said that such a transition offers Mali a
new and fresh start. We all sincerely hope that the new
authorities do not let their population down.

We stand by our engagement. We also promote political
dialogue. We are ready also in the framework of
what Philippe Kridelka said with regard to stronger
engagement concerning police officers. We will remain
engaged through humanitarian assistance, development
cooperation and stabilization mechanisms. Germany
will stand by his side. We know how difficult the
situation is — and climate change has repercussions
that make the work even more difficult — but Issa
Konfourou must not let his people down.

I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Annadif for his briefing. He very clearly
explained the basis for what has happened, namely, the
loss of the population’s trust in the political actors. I
believe that it is key that the new leadership regain its
trust. The Estonian Ambassador has just highlighted
the importance of the new leadership regaining the
people’s trust and addressing their grievances. The key
to that is an inclusive Government. Just like my Belgian
colleague and others said, it is truly a bad start that, in
the month of the twenty-fifth of the Beijing Declaration
and the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
there are 21 men and four women. Why do leaders not
understand that in such transitions, in order to get an
inclusive Government to answer to the needs of the
people, there must be a fair number — 50 per cent, or
even 30 per cent — of women in the Government. I ask
that it be reported back how important it is to have an
inclusive Government. That means that the transitional
leaders have a discussion with civil society, women’s
organizations, youth, artists and people from all levels
of society.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Germany for what he said about us,
but I would just like to note that our lengthy journey
and return home began in July, during the German
presidency of the Security Council, with Germany’s
efforts to return first to the Secretariat and then
to the Chamber. Therefore, the German delegation
pioneered this journey, as did subsequent presidencies,
which was supported by all States members of the
Security Council. I want to thank all my colleagues
at this meeting, once again, for supporting the idea of
returning to the Security Council Chamber.

On the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali, my French colleague, European Union colleagues
and other colleagues have said everything. There is a
clear road map and it needs to be implemented.
Also, with the regard to security sector reform, it
is important that it continue, and the justice sector is
key. The justice sector has to work. Impunity is not an
option. If you want to regain the trust of the people,
those who have committed crimes have to be held
accountable. Otherwise, it will not work.
I want to reconfirm to the Ambassador of Mali the
German commitment to his country. We are a major
troop contributor. We very much appreciate what my
Belgian colleague just said concerning the cooperation
that we have among the countries of the European
Union, in particular with Belgium, in our engagement.
12/16

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I too wish to thank the Russian
presidency for convening meetings of the Security
Council in their usual place. I also thank Christoph
Heusgen and Germany for beginning this journey.
I want to welcome the Ambassador of Mali. I also
want to congratulate the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) for the major work it
has accomplished.
We wish to convey our most sincere appreciation
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Annadif for his comprehensive and timely briefing
on the situation in Mali. At the outset, we pay tribute
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for the
efforts under way at this critical time. Indeed, Mali
stands at a critical juncture. It has sunk further and
further into a political abyss following the events of
August, which seriously impacted its democracy and
was firmly condemned by the international community,
including the Dominican Republic.
We are deeply concerned about the long-lasting
impact that the events of August on the whole gamut
of issues affecting Mali, which seriously undermine
constitutional order and create a political vacuum,
which risks further slowing the implementation of the
20-25962

08/10/2020

The situation in Mali

Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and the
reform agenda, eroding the gains made and fragmenting
the country’s social fabric.
Against this sobering backdrop, at the outset we
must also recognize the strategic and crucial mediation
efforts undertaken by ECOWAS since the beginning of
this crisis. In the context of Mali’s delicate political and
social reality, ECOWAS voiced its strong condemnation
and demanded an expeditious civilian-led political
transition back to constitutional order.
The news regarding the lifting of sanctions
imposed on Mali by the Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS is positive and reveals that there is an
understanding on the actions to be taken on issues
critical to a speedy and successful transition. We are
delighted by the decision taken by the authorities to free
all the civil servants detained during the coup d’état, as
it did yesterday.
The current state of affairs in Mali requires a new
set of priorities to be established and an evolution to
guarantee the speediest possible return to constitutional
order. However, we should in parallel continue to
focus on, demand and support — arguably with
greater dynamism — the implementation of the peace
agreement as the most viable framework to address the
most pressing issues for peace and security. That can be
achieved only through the concerted empowerment of
all Malian society.
The fight against terrorism, violent extremism
and asymmetric attacks, together with national,
regional and international partners, must remain a
priority together with addressing the deteriorating
security, humanitarian and human rights situation in
the centre and north of Mali and strengthening State
authority in those areas. To that end, it is important
to press on with the redeployment of the reconstituted
Malian defence and security forces and to generate
economic opportunities to protect the livelihoods of the
Malian people.
Despite the fact that we are focusing in the immediate
term on the transition, we must also stay focused on
addressing the root causes of conflict in Mali and the
Sahel and recognize the enormous challenges posed
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. At
the same time, we must ensure the full effective and
meaningful participation of women and young people
at all levels and in all spheres, including with the
implementation of the peace agreement.

S/PV. 8765

In addition, we must support mechanisms designed
to deter, through sanctions, individuals who undermine
or impede the implementation of the peace agreement,
as established in resolution 2374 (2017), on Mali. We
also wish to highlight the work of MINUSMA in raising
awareness of the obligations relating to sanctions, and we
encourage regional partners to continue strengthening
cooperation together with the United Nations.
I wish to encourage donor countries to increase
their support for official development assistance and
innovative debt relief and financial programmes for
countries most severely affected by the pandemic and
the devastation it has sown. We call for the vaccine and
other health technologies required to face COVID-19
to be made equitably accessible and for its distribution
to be guaranteed to all human beings on the planet. To
that end, the role of the World Health Organization,
donor countries and the private sector are essential to
achieving this objective on the basis of cooperation,
solidarity and justice.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We are grateful to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh Annadif for
his briefing about the situation in Mali and the work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). As we see
it, in the current circumstances, the Security Council
must continue to focus on the situation in the country.
We remain very concerned about the situation
in Mali after the coup d’état of 18 August. We are
in favour of creating conditions for the speediest
possible resumption of the national dialogue to develop
mechanisms to return the country to constitutional order.
We have taken note of the decisions made by
the interim authorities in this regard, including the
transition charter and the appointments of the President
and the Prime Minister. The formation of a ministerial
Cabinet is also a step in the right direction. We
welcome the discharge from custody of former Prime
Minister Boubou Cissé and other high-ranking officials
arrested on 18 August. We expect that the terms of
the transition period — 18 months — will be strictly
upheld, to be followed by general elections. Prospects
for stabilization in Mali also depend on whether
the new authorities and other political forces will
scrupulously follow the Algiers Agreement on Peace

20-2596213/16

S/PV.8765

The situation in Mali

08/10/2020

and Reconciliation in Mali. We hope that this will be
subject to constructive dialogue with signatory groups.
Security and governance reforms should continue, and
the interests of all peoples of the country, especially in its
northern territories, must be duly taken into accounted.

the same time, we stress that the main responsibility
for the protection of civilians, the restoration of control
over the northern territories and the resolution of
socioeconomic and other problems, is incumbent on the
Malians themselves.

Terrorists, who, judging by their increased attacks,
feel increasingly comfortable, must not be given an
opportunity to benefit from the current predicaments.
Militants’ improvised explosive devices are impacting
civilians more and more often, as was the case in
September, when a bus and an ambulance were attacked.
Especially alarming is the situation in Mopti, which
is the arena of recurrent attacks on military patrols
and convoys. Violent inter-ethnic and intercommunal
clashes continue in the centre of the country. In general,
Mali has suffered an increase in assaults and abductions,
an upsurge of delinquency, racketeering and robberies,
and rising numbers of human rights violations.

In conclusion, we express our appreciation to
Special Representative Annadif for his effective
leadership of the Mission.

The humanitarian situation is also of great concern.
The coronavirus disease pandemic (COVID-19) has
exacerbated the need for food assistance. Schools
remain closed and medical facilities are overburdened.
This calls for an urgent reaction on the part of
humanitarian agencies.
We support the efforts of the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in the area of political mediation for Mali.
We highly commend the role of ECOWAS and its
Special Envoy for Mali, Mr. Goodluck Jonathan. We
call on the Malian authorities to closely engage with
colleagues in the region. We welcome the fact that steps
aimed at the restoration of constitutional rule have led
to the lifting of ECOWAS restrictions for Mali.
We must be mindful that the situation in Mali is
a key factor for regional security. We expect that the
Malian armed forces will continue to fully participate in
the operations of Group of Five Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint
Force and that decisions to galvanize counter-terrorist
action, made at the regional summit in Nouakchott, will
be put into effect.
Bamako and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
must by all means pursue their close cooperation and
coordinated activities. Peacekeepers must proceed
with the efficient implementation of their mandate
in Mali’s northern and central regions. We welcome
the assistance of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, through
MINUSMA, and its help in countering COVID-19. At
14/16

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I too
welcome the Security Council’s return to its traditional
Chamber and the fact that its first meeting here
concerns Mali. I hope that the situation will continue
to improve and that this Chamber will be filled with
representatives of Member States actively participating
in the Council’s work.
I warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
accession of your country to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month of October 2020 and
express to the sisterly delegation of the Republic of the
Niger and Ambassador Abarry our deep appreciation
for their work guiding the Council last month.
I would also like to convey the deep gratitude of
the people of Mali to the Security Council, SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, all countries contributing
troops to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and all partner organizations and friendly countries for
their tireless efforts to help Mali to recover and stabilize.
The Government of Mali takes note of the
report of the Secretary-General under consideration
(S/2020/952) and I thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Mali, for his outstanding briefing and updates on the
latest developments in Mali. I also took careful note
of the messages, appeals and comments of Council
members. I pledge that I will faithfully convey them to
the transitional authorities of Mali. I would now like to
share some comments and observations on the report
of the Secretary-General and the latest developments
in Mali.
As the Secretary-General’s report so aptly notes
and as reflected in many statements made today, the
period under review was marked by socioeconomic
20-25962

08/10/2020

The situation in Mali

problems and socio-political unrest in Mali, linked to
the deterioration of the security situation in the country
and governance issues and further aggravated by a
post-electoral crisis following legislative elections. The
numerous popular demonstrations that resulted from
it were brought to an end by a military intervention,
on 18 August, which sanctioned the resignation
of the President of the Republic, preceded by the
resignation of the Government and the dissolution of
the National Assembly.
Thus, the Comité national pour le salut du peuple
was born, which immediately undertook consultations
with all Malian stakeholders in order to agree, together,
on the architecture and modalities of the transition
in Mali. It was within this framework that national
consultations were held from 10 to 12 September
in Bamako, which enabled representatives of all
components of the country to make an uncompromising
diagnosis of the shortcomings of our democratic system,
with a view to achieving the political and institutional
reforms necessary for the overhaul of the Malian State.
At the end of this participatory and inclusive
process, the charter and road map for the transition were
adopted. The main missions assigned to the transition
relate to the restoration and strengthening of security
throughout the national territory; the recovery of the
State and the creation of the basic conditions for its
re-establishment; the promotion of good governance;
an overhaul of the education system; the adoption
of a social stability pact; the launch of political,
institutional, electoral and administrative reforms; the
organization of general elections in order to pass power
on to the legitimate authorities; and the implementation
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
resulting from the Algiers process. The transition
charter also specifies the bodies responsible for
bringing the transition to fruition.
Thus, in accordance with the charter, an inclusive
electoral college proceeded to the designation on
21 September of Mr. Bah N’Daw as President of the
Transition and Head of State, and of Mr. Assimi Goïta
as Vice-President. The President and Vice-President of
the Transition were sworn in on 25 September.
Subsequently, the President of the Transition and
Head of State appointed Mr. Moctar Ouane as Prime
Minister of the Transition and Head of Government.
The Government, which comprises 25 members
representing a range of national viewpoints, was

S/PV. 8765

formed on 5 October. I must underline here the notable
entry into the Government of four representatives of
movements signatories to the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, including two representatives
of the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and
two of the Platform coalition of armed groups. In the
same vein, a 121-member national transitional council
will soon be set up comprising stakeholders from all
strata of Malian society.
We have made considerable advances in a short
period of time with a view to addressing the concerns
that the Council has raised. Only a short time after the
coup d’état, we have a transitional President, a Prime
Minister, a Government and a road map that must
implemented over the 18 months of the transition.
With respect to bringing about peace in the
country, I can confirm the freeing yesterday of civilian
and military personalities who had been arrested and
detained in connection with the events of 18 August.
Given the current context in Mali, it seems to me
very important to reassure once again all our partners
that our national authorities remain determined to
respect all national and international commitments to
which Mali has freely subscribed, in accordance with
the principle of State continuity.
In that regard, I would like here unambiguously to
reiterate the determination of the transitional authorities
to continue relentlessly with the diligent implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
The investiture speech of the President of the Transition
is proof of this, and the presence, as I noted earlier,
in the Government of representatives of the signatory
movements to the Agreement is a very clear indication
of the will of the Malian parties to pay particular
attention to that central question. In addition, the
transitional authorities of the Transition have also
made a commitment to ensure respect for human rights
throughout the national territory, in particular in the
context of the fight against terrorism, in accordance
with Mali’s international commitments, including by
the Malian Defence and Security Forces.
We cannot fail to mention here the regional
dimension of instability in the Sahel. The Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5) Joint Force has now reached a fairly
encouraging level of operationalization, and the results
obtained are quite significant. Next month we will have
the opportunity to share details on the Joint Force with
the Council. However, the Force still needs to see the

20-2596215/16

S/PV.8765

The situation in Mali

08/10/2020

fulfilment of the promises of support made by the G-5
Sahel partners in order to help consolidate the work
done by the Force on the ground.

will never forget them. I also welcome the lifting of
the ECOWAS sanctions, a very positive step for the
Malian people.

I would like here to echo the call made by the
Secretary-General and the Heads of State of the G-5
Sahel in favour of a mandate under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the predictable
and sustainable funding of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
including through the United Nations.

I also thank the African Union, the European
Union, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the
International Organization of la Francophonie and all
of our bilateral partners that have supported us during
this particularly difficult time.

Mali’s sustainable stabilization process is at a
critical juncture. This is a decisive period for peace
and stability in Mali and in the Sahel. Success in that
area depends first of all on the sacred union of Malian
forces to save our country, and I can assure the Council
that the transitional authorities are fully committed to
laying the foundations for the rebuilding of Mali. I must
also state emphatically that the success achieved in this
crucial period also depends on the level of international
support for exiting the crisis.
I take this opportunity to express the warm thanks
of the transition and the people of Mali to the Heads
of State and Government of ECOWAS for the tireless
efforts they have deployed to support Mali in exiting
the crisis. Its efforts have been pivotal, and our people

16/16

I also commend the outstanding work done on the
ground by the women and men of MINUSMA since
2013, working alongside us and under the able leadership
of Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, under conditions that
I know are not easy, even extremely difficult and often
dangerous, far from family and country. I reiterate the
gratitude of the transitional authorities and the people of
Mali to French-led Operation Barkhane, to the countries
contributing troops to MINUSMA and to all bilateral
and multilateral partners for their continuing support
aimed at a definitive settlement of the Malian crisis.
I would conclude by paying a particularly
strong tribute to all of the victims — I repeat, all the
victims — of the Malian crisis, be they civilian or
military, foreign or Malian, killed in the line of duty.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

20-25962
