UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

2298’”

MEETING:

29 AUGUST

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/22981 . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..1.1.......1............

1

Adoption of the agenda I...........I.........*..............,,,..,,,.,,,

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 August 1981 from the Char& d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Angola to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/14647) . . . . . . . . ..I..................................,.,.,

1

SIPV .2298

PtV

NOTE
Symbolsof UnitedNationsdocuments
arecomposed
of capitalletterscombinedwith figures.Mentionof sucha symbolindicatesa referenceto a United
Nationsdocument.
Documents
of theSecurityCouncil(symbolSl . . .I arenormallypublished
in
quarterlySuppletnettts of theOfficial Records of the Security Council. Thedate
of the documentindicatesthe supplement
in whichit appears
or in whichinformationaboutit isgiven.
The resolutionsof the Security Council,numberedin accordancewith a
systemadoptedin 1964,are publishedin yearly volumesof Resolutions and
I)ecisiartsof the SecrcrityCouncil. The new system,which hasbeenapplied
retroactivelyto resolutions
adoptedbefore1January1965,became
fully operative
on that date.

Chint
Japar
Tunh
Unite
Irelar
1. P
2. c

Ths

Th
Corn
Le

1. *
In ac
2297
to b
tativ
Gerr

Soul
take
COU

2.

I sh

2298th MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 29 August 1981, at 4, p.m.
President:

Mr. Jorge E. ILLUECA (Panama).

Presettt: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America,

Provisional agenda(SIAgenda12298)
I. Adoption of the agenda
2, Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 August 1981from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Angola to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/14647)
The meeting

was called

to order

at 5,lS

p.m.

Adoptlon of the agenda
The agetrda

wus udopted.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 August 1981 from the Charge
d’affalres a.:. of the Permanent MIssion of Angola
to the United Nations addressedto the SecretaryGeneral (5114647)
1, The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanfsh):
In accordance with decisions taken at the 22%th and
2297th meetings, I invite the representative of Angola
to be seated a1 the Council table and the representatives of Brazil, Cuba, the Federal Republic of
Germany, India, Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
South Africa, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia and Zimbabwe to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
At the invitatiott
of the President,
Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola),
took u place at the Coutrcil ruble; Mr. Bueno
(Bruz.il),
Mr.
Rou Kourl
(Cubu),
Mr.
vutt Well
(Federal
Republic of Gertttotry),
Mr. Krishnatt
(India),
Mr. Maitta (Kenya),
Mr. Burwitt (Libyutt
Arab Jattiahiriyu),
Mr. Eksteetl
(South
Africa),
Mr. Ha Vatt
Lau (Viet Nom),
Mr. Luzurevic<
(Yugosluviu)
uttd
Mr. Mashittguidze
(Zimbabwe)
took the places
reserved for thetn ut the side of the Couttcil chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT(itrterpretutiott
fiottl
Spattish):
I shouldlike to inform membersof the Security

Councilthat1receiveda letterfromtherepresentative
of Canadain whichheasksto beinvitedto participate
in the discussionof the item on the agenda.In
accordance
with theusualpractice,I propose,with the
consentof theCouncil,to invite himto takepartin the
discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance
with rule 37of the provisionalrulesof procedure,
At the ittvlration
of the Presidettt,
Mr. Morden
(Canada)
took the place reservedfor
him at the side of
the Council chamber,

3. The PRESIDENT(interpretation
from Spanish):
The first speakeris the representative
of the Federal
Republicof Germany,whomI invite to takea placeat
the Counciltableandto makehisstatement.
4. Mr, van WELL (FederalRepublicof Germany):
Mr. President,
thankyouvery muchfor givingmethe
opportunityto presentmy Government’spositionin
this importantdebateof the SecurityCouncil.It is a
greatpleasure
to do this underthe presidencyof the
Ministerfor ExternalRelationsof Panama,
a country
with whichthe FederalRepublicof Germanyhasvery
closetraditionaltiesof friendship.
5. The latesteventsin southernAfrica, which the
Councilhasbeenconsidering
over thepasttwo days,
representa grave challengeto all those trying to
contribute to a peacefulsolution of the serious
problems
endangering
theregionof southernAfrica as
a wholeandparticularlyNamibia.
6. It is with the greatestdismaythat the Federal
Governmenthaslearnedof theinterventionandarmed
attackof SouthAfrican troopsin Angola,This major
operation,whichrepresents
a clear-cutbreachof the
principlesof the Charterof the UnitedNationsand
can havefar-reachingconsequences
for international
peaceand security is, in the view of the Federal
Government,absolutelyunacceptable.
Not only does
it representa threat to the territorial integrity and
sovereigntyof a StateMemberof the UnitedNations;
it furthermoreheightenstensionsthroughoutthe
wholeregionandimpedes
the processleadingto the
independence
of Namibia.
7. The Governmentof the Federal Republicol
Germany,which valuesits good relationswith the
People’sRepublic of Angola, has been directly
informedby the AngolanGovernmentof the serious
eventswhichhaveoccurred.In view of the gravity of

-

/.

TM-46
of the
struck
severe
such,
appro
teach
matte
meas
doctri
slippe

the situation, the Federal Foreign Office called in the
Ambassador of the Republic of South Africa at Bonn
on 26 August 1981to expressclearly to him the
reactionof the FederalGovernment.

economicstability shouldsupersede
all other considerations,
Wehaverepeatedlyextendedthe handof
friendshipto our neighboursWe have repeatedly
offeredto work with themto our mutualeconomic
benefit,respecting
thepoliticaldifferences
whichexist
8, The Governmentof the Federal Republicof
betweenus.Wehaverepeatedlyinvitedthemto enter
Germanymoststronglycondemns
the SouthAfrican into non-aggression
treatieswith us. Timeand time
interventionin Angola and joins in the demand againwehaveinvitedthemto discuss
theirdifferences
expressingduring the presentdebatethat South with us so that problemscan be peacefullyand
African troopsbe withdrawnfrom Angolanterritory
amicablyresolved.
withoutanyfurtherdelay,
16, However, we have beenequallyadamantthat
9. Togetherwith Caanda,France,the UnitedKing- suchco-operation
cannottake placeif our neighbours
dom and the United States, my Governmenthas allowterroriststo usetheir territoriesassanctuaries
actively contributedto the settinaUP of the oroaosed from whichto attackthe civilianpopulationof South
plan adoptedby the Councilin order to ensurea WestAfrica/Namibia.We have warnedthat should
peacefulsolutionfor Namibia.We are resolvedto
suchattacksbepermittedacrossinternational
borders
continueto work towardsthat goal. It is our firm we shallcarry out our responsibilityto defendthe
opinion that Council resolution435 (1978)should civilian populationunderour protectionandwe shall
remainthe solidbasisfor all our endeavoursin that pursuetheirattackerswhereverandwheneverwecan
direction Weare convincedthat the efforts to reach find them.
a peacefulsolution,to which we feel stronglycommitted,canonly besuccessful
if all partiesconcerned 17. In his letter of 27 Augustlibid.1. mv Minister
exercisethe utmostrestraintand desistfrom any referredto the premeditated
attacksfromacrossthe
actionwhichis likely to endanger
peaceandsecurity borderconductedby the SWAP0againstthe civilian
in that region.
populationof South-West
Africa/Namibia.He pointed
out that thoseattacksof aggression
hadescalatedto
IO, We deplorethe heavylossesin humanlives as newlevelsof intensityduringthepastfewweeks.Let
well as the destructionof civil installations
essential mepointout in graphictermswhatthe effectof those
for the economicwelfare of Angola. The Federal attackshasbeenon the peopleof the Territory, the
Governmentwill continueto do its sharein bringing peoplefor whomthe UnitedNationsclaimsto careso
aboutanimmediate
endto thedangerous
situationthat much.
hasdeveloped.
18. AndreasNdentwaowneda little generalstore
I I. ThePRESIDENT(interpretafiott
from Spanish):
12kilometresnorth-eastof Oshakati.OneNovember
Thenextspeaker
istherepresentative
of SoulhAfrica. morning,SWAP0 terroristsarrivedat his storeand
1 invite himto takea seatat the Counciltableandto
robbedhimandhiswife. After therobbery,theydrove
makehisstatement.
Mr, andMrs. Ndentwato a placea few kilometres
awaywherethey shotMr. Ndentwaandsethistruck
12. Mr. EKSTEEN(SouthAfrica]: Mr. President, alight. Mrs. Ndentwamanaged
to escape.No doubt
may I join other representatives
in extendingcon- the Ndentwaswerecategorizedas“middleclass”by
gratulationsto you on your accession
to the presi- the ideologists
in SWAP0 andwerethereforeslated
dencyof theSecurityCouncilfor thismonth.
for liquidation.There were no storiesin the world
press;there were no consultationsof the Security
13, SouthAfrica hascometo the Councilto state Councilor angryprotestsoutsideembassies;
simplya
its case on the recent developmentsin southern deadshopkeeper,
a burnt-outtruck, anotherwidow.
Angola.After all, SouthAfrica is oneof onlv two or The perpetratorsimmediatelyfled back acrossthe
three countrieswhichactually know what hasbeen borderinto Angola.
happening
in that part of Africa, soour viewscould
presumably
be of someinterestto the Council.The
19. Gne Decemberday, two SWAP0 terrorists
restof theworldhashadto relyon theextravagantand attackeda little village 22 kilometressouth-eastof
imaginativereportsemanating
fromLuanda,
Nkongo.The villagerswere celebratinga wedding
whenthat attackoccurred.Theguestswereterrorized
14. In presentingSouth Africa’s case,I wish to
andthe headman,
Mr. MalakaRarnabas,
wasshotand
emphasize
severalof the pointsmadeby my Minister killed-no doubtbecausehe belongedto a groupof
of ForeignAffairs in his letter of 27 August 1981 whichthe SWAP0 ideologists
disapproved.
Themuraddressed
lo the Secretary-General
lsc~e
S//4652].
derersfled northwardtowardstheirsanctuaries
across
the Angolanborder.
15. Firstly, a choice hasto be madeurgently in
southernAfrica betweenpeacefulcoexistenceand 20. On 6 November1979.early in the morning,a
escalatingcon!Iicl. For its part, South Africa is civiliantruck wasdrivingalonga road28 kilometres
determinedin its choice. Peacefulcoexistenceand north-eastof Ondangwawhenit detonateda Soviet

i

21. 1
1980
to the
attent
invob
West
childr
Terril
those
after
strug
pose
villag
their

on ti

2%
the C
shou
cons
retai

“\
ca
as
in
St
A
in
ar
M
m

23.
reac
SW
rho

24.
beI
pea
pea
live
the
at&
tori
ma

TM-46 land-mine.The truck was carrying 17members
of the local population to their daily work when it
struck the mine: I I men were killed and 6 were
severely hutned. Now they were workers and, as
such, would probably have received the ideological
approbation of SWAPO, but then Marxism-Leninism
teaches that one must not be senthnental about such
matters and that individual life means little when
measured -against the imperatives of revolutionary
doctrine. The SWAP0 terrorists who had laid the mine
slipped quietly back across the Angolan border.

25. The Chartermakesprovisionfor MemberStates
to refer problemswhich constitutethreatsto internationalpeaceto the UnitedNations.We have tried
that courseas welL As 1 mentionedearlier, we
addressed
54lettersto theSecretary-General
in a twoyearperiodin whichwerequested
hhnto usehisgood
officesto assistin loweringtensionin the borderarea
andin establishing
a peacefulatmosphere.
Receiptof
our letterswasnot evenacknowledged.
26. We soughtto stateour caseand expressour
concernsin this regardin the GeneralAssembly,but
the latter, in blatantcontraventionof the Charterand
its own rulesof procedure,refusedto allow us to
speak.And in April of thisyear whendemocraticallyelectedrepresentatives
of the very peoplewhichare
currently beingterrorizedby SWAP0 soughtto lay
theirconcernsbeforethe Council,their reauestto do
so was summarilydismissed.
We have now even
invitedthe members
of theCouncilto visit SouthWest
Africa/Namibiato gainfirst-handknowledgeof the
situationon the borderwith
morecan
-- Angola.
~~ What
~~
we do?

21, During the period from July 1978to September
1980.the Mission of South Africa addressed 54 letters
to the Secretary-General in which it brought to his
attention almost 1.000 such incidents. The incidents
involved the murders of almost 300 citizens of South
West AfricdNamibia, the abductions of 390 schoolchildren and serious injuries to 2.50inhabitants of the
Territory. Without exception, the perpetrators of
those crimes fled back to their sanctuaries in Angola
after carrying out those actions in their so-called
struggle for liberation. From whom is SWAP0 supposed to be liberating itself? From shopkeepers, from
villageheadmen,from workers travelling innocently to
their place of employment?

27. Whathasthe UnitedNationsresponse
beento all
thoseattemptsto solvetheproblemof the SouthWest
African-Angolanborder in a peacefulfashion?Its
responsehas beenpersistentlyto extend aid and
succourto the very organizationwhichis responsible
for threateninginternationalpeace.The UnitedNations,whichwasestablished
to promotethe peaceful
settlementof disputes,has repeatedlyencouraged
SWAPO’s“armedstruggle”and haslavishedupon
SWAP0 every conceivableform of political, propagandaandmaterialassistance.

22. The truth of the matter is that SWAP0 has not
been conducting a “liberation” struggle at all; it has,
on the contrary. been conducting a systematic campaign to terrorize and intimidate the- inhabitants of
South West Africa/Namibia with a view to taking over
the Government of the Territory by armed for& This
should come as no surprise. After all it is quite
consistent with the Leninist formula for seizing and
retaining power. It was Lenin himself who said:

28. What recoursedoes South Africa and the
aggrievedpeopleof theTerritory thenhave?Wehave
receiveda greatdealof piousadviceconcerningthe
necessity
for restraint.Rut whatrestrainthasSWAP0
shown?

“We have never rejected terror on principle, nor
can we do so . . , We would not for one moment
assert that individual strokes of heroism are of no
importance at all . . . [Marxism] organizes tactics of
strife and renders them suitable for general use , + .
As the economic and political crises become more
intense, ever new and different methods of defence
and attack will be used in [guerrilla] combat. Hence,
Marxism never will reject any particular combat
method, let alone reject it for ever.”

29. As my Ministerof ForeignAffairs haspointed
out in hisletterto the Secretary-General,
SouthAfrica
statedas longagoas20 September1978that it was
willingto confirmthat themomentSWAP0undertook
to stopviolenceandin fact carriedoutits undertaking,
action againstSWAP0 by the South African forces
wouldcease[S/12854].
My Ministerrepeated
that offer
theday beforeyesterday[seeS/146521.

23. What alternatives are open to South Africa in
reacting to the unprovoked attacks mounted by
SWAP0 against the civilian population of the Territory’!

30. Therearethosewhosaythat the solutionof this
problemlies in the immediateimplementation
of
Council resolution435 (1978).But it is precisely
SWAPO’sterrorist attacks and the fear that they
wouldcontinueafter implementation
of the planthat
constituteoneof the mainobstacles
to imp!ementation. Apart from anythingelse,if SWAP0 continues
its presentpolicy of assassination
therewill be few
democraticpoliticiansleft in the Territory to contest
an election,SWAP0 hasalreadymurderedmorethan
20 leading politicians. including such men as

24. The Charter of the United Nations enjoins Member States to settle their international disputes by
peaceful IrledI1S. WC have tried this: we have repeatedly informed neighbouringStates of our wish to
live in neace with them: we have rcueatedlv asked
them not to harbour terrorists or to allow terrorists to
attack South West Africa/Namibia from their territories: we have repeatedly offered to discuss these
nratters with them.
3

Mr. Clemens Kapuuo, Mr. Shiagaya and Chief Mip
ister Elifas of Ovambo. Those men were widely
respected and authentic leaders of their people,
31, Clemens Kapuuo was a frequent petitioner before the United Nations in the cause of Namibian
iudeoendence.No one can auestion the dedication of
thosk leaders to the people bf the Territory. And yet
thev were cut down by SW,QPO bullets. assassinated
in their prime by that party which now pretends to be
willing to bubniit to the democratic process.
32. Soulh Africa’s response to SWAPO’s campaign
of’ terrorism and intimidation is clear. It was once
again stated unequivocally by my Prime Minister in
Parliamentlast Wednesday, 26 August 1981:
“The Government of South Africa has in the
recent past unfailingly and seriously requested our
neighbouring States and other countries in Africa to
work together in the pursuit and achievement of
peaceful economic prosperity, welfare and stability
for all. At the same time, the Government has
warned these countries and requested them not to
harbour communist-supported terrorists who operate against South West Africa/Namibia and the
Republic of South Africa, or to allow them to
operate against us from neighbouring territories,
“It therefore obviously follows that we cannot sit
and wait on our side of the border for terrorists to
come across to commit murder, plant land-mines
and to intimidate.
“I trust that the MPLA Government will now take
heed of our request for non-interference and of our
ideal to live in peace with our neighbours, and will
cease their involvement in operations which are not
aimed against them, but against terrorism, and that
they will comply with our requests to engage in
discussions with us.”
33. At the outset of my statement, 1 referred to the
letter from my Minister of Foreign Affairs to the
Secretary-General [ihid.] to the effect that a choice has
to be made urgently in southern Africa between
peaceful coexistence and escalating conflict and that
South Africa for its part was determined that peaceful
cocxistencc and economic stability should supersede
;ill other ronsidcralions.
34. ‘I‘hc countries of Africa need fear nothing from
South Africa if they dccidc to make a similar choice. If
they should so decide, we would gladlyjoin hands with
them in combating the continent’s real problems:
hunger. disease. ignorance and lack of economic
&v~lolmcnl.
Those arc the ghosts which haunt the
Jay-lo-day lives of hutrdrcds of millions of ordinary
Africans-those and the spectre of Soviet imperialism.
Africa needs greater food production; it needs schools
and colleges: it needs hospitals and clinics; it needs
t:dctorics atld industries. It dots not need Kalash-

%

nikovs, political commissars and the alien ideologies
of Marx and Lenin,
35. The Council is at present engagedin a debate on
allegations of what is called aggression by South
Africa against Angola, South Africa emphatically
rejects that accusation. South Africa harbours no
aggressive intentions against Angola and its people.
36. The problems on the border are, as in the past,
the direct result of SWAP0 activity. The Angolan
authorities are also aware that any action on the part of
the South African security forces is aimed solely at
SWAP0 and not at Angola and its people.
37, The Council has heard a great deal of extravagant
rhetoric during this debate. The imagination of the
Angolan representative, for example, was unrestrained in his descriptions of recent events in southern
Angola. But those were merely words signifying
nothing, completely detached from reality.
38. Let me instead quote from a wire service report
which was filed today by an international .;Durnalist
who actually visited the scene of South Africa’s recent
operation in Xangongo, a town which Angola claims
was bombed by South Africa:

I in
mal

I
I
I
I
I,
1
!

I

“Parts of the town were scattered with South
African leaflets, dropped before the attack, urging
civilians to evacuate. One old man, asked why he
had come back while the South Africans were there,
said, ‘I have lived here for 34 years. Why should
I stay away?’ ”
The reporter continues:

&f&
arn
mo
exr
An;
syn
the
43.
sad
COI

hin
dec
COI

I

“The townspeople appeared to be going about
their normal business. Pigs and goats ran through the
streets ahead of us.
“The town, populatedby about 2,000people, was
obviously run down and it was difficult to decide
between decay and military damage.But it appeared
that the centre had been hardly touched by war,
with just a few bullet holes in the walls . . .

&
thrc
me

!ri

inc
GO

wil
fur
1

44.
SO!

mil
COI
45,
net
h
fra
co
w
z
Wi

“We arrived at the football stadium, where a
match watched by some 200 spectators, military and
civilian, was beingorganized between South African
soldiers and a local team.”
is the sort of scene that the representative of
Angola has described in the Council as “a massacre
not too far from genocide” [2296r11
meeting, patu. 81.
‘I’hat

39. General Constand Viljoen, Chief of the South
African Defence Force, announced yesterday that the
security forces which had been involved in follow-up
operations against SWAP0 elements in southern
Angola had complettd their limited task and were now
returning to their bases. Advance groups are already
back in South West AfricalNamibia.

Ch
Ii
llli

47
an
ml

40, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speakeris the representativeof Canada.
I invitehimto takea placeat theCounciltableandto
makehisstatement.
41. Mr, MORDEN (Canada):Mr. President,on
behalfof the Governmentof CanadaI shouldlike
throughyouto thanktheSecurityCouncilfor allowing
meto participatein thisdebate.
42, It waswith the deepestregretthat the Canadian
Governmentlearnedof the incursioninto Angolaby
armedforces of South Africa. The eloquentand
movingstatementby Mr. de Figueiredohasfully
expressedthe distressand plight of the peopleof
Angola, and my Governmentextendsits deepest
sympathyto thosewho are sufferingat the handsof
the SouthAfrican armedforces.
43. On 26 August1981,the SouthAfrican Ambassadorin Ottawawascalledin andCanada’s
profound
concernover the situationin Angolawasexpressed
to
him.He wasinformedthat theCanadian
Government
deeplydeploredthe escalationof violence, which
couldonly serveto heightentensionin the areaand
Dutin serious
.ieooardvthe negotiations
for Namibia’s
independence-fofo;
whichthe tiestern contactgroup,
in&dine Canada.had beenstrivinn. The Canadian
GovernGenthop& that the Republicof SouthAfrica
will terminateitsincursions
intoAngolaandavoidany
furtherescalation
of theconflict.

49. Permitme first of all to readout a telex messageaddressed
today to the Secretary-General
by
Mr. DanielT, Arap Moi, Presidentof the Republicof
Kenya,in hiscapacityascurrentChairman
of OAU. It
states:
“I havelearnedfromthePresident
of thePeople’s
Republicof Angolaaswell asfrom informationby
newsagenciesand other reuortsthat the racist
r6gimeif SouthAfrica haslauhchedanunprovoked
attack on the Peonle’sRepublicof Angola, As
currentChairman
of OAU, I ‘havethe responsibility
to bringto your noticethe gravityof thisact by the
South African rdgime,The attack is not only a
flagrantviolationof the sovereigntyand territorial
integrityof Angola,a memberStateof OAU, but it
also constitutesa grave threat to peacein the
southernAfrican region and indeed the whole
world. For this reason1mustregisteron behalfof
my country and on behalf of -0AU our strong
condemnation
of the barbarousattacksby South
Africa on the sovereignStateof Angola,The South
African racistr6gimestands
condemned
byall OAU
memberStatesand,on myown behalf,I wouldlike
not only to expressindignationat thoseattacksbut
also to appealto the United Nations,and the
Security Councilin particular,to take appropriate
actionagainsttheSouthAfrican regimesothat such
actionsareneverrepeatedagain.As a priority, the
South African regimemustfirst and immediately
withdraw its forces from Angola and stop any
further attacks.”

44. RepeatedSouth African violationsof Angolan
sovereigntyare totally unacceptable
and the current 50. As weall know,theworldof theracistr&gimeof
military activity posesa grave escalationof the South Africa hasbeenshrinking-nay, crumblingconflict,whichmustbeunreservedlycondemned.
fast. Before the collapseof the Portuguese
empire
sevenyearsago,theworldof the racistregimelooked
45. The situationemphasizes
oncemorethe acute solidandsecure.Therewasstill somehopeleft when
needfor a solutionto theNamibianissue.Canada
calls the otherracistregimein Zimbabweexisted.Now, in
for an immediate
withdrawalof SouthAfrican forces desperation.
the racistregimeishopelessly
clingingto
from Angolaandfor SouthAfrica’s full andgenuine Namibiaandhasadopteda policy of lashingout at its
co-operation
with international
effortsto bringabouta neighbourswhich opposethe evil policiesof that
peacefulnegotiatedsettlement
in Namibia.
regime.Thetacticsarenot newandit is anillusionto
believethattheywill succeed
in stoppingthemarchto
46. ThePRESIDENT(interpretation from Spanish):
freedomof the peopleof southernAfrica.
Thenext speakeris the representative
of Kenyawho
will be speakingas representativeof the current 51. The latestinvasionof Angolaby SouthAfrica is
Chairman
of theOrganization
of African Unity (OAU). only onein a seriesgoingbackto thetimeAngolawas
1invitehimto takea placeat the Counciltableandto strugglingfor its freedomfrom the colonialPower
makea statement.
somesix years ago. Each time the invasion is
mounted,a-packof-liesareput out to cover the real
47. Mr. MAlNA (Kenya):Mr. President,I thankyou reasons
for the attack. This time, hot pursuitof the
andthe members
of the SecurityCouncflfor granting freedomfightersof Namibiaand destr&tionof their
methisopportunityto address
the Council.
allegedbases
aregivenasthe reasons.
Weknowfrom
the pressandother sourcesthat the invasiontook a
48. You, Mr. President,bring to your office very longtimeto planandthat Angola,not SWAPO,was
wideexperiencegainedover the longperiodof your the target.
distinguished
career.Comingasyoudo fromPanama,
a country that hasbeenstrugglingto consolidate
its 52. In this situation,the Council has a straightterritorial integrity andfreedom,you are in a better forward duty, in our view, to condemnthe unpositionthan mostto appreciatethe problemsfacir procokedaggression
andbreachof internationalpeace
and security. We listenedwith dismayto the statethepeoplesof southernAfrica.
5

1
-,:

:

.,/,’

.’
.’

8. ,

L:’
,_,

‘,
i‘
:t

ments madeby the representative of the United States
yesterday [22961/rnreeting]. He stated that the attack
must be seen in the context of the whole situation in
the region. In other words, he understands and by
implication accepts the reasons for the attack, reasons
which make him unwilling to condemn the aggression.
Coming from a permanent member of the Security
Council, those words have very great significance.
They provide carte ‘blanche to South Africa to carry
out such aggression with the assurance of support
where it matters most. South Africa has few friends in
the world, but to have a powerful friend and ally is a
great compensation,
53. We think that the world security situation is
rapidly deteriorating. Instead of a calm handling of
accidentalbreaches of international peaceand security
there is discernible jubilation in certain quarters. This
is a dangerous new development and unless the
Council can speak out loud and clear againstthe forces
that encourage war, it will not be long before those
forces plunge the world into untold misery and destruction.
54. One does not justify a breach of peacein one part
of the world by citing a breach of peace elsewhere. If
you are responsible, you condemnall such breaches of
peace, wherever they may occur. That is why we
appealstrongly to all members of the Council to join in
condemning South Africa for unleashing this unprovoked attack against Angola.
55. We listened with interest io the statement made
by the representative of the racist rCgime in the hope
that we could find some realjustification for the attack
mounted by his country against Angola, but unfortu-

-

nately we found no reasons that could convince
anyone.
56. South Africa has claimed’and arrogated to itself
the right to determine the kind of peaceful coexistence
that should exist in its region with its neighbours and is
determined to lay down the terms.
57. I listened carefully to learn whether there was
any reason given why South Africa had not quit
Namibia, but I did not hear any. His whole statement
was based on the assumption that South Africa has
some right to be in Namibia. WC do not accept that
assumption and any claims for the possibility of a
peaceful coexistence with the racist-regime are an
illusion. Certainly, if South Africa is looking for
support and acceptance of its policies. whereby it
regards freedom fighters elsewhere as terrorists while
terrorist activities in South Africa itself are supposed
to be ignored and not looked at by anybody who is
opposed, then the grounds for co-operation or peaceful coexistence referred to are no more than an
illusion.
58. We trust that the Council will join together, as it
has done in the past, to condemn the actions of South
Africa and demand the complete withdrawal of its
forces from Angola.
59. The PKESIDENT (interpretcrtion
from Spanish):
I should like to inform the Council that the Secretariat
has received a draft resolution sponsored by the
delegations of Mexico, Niger, Panama, the Philippines, Tunisia and Uganda, which will be officially
circulated to members of the Council.
The meeting

rose NI 6 p.m.

I:
.i

::,:
