S/2009/283

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 June 2009
Original: English

Letter dated 2 June 2009 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 13 May 2009,
which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

09-35757 (E) 100609

*0935757*

S/2009/283

Annex
Letter dated 13 May 2009 from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from August 2008 to January 2009. I would appreciate your
making this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer

2

09-35757

S/2009/283

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the Security Council on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
The present report, pursuant to the obligation under Security Council
resolution 1386 (2001) to report to the United Nations on the progress of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) mission, covers the period from
1 August 2008 to 31 January 2009. As at 2 February 2009, total ISAF strength stood
at 57,249 personnel from 26 NATO nations and 15 non-NATO nations.
2.
Throughout the reporting period, ISAF continued to assist the Government of
Afghanistan in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. From
1 August 2008 to 31 January 2009, ISAF suffered 777 casualties in total: 113 killed
in action and 664 wounded in action. Key issues have been:
(a) ISAF continued to conduct security and stabilization operations while
supporting governance, reconstruction and development. Security operations have
been conducted with an emphasis on ensuring freedom of movement, particularly
along the ring road, building the capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces
and assisting the Government with voter registration. In addition, the ISAF security
footprint in Kabul has been reduced, while maintaining support to the Security
Forces. Combined operations with the Security Forces have included the movement
of critical electricity-generation equipment to the Kajaki dam, although as is the
case with many infrastructure projects, delivery of the full benefit to the Afghan
people will take many years;
(b) Every effort has been made to avoid civilian casualties and collateral
damage. Procedures and processes are continually reviewed, and ISAF has
implemented a new process to facilitate joint ISAF-Afghan investigations and hold
joint press conferences in conjunction with the newly established Government
Media and Information Centre as soon as information is available, in order to
promote transparency;
(c) The focus of ISAF in the coming months will be to continue to support
the efforts of the Afghan National Security Forces to provide security to the
electoral process, including through the deployment of the Election Support Force
for the election period. Additionally, ISAF will endeavour to increase cooperation,
mentoring, planning and the combined execution of security operations with the
Security Forces across the theatre. ISAF intends to maintain a high operational
tempo throughout the winter months.
Security situation
3.
Insurgent activity throughout Afghanistan was somewhat higher than in the
same period last year. The unusually mild winter weather allowed opposing militant
forces to remain active for longer than in previous winters rather than return to
sanctuaries and their homes. The insurgents have avoided larger-scale direct
engagements and tended to focus on improvised explosive device attacks and
smaller-scale attacks against soft targets, such as Government officials and the
Afghan National Police/Afghan National Security Forces. Insurgents have come
under pressure in areas where they have not been challenged in the past, thus

09-35757

3

S/2009/283

forcing them to focus great effort on protecting their lines of communication and
preserving their freedom of movement. The insurgents have also increased negative
propaganda and shown greater indifference to civilian casualties during their
operations. These factors — combined with the overall year-end statistics showing
significant increases in casualties in 2008 — have created the perception that neither
the Government of Afghanistan nor ISAF is able to provide adequate security to the
Afghan people. Regional security situations are as follows:
(a) Regional Command Capital: The opposing militant forces sought to
maintain the perception of a negative security situation in and around Kabul City by
conducting several direct fire and improvised explosive device attacks. Several
incidents occurred in this reporting period, the most significant being the ambush on
an ISAF patrol in Surobi District. Other significant events include the assassination
of Judge Alim Hanif, Chief Judge of the Central Narcotics Tribunal Appeals Court;
the assassination of the Governor of Lowgar in Paghman District; and the
30 October 2008 suicide improvised explosive device attack against the Ministry of
Information and Culture. Propaganda was employed to exploit those incidents.
Despite those high-profile events, the Afghan National Security Forces has
successfully assumed lead responsibility for many of the security tasks in Kabul
previously conducted by ISAF. Despite the continuous threat of improvised
explosive device attacks against high-profile/high-payoff targets, the overall
security situation in Regional Command Capital has improved. However, the threat
and a small number of isolated, high-profile incidents have created the perception
that the insurgents maintain a strong influence surrounding the city of Kabul. ISAF
assesses that the insurgents remain unable to gain the freedom of movement and
operating areas required to “encircle” Kabul;
(b) Regional Command North: Insurgent violence remains mostly connected
to the activities of criminal and illegal armed groups. The insurgents have attempted
to spread violence outside the Pashtun areas, but have had limited success.
Competing interests from regional power brokers and ethnic divisions continue to
play a major role in limiting the spread of the insurgents’ influence;
(c) Regional Command West: Insurgent activity in Regional Command West
was focused on Farah and Badghis provinces. In Badghis province, Government
influence and presence is limited, as local elders, opportunistic power brokers and
criminals try to ensure that their interests prevail; the situation has worsened
significantly since the release of Mullah Dastigir. a Farah remained a critical location
for the insurgents, as it is an important insurgent junction linking safe havens to
lines of communication;
(d) Regional Command South: The insurgency in Regional Command South
remains the focal point for the Taliban, whose efforts are greatest in Helmand. This
area is the traditional homeland of the Pashtun-dominated Taliban movement in
Afghanistan. Across the region, improvised explosive device attacks continue to
increase. The insurgents are also believed to be relying even more heavily on the
narcotics industry for money, especially in the winter months;
(e) Regional Command East: Overall, continuing insurgent activity and
weak governance in many Regional Command East provinces have limited the
effect of ongoing ISAF military and reconstruction activities in the region. Activity
__________________
a Update: Mullah Dastigir was successfully targeted by coalition forces on 15 February 2009.

4

09-35757

S/2009/283

of opposing militant forces was high along the Afghan/Pakistan border. The
opposing militant forces routinely transit the porous border to conduct hit-and-run
attacks against ISAF, the coalition forces and the Afghan National Security Forces
before retreating to illegal sanctuaries in Pakistan. Additionally, opposing militant
forces’ efforts to intimidate and target Government officials have increased,
resulting in the death of Lowgar Governor Hazrat Din Nur. The extremely difficult
terrain along the Afghanistan/Pakistan border and the limited number of ISAF
combat troops to deny infiltrations into Afghanistan make it extremely difficult to
limit insurgent activity in Regional Command East.
Afghan National Army
4.
The Afghan National Army continues to make steady progress, increasing in
capacity and capability while simultaneously conducting security and stabilization
operations. Confirmation of this lies in greater leadership in the conduct of
operations. However, development of the Afghan Ministry of Defence and the
Afghan National Army Air Corps remains far behind that of the army combat forces,
and an overall lack of training teams continues to hamper the speed of the Afghan
National Army’s development. While recent contributions of training teams by allies
at the Summit is welcome, the continued expansion of the army will require more
teams. Progress is summarized as follows:
(a) Capability: More than half of Afghan National Army units are currently
partnering with ISAF and coalition forces during the conduct of security and
stabilization operations. Thirty-three per cent of army units are capable of
conducting security and stabilization operations at the battalion level with limited
external support, although many such units continue to require active mentoring.
Despite the upward trend, more must be done before the army can reach a level
where it can operate independently and overcome the logistic challenges posed to it.
Emphasis on development of the Ministry of Defence and the Afghan National
Army Air Corps, outfitting forces with appropriate enablers and the establishment of
a sustainable logistics support system are critical if the army is to be able to conduct
independent operations;
(b) Manning: Manning numbers continue to climb, with approximately
79,000 personnel assigned as of January 2009, thus nearly achieving the former goal
of 80,000. With the current manning, historical trends and projected fill rates, it is
anticipated that the Afghan National Army will meet its desired manning end state
of 134,000 in accordance with established timelines;
(c) Equipment: The United States of America continues to provide the bulk
of equipment and financial support to the Afghan National Army, with other NATO
nations providing substantive support. Although equipment donations remain
insufficient, there has been progress in the nations’ monetary donations to the NATO
trust fund over the reporting period. Eight nations have contributed to the trust fund,
and these donations have already supported the procurement of winter equipment
and the transportation of previously donated items. The NATO equipment trust fund
covers all key categories of the donation programme, that is, transportation costs,
procurement of equipment, training, infrastructure and sustainment. With the United
States continuing to equip the army and nations’ improved support to the NATO
trust fund, it is projected that the army will meet its equipment fielding requirements
in accordance with the established plan;

09-35757

5

S/2009/283

(d) Training: NATO operational mentoring and liaison teams and United
States embedded training teams are proving invaluable to supporting the
development of the army. However, the increasing requirement for additional teams
persists. This situation significantly undermines the development of the army and,
indirectly, the Afghan National Police. Currently, approximately 80 per cent of the
required teams have been fielded, an increased percentage from the previous
reporting period. However, with the continued increase in the number of army units
and insufficient offers of operational mentoring liaison teams to meet this
expansion, it is projected that the shortfall of teams will increase by December
2009. In addition to the requirement for deployment of teams, the hesitancy of
nations to actively support Afghan National Army branch schools is likely to impede
the development of the army. These schools play a vital role in the long-term
development of the army;
(e) Afghan National Army Air Corps: Over the past year, almost entirely
financed by the United States, the Afghan National Army Air Corps has expanded its
training and its contribution to army operations throughout Afghanistan. At present,
there are approximately 2,300 personnel in the Air Corps, and that number is
growing. Despite minimal involvement by NATO and ISAF, Afghan National Army
Air Corps training is progressing. With the proper support, the Air Corps will soon
become the leading enabler for the entire Afghan National Army; however, for the
Air Corps to achieve the self-sufficiency and mission capability required to support
the growing ranks of the army within the available time, it will depend heavily on
international coalition and NATO help. NATO support for the Air Corps consists
mainly of equipment donations to the Government of Afghanistan. NATO is staffing
a Combined Security Transition Command-Afghanistan request for pilot and
maintenance instructors. This increased support will be vital to the continued
development of the Air Corps.
Afghan National Police
5.
While supporting the Afghan National Police is not under the direct
responsibility of ISAF, the inability to develop the Afghan National Police as
quickly as the Afghan National Army remains one of the most significant problems
in establishing security and the rule of law in Afghanistan. Although there are a
number of initiatives to improve police development, the Afghan National Police
remains far behind the Afghan National Army. The focused district development,
capital jumpstart and focused border development programmes are promising
initiatives helping to build the capacity of the police. With approximately
79,000 personnel assigned, the Afghan National Police has nearly achieved its goal
of an 82,000-man force; however, the number of adequately trained personnel
remains low, and problems of absenteeism and corruption persist. Therefore, unless
substantive support is provided in the near term by the international coalition in the
form of police mentors and equipment support, the Afghan National Police will
continue to fall further behind in their development, increasing the amount of time
required to develop an effective force. The key programmes are progressing as
follows:
(a) The focused district development programme, executed by the Combined
Security Transition Command-Afghanistan, has started in 52 selected districts and is
a focal point of the international coalition engagement for Afghan National Police
development. Germany started in January 2009 to conduct focused district

6

09-35757

S/2009/283

development in Regional Command North. As the programme contributes positively
to the security of the selected districts, the Afghan Ministry of the Interior has
approved the continuation and expansion of the programme into additional districts
starting in January 2009. Confidence in the trained Afghanistan National Civil Order
Police is increasing and could improve Afghan perceptions of their police
institutions. The persistent shortage of police mentor teams assigned to the focused
district development programme will prolong the programme if not addressed by the
nations;
(b) The European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan increasingly
contributes to the development of the Afghan National Police, including in the fields
of anti-corruption, criminal investigation, the rule of law and training. The EU
decision to double the size of the mission, currently being implemented, has given
renewed impetus to the mission;
(c) Focused border development has commenced and is aimed at retraining
the Afghan Border Police in an effort to stem the tide of insurgents entering districts
bordering Pakistan. Over the reporting period, some 1,200 Border Police went
through the focused border development programme and another 5,000 are expected
to do so by September 2009. Equipping the Afghan Border Police remains a critical
shortfall.
Counter-narcotics
6.
ISAF operations have continued to focus on cross-agency coordination and on
seeking to disrupt the narcotics industry though support to the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community. ISAF provincial reconstruction teams
have continued to work towards providing guidance to provincial planners, which
has contributed to the promotion of alternative-livelihood programmes and has been
reinforced by ISAF information operations. It is recognized that the illicit narcotics
industry continues to be a factor in funding of the insurgency. Evidence exists that
money linked to narcotics production and trafficking is being used to directly
finance some insurgent operations. ISAF has continued to provide logistical and
intelligence support to Afghan forces, operating within the current counter-narcotic
mandate and resources. In accordance with the Budapest Defence Ministers meeting
of 10 October 2008, ISAF has sought to enhance its support to the Afghan forces
and target the nexus between the insurgency and the illegal narcotics industry.
Narcotics production continues to contribute to instability and corruption, directly
threatening all levels of governance, including police authority and the wider rule of
law. ISAF support for the Government’s key counter-narcotic interdiction forces is
aimed at delivering an effect that actively discourages narcotic production and
trafficking, without directly engaging in operations against cultivation or farmers.
Within the current mandate and in accordance with international law and the ISAF
rules of engagement, the actions taken will be in accordance with the NATO policy
to avoid civilian casualties to the maximum extent possible.
Governance
7.
Although there have been some encouraging initiatives, overall progress in
establishing effective national and subnational institutions in Afghanistan remains
slow. The Government’s limited reach and lack of capability to deliver security,
economic and social services evenly across the country, coupled with widespread

09-35757

7

S/2009/283

corruption, impede efforts to stem the insurgency. These problems, combined with a
severe shortage of professional, trained personnel, limit the ability of the
Government to deliver visible progress. Warlords, criminals (particularly
narco-criminals) and senior tribal figures continue to undermine central and
provincial government authority for their own ends, while all levels and institutions
of Government continue to struggle against corruption (including the police and the
judiciary). The development of effective, professional and sustainable Government
institutions at the subnational level is urgently required to gain popular support for
the Government; however, achieving reform will be slow. Most of the ministries
remain ineffective, under-resourced and lacking in skilled or experienced personnel,
and this lack of institutional capacity makes it difficult for ministries to administer
and disburse development funds. While surveys indicate a broad degree of popular
support for President Karzai, the slow progress in improving governance carries a
real danger that the Afghan population increasingly will turn to alternative local and
regional mechanisms of governance.
8.
Increasing domestic revenues remains a major challenge for the Government
of Afghanistan. Central revenue collection is complicated by the political and tribal
landscape, the security situation, widespread corruption and by the difficulty in
imposing an effective tax regime on the large informal and rural economy of
Afghanistan. Major improvements to the police and judicial system and to the tax
and customs regime are required if Afghanistan is to be able to fund a substantial
portion of the operating budget from domestic revenues in the near future. Given the
current global economic downturn and the recent critical International Monetary
Fund report on the country’s financial health, it is certain that Afghanistan will
remain reliant on the international community for the foreseeable future.
9.
There are also some encouraging signs. In October 2008 the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board approved the Independent Directorate for Local
Governance-initiated Afghan social outreach programme. This is the most
significant Afghan initiative on subnational governance and will remain at the centre
of attempts to improve the situation until the District Council elections planned for
September 10. The programme is a local governance programme that will function
through district shuras and community councils, whose members will be appointed
through local consultation. It is an attempt to revitalize traditional collective
decision-making processes whereby the community has a say in matters affecting it.
The programme does have a security dimension, as it is intended to strengthen
community security by enhancing the cohesion of that community, making it less
vulnerable to extremist infiltration and intimidation. It has been specifically stated
that councils will not arm community members or manage armed groups. A pilot
programme has been run in Wardak Province for the past year, and initially negative
reports have started to improve (community councils formed and projects being
implemented). A new programme is due to start in Helmand province shortly.
Development
10. Over the reporting period, we have seen slow but steady progress in a number
of development sectors. Access to food has increased thanks to lower food prices
and improvements in the coordination of humanitarian aid. Considerable success has
been achieved in the close cooperation between ISAF and the World Food
Programme (WFP). The Government, ISAF and WFP successfully prepositioned
food items for the winter season. Efforts to transport and distribute food are still

8

09-35757

S/2009/283

ongoing, and there is no indication of an immediate Afghanistan-wide food
shortage. However, more donations from the international community are needed to
avoid food shortages during the spring and summer of 2009. Low precipitation, high
prices and a lack of access to improved seed and fertilizers have limited agricultural
development. To transform the agricultural sector, investments from the private
community will be required, but this is hampered by issues such as property rights,
insufficient rule of law, continued corruption and insufficient access to energy
resources.
11. Other basic human services have seen varying progress during the reporting
period. Overall health care experienced some progress; however, urban health care
remains better than rural. Education is also steadily improving, yet still suffers from
the lack of security. Water resource management remains poor and requires much
greater inter-ministerial and donor coordination to solve the issues. Electricity
production has been making some progress, but overall production was down owing
to the impact of the drought. Lack of Afghan capacity, insufficient investment and
self-sustainability and security concerns hamper road construction and maintenance.
On the positive side, 10 per cent of the ring road was completed in the last quarter.
The main structures to monitor and coordinate development in relation to the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, together with the underlying
committees and working groups, are off to a good start, but a lot of work still needs
to be done in order to make them fully functional.

09-35757

9
