A/64/PV.54

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

54

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 2 December 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda item 16 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/64/L.20, A/64/L.21,
A/64/L.22 and A/64/L.23)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held the debate on this item at its 51st to
53rd plenary meetings, on 30 November and
1 December 2009.
Before the Assembly takes action on the draft
resolutions one by one, I wish to remind members that
they will have an opportunity to explain their votes on
all of the draft resolutions before and after action is
taken on each one.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/64/L.20, A/64/L.21, A/64/L.22 and A/64/L.23. Before
giving the floor to the speaker in explanation of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States of America.
Mr. Erdman (United States of America): With
respect to the situation in the Middle East, the United
States has clearly stated our policy that there should be
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security. Therefore, we are deeply saddened
to be presented once again with unbalanced draft

resolutions that, unlike the General Assembly’s action
with respect to any other Member State, geographic
area or issue, place demands on Israel while failing to
acknowledge that both sides have obligations and must
take difficult steps.
While the United States accepts the principle that
the General Assembly may look into the practices of
individual States, the draft resolutions under this
agenda item, in combination with over 15 other draft
resolutions that will come before the Assembly this
year — as every year — form a clear pattern of
institutional bias directed at one Member State of the
United Nations.
Of particular concern to the United States are
three resolutions concerning entities established more
than a generation ago that perpetuate institutional bias.
The millions of dollars expended on the Secretariat’s
Division for Palestinian Rights, the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories could be better directed towards more
pressing issues, including direct assistance to needy
Palestinians, as could the staff resources taken up by
those entities. The United States provides significant
financial support to the Palestinian Authority and to
Palestinian refugees receiving support from the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, to which the United States
is the largest single donor. We reiterate our call for all

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-62820 (E)

*0962820*

A/64/PV.54

Member States to review seriously the continued
existence of those bodies, with a sharp focus on what,
if anything, they actually contribute towards a solution
to the Middle East conflict.
In addition to these three draft resolutions, the
General Assembly will consider other draft resolutions
that prejudge the outcome of permanent status issues.
Those issues properly belong in bilateral negotiations.
Resolutions such as these call into question the
credibility of the United Nations, which, through the
Quartet, has an important role to play in supporting the
resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
We believe that through good-faith negotiations
the parties can mutually agree on an outcome that ends
the conflict and reconciles the Palestinians’ goal of an
independent and viable State based on the 1967 lines
with agreed territorial swaps, and the Israeli goal of a
Jewish State with secure and recognized borders that
reflect subsequent developments and that meet Israeli
security requirements. Our commitment to achieving a
solution, with two States living side by side in peace, is
unwavering.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take decisions on draft
resolutions A/64/L.20, A/64/L.21, A/64/L.22 and
A/64/L.23. I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat to make an announcement.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Before the Assembly
proceeds to take action on the draft resolutions, I
would like to announce that, since their introduction,
Guinea has become a sponsor of draft resolutions
A/64/L.21, A/64/L.22 and A/64/L.23.
The President: We turn first to draft resolution
A/64/L.20, entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Comoros,

2

Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay
Draft resolution A/64/L.20 was adopted by 109
votes to 8, with 55 abstentions (resolution 64/16).
[Subsequently the delegations of Congo,
Grenada, the United Republic of Tanzania and

09-62820

A/64/PV.54

Yemen advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegation of
Albania advised that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
A/64/L.21, entitled “Division for Palestinian Rights of
the Secretariat”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, New
Zealand, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, El
Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,

09-62820

Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/64/L.21 was adopted by 112
votes to 9, with 54 abstentions (resolution 64/17).
[Subsequently the delegations of Congo and
Grenada advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegation of
Albania advised that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
A/64/L.22, entitled “Special information programme
on the question of Palestine of the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,

3

A/64/PV.54

Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Swaziland,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Benin, Cameroon, Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Tonga
Draft resolution A/64/L.22 was adopted by 162
votes to 8, with 5 abstentions (resolution 64/18).
[Subsequently the delegations of Bahamas,
Congo and Grenada advised the Secretariat that
they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
A/64/L.23, entitled “Peaceful settlement of the question
of Palestine”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,

4

Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Canada, Fiji, Tonga
Draft resolution A/64/L.23 was adopted by 164
votes to 7, with 4 abstentions (resolution 64/19).
[Subsequently the delegations of Congo and
Grenada advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

09-62820

A/64/PV.54

Mr. Weissbrod (Israel): Israel voted against the
resolutions just adopted and will vote against the draft
resolution still before us, as we have done in the past,
because we believe that those resolutions do not reflect
the reality of our region. They reflect a one-sided
political agenda that has been traditionally repeated
here year in and year out. They are unhelpful to the
conflict, where one side is only right while the other
only has obligations.
The peoples in our region need peace based on
mutual recognition that is the result of direct bilateral
negotiations, which should be resumed as soon as
possible and without preconditions. Our region does
not need annual biased, unbalanced and one-sided
General Assembly resolutions. Instead, the Middle East
requires an agreement that will enable us to live side
by side in peace and security.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand wished
to explain its vote on two resolutions, namely,
resolution 64/17, on the Division for Palestinian Rights
of the Secretariat, and resolution 64/18, on the special
information programme on the question of Palestine of
the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat.
New Zealand has consistently and strongly
supported negotiations towards a two-State solution to
the Middle East conflict — namely, a viable,
contiguous Palestinian State living side by side with
Israel in peace and security. As we have previously
explained, New Zealand believes that it is essential to
approach the issues raised in those resolutions with
balance and with regard for the overall purpose and
intent of the text in question.
With regard to the resolution on the special
information programme, New Zealand supports the
dissemination of balanced and objective information on
the conflict in the Middle East. We welcome the
resolution’s focus on promoting dialogue and
understanding between Palestinians and Israelis.
Although we voted in favour of the resolution, we call
on the Department of Public Information’s special
information programme to carry out its mandate in a
manner that reflects the full spectrum of perspectives
on the question of Palestine, particularly those of both
Israel and Palestine.
On the resolution on the Division for Palestinian
Rights, New Zealand is not convinced that the Division
is a constructive use of resources, and we think it does
little to contribute to the Middle East peace process.

09-62820

That we voted against the resolution does not detract,
however, from our strong support for Palestinian selfdetermination and for the continuation of negotiations
leading to a two-State solution.
Ms. Måwe (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The European Union wishes to make to following
explanation of vote with regard to resolution 64/19, on
the peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine.
The European Union urges the Palestinian
Authority and the Government of Israel to enter into
serious peace negotiations as soon as possible while
respecting international law and previous agreements
and implementing their road map obligations. We
hereby reiterate the need to ensure a political solution,
with two States — Israel and an independent,
democratic and viable Palestinian State — living side
by side in peace and security.
We welcome the United States Administration’s
commitment to pursue vigorously a two-State solution
and a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The EU
is ready to work with the parties to the conflict, as well
as with the United States and other Quartet members
and Arab partners, to achieve that goal.
The European Union remains deeply concerned at
the continued settlement activities, house demolitions
and evictions in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including in East Jerusalem. The EU reiterates that the
settlements are illegal under international law and
constitute an obstacle to peace.
The European Union is also concerned about the
recent developments in East Jerusalem. We have been
following closely the situation around the Al-Aqsa
mosque, the Temple Mount and Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We
urge all parties to refrain from any provocative actions
that could further inflame tensions or lead to violence.
The EU remains gravely concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and what is described
as, in effect, amounting to a blockade. While
acknowledging that crossings are open for the delivery
of some basic humanitarian supplies on a relatively
frequent basis, they remain at an insufficient level to
meet the needs of the population. The EU has
consistently called for the immediate and unconditional
opening of crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza,
without which the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian

5

A/64/PV.54

aid, reconstruction and economic recovery will not be
possible.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting. The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 16.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions (A/64/L.24 and A/64/L.25)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held the debate on this item at its 53rd
plenary meeting, on 1 December 2009.
Before the Assembly takes action on the draft
resolutions one by one, I should like to remind
members that they will have an opportunity to explain
their votes on the two draft resolutions before and after
action is taken on both of them.
The Assembly will now take decisions on draft
resolutions A/64/L.24 and A/64/L.25. I give the floor to
the representative of the Secretariat to make an
announcement.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Before the Assembly
takes action on the draft resolutions, I should like to
announce that, since their introduction, Guinea has
become a sponsor of draft resolutions A/64/L.24 and
A/64/L.25.
The President: We turn first to draft resolution
A/64/L.24, entitled “Jerusalem”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,

6

Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Swaziland,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, Panama, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, Tonga
Draft resolution A/64/L.24 was adopted by 163
votes to 7, with 5 abstentions (resolution 64/20).
[Subsequently the delegations of Congo and
Grenada advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
A/64/L.25, entitled “The Syrian Golan”. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

09-62820

A/64/PV.54

In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

09-62820

Draft resolution A/64/L.25 was adopted by 116
votes to 7, with 51 abstentions (resolution 64/21).
[Subsequently the delegations of Congo and
Grenada advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the delegations
of Brazil and Argentina in connection with agenda item
15, “The situation in the Middle East”. I wish in
particular to explain the votes of our delegations with
regard to resolution 64/21, entitled “The Syrian
Golan”, which the General Assembly adopted just a
few moments ago.
Brazil and Argentina both voted in favour of the
resolution, for we believe that its crucial nature is
linked to the illegality of the acquisition of territory by
force. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the
United Nations prohibits the use or threat of use of
force against the territorial integrity of a State. That is
an imperative norm of international law.
I should also like to clarify the position of our
delegations with regard to paragraph 6 of the
resolution. Our votes do not prejudge the provisions of
that paragraph, and in particular the reference to the
line of 4 June 1967.
Brazil and Argentina believe that it is important
to make progress in the search for a solution on the
Syrian-Israeli track of the Middle East conflict, with a
view to putting an end to the occupation of the Golan
Heights in line with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973). I should therefore like to take
this opportunity, on behalf of the Governments of
Brazil and Argentina, to once again urge Israeli and
Syrian authorities to renew negotiations in order to find
a definite solution to the situation in the Syrian Golan,
in line with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and
the principle of land for peace.
Mr. Salsabili (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to place on record here in the General Assembly that
my delegation has voted in favour of all the resolutions
adopted today under the agenda item entitled
“Question of Palestine”, namely, resolutions 64/16,

7

A/64/PV.54

64/17, 64/18 and 64/19. We have also voted in favour
of resolutions 64/20 and 64/21, which were adopted
under agenda item 15, entitled “The situation in the
Middle East”. We have done so in the spirit of
solidarity with the Palestinian people and their cause,
as well as in solidarity with other peoples under
occupation.
However, I would like to express my delegation’s
reservations on those parts of the resolutions that may
not be in line with the stated policies and positions of
my country, or that may be construed as recognition of
the Israeli regime.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation would like to express
its deep gratitude and appreciation for the General
Assembly’s majority adoption of resolution 64/21,
entitled “The Syrian Golan”. The Assembly has done
so for many years now, since 1991, in order to promote
justice, right and law,. I am also grateful for the
adoption of the other resolutions concerning the
question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East.
That the international community has continued
to support those resolutions is a clear reflection of the
commitment of Member States to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It also
reflects their rejection of foreign occupation as well as
their support of our right to recover our territory, which
has now been occupied by Israel since 5 June 1967,
more than 40 years.
There is no doubt whatever that the affirmative
votes for the resolutions were intended to send a clear
message from the international community to Israel,
the occupying Power in the Golan, Palestine and parts
of Lebanon, that it rejects all expansionist policies and
policies of occupation, aggression and killing, the
construction of settlements, the imposition of fait
accompli situations and the annexation of the territory
of others by force. Those policies and practices are
rejected, as they violate the Charter and the 1949
Fourth Geneva Convention. The entire international
community has thereby condemned those policies and
practices.
The world is unanimous in its belief that just and
comprehensive peace can be established only on the

8

basis of the principles of peace and international
resolutions. By definition that means that there is a
need for an Israeli partner with whom peace can be
established. That partner does not exist today. It also
illustrates the international community’s belief that all
occupied Arab territories, included Syrian Golan,
should be restored to the 4 June 1967 borders and that
an independent Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its
capital, must be established. The ongoing Israeli
occupation is counter to peace and underscores the
need for all resources to be mobilized in order to end
the occupation.
I would like to reiterate Syria’s gratitude to all
the States that sponsored the resolution entitled “The
Syrian Golan”. I also wish to thank all countries that
voted in favour. Lastly, I would like to emphasize my
country’s call for the establishment of a just and
comprehensive peace. More than ever before, Syria is
determined to liberate the occupied Golan to the 4 June
1967 borders and to rid it of Israeli occupation through
every means guaranteed by international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Palestine would like to
express its gratitude to all those who sponsored the
resolutions related to the question of Palestine and the
situation in the Middle East, as well as all those who
voted in their favour. We view the adoption of those
resolutions as a very strong signal from the General
Assembly both with regard to upholding international
law and reaffirming very clear principles.
We hope, and will work diligently to ensure, that
the Israeli side will comply with the essence of these
resolutions, which are rooted in international law and
the civilized conduct of nations. We do not see
upholding international law and reaffirming those
principles as conditions. What we see as illegal, and as
obstacles to peace, is unilateral action in building
illegal settlements, the construction of an illegal wall
and the annexation of East Jerusalem. And if the Israeli
occupying authority thinks that they can take us for a
ride, forcing us to negotiate on the basis of their
conditions, creating all those unilateral, illegal actions,
they will have a long time to wait. They must abide by
their obligations under international law and by the
essence of the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council.

09-62820

A/64/PV.54

We are eager to move forward in the direction of
peace, as we have demonstrated all along by fulfilling
all of our obligations. We do not see similar behaviour
on the Israeli side. And for those who think that these
resolutions are one-sided, they have to recall that this
strong message is sent by almost the entire membership
of the United Nations. We cannot all of us be wrong.
We cannot all of us be selecting Israel as a target. Israel
is acting and behaving as if it were above international
law, and it is getting away with it. It is high time for all
of us to bring Israel into compliance with international
law and the essence of these resolutions.
The one-sided action is that of the Israeli side,
which is building illegal settlements and creating the
reality on the ground. Its actions are much stronger
than resolutions. Although these resolutions defend
international law and the rights of the Palestinian
people, the action of the Israeli side, which should be
condemned and which we should seek to stop, could be
the most important contribution to the peace process so
that all obstacles could be removed from the path of

09-62820

the peace negotiations and the occupation brought to
an end, allowing the Palestinian people to enjoy
freedom and sovereignty in their own independent
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We hope that, collectively, we can find a way to
bring Israel into compliance so that we can put an end
to the tragedy of the Palestinian people and allow them
to exercise self-determination and have their own
independent State in Palestine.
We wish to thank all members for the strong
message they are sending to our people, who continue
in their struggle. They will not cease in their struggle
until they succeed in putting an end to the occupation
and realizing their aspiration for an independent State
of Palestine.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

9
