General Assembly-Fifth Session

B
The General Assembly
Authorizes the Secretary-General, in accordance with
established practice,
1. To arrange for the payment of an appropriate
remuneration for the members of the United Nations
Tribunal set up under article X above and to reimburse
their travel and subsistence expenses ;
2. To assign to the United Nations Tribunal such
staff and provide such facilities as the Secretary-General
may consider necessary to carry out the terms of the
present resolution, utilizing the existing United Nations
staff of the Libyan Mission in so far as possible.
326th plenary meeting,
15 December 1950.
389 (V).

Technical and financial assistance to
Llhya

Whereas Libya as a result of the war has suffered
extensive damages to private and public property, both
movable and immovable, as well as to its system of
communications,
Whereas the existence of these war damages and the
necessity of repairing them represents one of the major
economic and financial problems to be taken into consideration in order that an independent Libya may be
established with a sound basis for economic and social
progress, which is one of the avowed purposes of the
United Nations in accordance with paragraph 4 of
the resolution 7 adopted by the General Assembly on
17 November 1950,
The General Assembly,
Instructs the Secretary-General to study the problem
of war damages in connexion with the technical and
financial assistance which Libya may request from the
Economic and Social Council, the specialized agencies
and the Secretary-General, and to report on the subject to the sixth session of the General Assembly.
326th plenary meeting,
15 December 1950.
390 (V). Eritrea: Report of the United Nations
Commission for Eritrea; Report of the
Interim Committee of the General Assembly
on the Report of the United Nations Commission for Eritrea

A
Whereas by paragraph 3 of Annex XI to the Treaty
of Peace with Italy, 1947, the Powers concerned have
agreed to accept the recommendation of the General
Assembly on the disposal of the former Italian colonies
in Africa and to take appropriate measures for giving
effect to it,
Whereas by paragraph 2 of the aforesaid Annex XI
such disposal is to be made in the light of the wishes and
welfare of the inhabitants and the interests of peace and
security, taking into consideration the views of interested
governments,
7

See resolution 387 (V).

Now therefor1
The General Assembly, in the light of the reports 8 of
the United Nations Commission for Eritrea and of the
Interim Committee, and
Taking into consideration
(a) The wishes and. welfare of th~ inhabi!ants '?f
Eritrea, including the views of the va~10us racial, religious and political groups of the provmces of the territory and the capacity of the people for self-government,
( b) The interests of peace and security in East Africa,
( c) The rights and claims of Ethio_pia based ~n geographical, historical, ethnic or economic reasons, mcluding in particular Ethiopia's legitimate need for adequate
access to the sea,
Taking into account the importance of assuring the
continuing collaboration of the foreign communities in
the economic development of Eritrea,
Recognizing that the disposal of Eritrea should be
based on its close political and economic association with
Ethiopia, and
Desiring that this association assure to the inhabitants
of Eritrea the fullest respect and safeguards for their
institutions, traditions, religions and languages, as well
as the widest possible measure of self-government, while
at the same time respecting the Constitution, institutions,
traditions and the international status and identity of
the Empire of Ethiopia,
A. Recommends that:
I. Eritrea shall constitute an autonomous unit federated with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the Ethiopian Crown.
2. The Eritrean Government shall possess legislative,
executive and judicial powers in the field of domestic
affairs.
3. The jurisdiction of the Federal Government shall
extend to the following matters: defence, foreign affairs,
currency and finance, foreign and interstate commerce
and external and interstate communications, including
ports. The Federal Government shall have the power to
maintain the integrity of the Federation, and shall have
the right to impose uniform taxes throughout the Federation to meet the expenses of federal functions and
services, it being understood that the assessment and the
collection of such taxes in Eritrea are to be delegated
to the Eritrean Government, and provided that Eritrea
shall bear only its just and equitable share of these expenses. The jurisdiction of the Eritrean Government
shall extend to all matters not vested in the Federal Government, including the power to maintain the internal
police, to levy taxes to meet the expenses of domestic
functions and services, and to adopt its own budget.
4. The area of the Federation shall constitute a single
area for customs purposes, and there shall be no barriers to the free movement of goods and persons within
the area. Customs duties on goods entering or leaving
the Federation which have their final destination or
origin in Eritrea shall be assigned to Eritrea.
5. An Imperial Federal Council composed of equal
numbers of Ethiopian and Eritrean representatives shall
meet at least once a year and shall advise upon the corns See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session,
Supplements, N os. 8 and 14.
