TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th

MEETING: 25 JANUARY1968
NEW

‘-,
A/:(_’

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 387) . . , , . . . . . , , , . . , . . . . . , . . , . . . . .
Expression of thanks to the retiring President and to the retiring members and
welcome to the new members of the Security Council , . . , . , . , . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda , , . . . . , . . , , . . . , , , . , . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . , . .

2

The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 24 January 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/8355)
Letter dated 23 January 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the President .of the United Nations Council for South West Africa
(S/8353)

. . . . . . . , . . . . . : . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a . . , . . . . a. . .

4

S/PV.1387

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND EIG

Held in New York on Thursday, 25 January 1968, at 3 p.m.
Prrui&lf:

Mr. A&a SI-IAI-II (Pakistan).

&x,sorlt:
The reprcscntativcs of the following States:
Algeria, BraXil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, I-?rancc,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, I’ilrilgUily.
SCIlCgd,
Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and I.Jnitcd States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 387)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The question of South Wc::t Africa:
Letter datctl 24 January 1968 addrcsscd to the I’resident of the Security Council by the rcprcsentativcs of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cambodia, Camcroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
(l011g0
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomcy, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory
Coast, .IOK~:III,
Kenya, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Pakistan, I’hilippincs, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Lconc, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan, Syria,
Thailand, Togo, Turkey, Uganda, Unitccl Arab
Republic, United Republic of ‘I’anXania, Upper Volta,
YCIIICII,
Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/X3.55).
Expression of thanks to the retiring President and to the
retiring members and welcome to the new members of
the Security Council
1. The PRESIDENT: Bcforc taking up the question 011 the
provisional il~CIldi1
of the meeting, it is my privilcgc, in
accordance with an agreeable and time-honoured practice
and on bcllalf’ of all my collcagucs in the Council, to pay
tribute to my prcdcccssor in the Chair, Chief Adcbo of
Nigeria. His breadth of vision, sagacity and dedication to
the United Nations arc well known
to all of USwho have
ha,d the privilcgc of working with him in the world
Organization. All his collcagucs acknowlcdgc the high
qualities Of St:ltCSIlliiIlStlip
that hc brought to our CoUIlSClS
SO slrikingly
last
month, piIrtiClIlXly
wllcn thC Council
dealt with the question of Cyprus. It was largely due to his
wise guidance of its dclibcrations that the Council was ablC
to remove the threat to peace posed by that question. It is
uqdoubtcdly a loss that the scrviccs of this grcal SOII of
Africa will no longer bc available to tllc Security Council,
the General Assembly, or the other dclibcrativc organs of
the United Nations. Ncverthclcss it *is comforting to know
that he will bc serving the world Organization at a high lcvcl
in the Secretariat. We have no doubt that hc will add lustre
to any office he holds.

2. 1 should now like to say a few words on behalf of the
Council in deep appreciation of the contributions made by
the outgoing members of the Security Council to the cause
of international peace and security,
3. Ambassador Ruda of Argentina, Ambassador Tarabanov
of Bulgaria, Ambassador Matsui and Ambassador: Tsuruoka
of Japan, Ambassador Keita and Ambassador Kante of
Mali, and Chief Adebo of Nigeria have rendered outstanding
services during their tenure of membership of the Council.
It is our hope that the high example which they have set
will be followed by those of us who represent the newly
elcctcd members.
4. I should also like to take this opportunity to welcome
the new mcmbcrs, Ambassador Bouattoura of Algeria,
Ambassador Csatorday of Hungary, Ambassador Solano
L@CZ of Paraguay and Ambassador Diop of Senegal. All
these distinguished rcprescntativcs arc held in great esteem
in the United Nations. In negotiations, as well as in the
deliberations of its various organs, they have given proof of
their great abilities and devotion to the principles enshrined
in the Charter and have sought to promote its high
purposes. They represent nations and civilizations which
have made great contributions to the progress
of mankind.
5. As Pakistan takes its seat in the Security Council, may
I, with the permission of the Council, now speak as
representatiire of PAKISTAN.
6. As laid down by President Ayub Khan, the policy of
the Govcniment of Pakistan cndcavours to promote the
application of the following, among other fundamental
principles, through the United Nations: first, inadmissibility
of the tllrCilt
or use of force in international relations;
second; right of self&termination
of peoples under alien OI
colonial rule; third, rcspcct for human rights and fundamental freedoms regardless of race, language or religion;
fourth, faithful observance of international commitments;
fifth, pcaccful settlement of disputes by the means envisaged in Article 33 of the Charter of the lJnited Nations. It
is in the light of these principles that Pakistan will address
itself to the grave ilIld complex issues which confront thC
Security Council in the discharge of its specid responsibility for the maintenance of pcacc and security.
7. We arc mindful that the Charter requires the Council to
act on behalf of all Members of the United Nations. The
Council’s capacity to do so has undoubtedly been enhanced
by its enlarged composition. In a sense, members of the
Security Council represent but a single constituency, acting
for the entire membership of the United Nations. We an‘
given a common mandate: to act in accordance wit!: thu

Member States are circulated by the Secretary-General. It
has not been the practice for some time to take up the
question of credentials in the Council itself. However, if,
any member of the Council wishes to make observations
with regard to the question of the credentials of any
particular Member State, I shall give him the floor.

Charter. We have made a common pledge to uphold the
integrity of the Security Council. I need hardly say how
carefully, in the face of events and their pressures, this
integrity needs to be preserved. I need hardly emphasize
that this integrity would be jeopardized if ever the Council
were to disregard its considered pronouncements on the
questions of which it remains seized.

17. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (timslated
from
French): In the view of my delegation, the provisional rules

8. As we start a new year in our work here it is our prayer
that the Council will devote itself to the task of building
peace on the bedrock of justice, for it is only a just peace
that w:ll endure.

of procedure of the‘ Security Council are perfectly clear.
The Secretary-General submits reports on the credentials of
the representatives, and it is up to the Security Council to
approve these reports. According to practice, as th.e
President has just indicated, this approval is implicit; it is
tacit. But as soon as any remark or objection is made with
respect to any report of the Secretary-General, it becomes
necessary, in my delegation’s opinion, for the report to be
approved explicitly.

Adoption of the agenda
9. The PRESIDENT: The provisional agenda for this
afternoon’s meeting of the Security Council is contained in
document S/Agenda/ 1387.

18. The PRESIDENT: With reference to the statement
made a few moments ago by the representative of Algeria,
may I read out rule 15 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council:

10. The first item is the adoption of the agenda. If I hear
no objection, I shall take it that the agenda . . , .
11. I call on the, representative of Algeria on a point of
order.

“The credentials of representatives on the Security
Council and of any representative appointed in accordance with rule 14 shall be examined by the SecretaryGeneral who shall submit a report to the Security Council
for approval.”

12. Mr.

BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated
from
I am sorry to interrupt you, Mr. President, in view
of the urgency of the questiqn inscribed on the provisional
agenda for this afternoon’s meeting of the Council. However there is a point on which I should like to have some
clarification. Before the agenda is adopted, may I ask if I
am right in assuming that the Secretary-General’s reports on
the credentials of representatives are considered to have
been adopted by the Security Council? I should be
grateful, Mr. President, for any clarification you could give
my delegation on this matter.

French):

19. The representative of, Algeria has raised the question
whether, if the credentials of a particular member of the
Security Council are challenged, the matter should not be
considered by the Council, I hope I have correctly
understood the point made by the representative of Algeria.
If so, I should like to take the views of the Council on this
matter. Does any representative wish to speak?

13. The ,PRESIDENT: In reply to the question raised by
the representative of’ Algeria, the Chair is ,given to understand that documents regarding the credcntialsof members
of the Security Council have been circulated by the
Secretariat from time to time.
*
14. Mr. ’ BOUATTOURA
(Algeria):
(translated
from
French): I am sorry, Mr. President, for having to take the
floor again. If my, understanding is correct, it is Security
Council practice tacitly to ’ approve the reports- of the
Secretary-General concerning the credentials of representatives. However, if I may refer to the provisional rules
of procedure, particularly to rule 15, it is clear that:‘

20. Mr.

BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated
Porn
Mr. President, you have just expressed most
eloquently the point which my delegation had in mind.
Neverthless, I should like to make one additional remark. In
my delegation’s opinion, rule 15 of the rules of procedure
should be read in the context of all the rules in chapter III,
which deals with representation and credentials. Referring
to rule 17, I find that it states:

French):

“Any representative on the Security Council, to whose
credentials objection has been made within the Security
Council, shall continue to sit with the same rights as other
representatives”, and I should like to stress the last part
of this rule “until the Security Council has decided the
matter.’
\

“The credentials of representatives on the Security
Council and of any’ representative appointed in accordance with rule 14 shall be examined by the SecretaryGeneral who shall submit a report to the Security Council
for approval.”

21. Consequently, if any delegation raises objections
concerning the credentials of one or more representatives
on the Security Council, it is understood that the Council
must take a decision on the matter. If this interpretation is
not correct, I should be very grateful, Mr. President, if you
would be so good as to correct me.

15. Does this mean a tacit approval, or is it necessary for
these reports to be approved explicitly?
16. The PRESIDENT: I In answer to the request for
clarification made by the representative of Algeria, I am
given to understand that as Member States take their seats
in the %ouncil the reports on the credentials of particular
.
?

22. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Algeria has
drawn our attention to the provisions of rules 15 and 17 of
the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council.
Does any representative wish to speak?
2

23. ‘Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): It is not
my intention to speak on the procedural points raised by
my colleague and friend the representative of Algeria, but I
feel it my duty to call the attention of the Council to the
fact that today is a day when we should do our utmost to
avoid anything that may delay the urgent action required of
the Council, and”1 am very fearful that if we were to enter
into any kind of procedural debate or discussion we should
lose the race with time that we must bear in mind in dealing
with this very grave question that has come before the
Council today. Therefore, without passing any judgement
on the comments made by anyone around this table, and
without wishing to appear to object or to take any position
which is contrary to that taken by any other representative,
I would simply urge that you, Mr. President, help us
expedite our work so that the urgent action required of us
can be carried out without delay. We cannot afford to have
any delay at this time.

27. You may rest assured, Mr. President, that my delegation v&l1 co-operate with you and with all the members of
the Council to speed the course of our debates so that we
may quickly reach a unanimous decision on the item on our
provisional agenda. However, my delegation feels that some
clarification is essential before we proceed.
28. The PRESIDENT: With reference to the intervention
made by the representative of Algeria, it is clear that the
provisions of rule 17 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council are mandatory. They are explicit
that if the credentials of a Member State have been
objected to, the representative of that State “shall continue
to sit with the same rights as other representatives until the
Security Council has decided the matter”,
29. In this connexion, I have already stated that it would
be necessary to obtain information about the recent
practice on the question of credentials of members of the
Security Council and that we should like to have a report
from the Secretary-General. I trust that this will meet the
viewpoint of the representative of Algeria who, I note, has
raised a general question of principle.

24. The PRESIDENT: In regard to the point raised by the
representative of Ethiopia about the urgency of the matter
of which the Council is seized at the present moment, I am
fully conscious that we need to proceed in an expeditious
manner and to reach a decision before the Council adjourns
this evening. Human lives are at stake, general principles of
law recognized among civilized nations have been violated,
and this Council must therefore act expeditiously. At the
same time, I consider that the question raised by the
representative of Algeria is an important one and if there is
no objection, I should like, on behalf of the Security
Council, to request the Secretary-General to present to us
some information in regard to the recent practice on the
credentials of new members of the Security Council. I
understand it is only reports on the credentials of new
members that are circulated, but we are not quite clear as
to the practice that is followed and whether the procedures
adopted comply with the requirements of the provisional
rules of procedure. This is a subject of great importance to
which, no doubt, the Security Council would like to turn
its attention at the appropriate time. For the moment, I
would appeal to my colleague the representative of Algeria
to let me proceed to take up the next item on the agenda,
which is the adoption of the agenda, unless he would like to
make some further comments.

30. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated
~‘?orn
French): My delegation is satisfied, Mr. President, with the
observations you have just made. We should merely like to
point out that this decision, in its spirit, applies not only to
the credentials covered by the Secretary-General’s reports
since new Member States were elected to this Council, but
includes all reports concerning the credentials of representatives sitting in the Security Council.
31. The PRESIDENT: With the permission of the Council,
may I propose that we take up for consideration the
provisional agenda for this meeting, The provisional agenda
is contained in document. . . . I call on the representative of
the Soviet Union.
32. Mr. MbROZOV

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Mr. President, forgive me for
interrupting you. I thought that you would continue with
your comments on the matter raised by the Algerian
representative.
(translated from Russian):

BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
In my first remarks, I said that my delegation was
aware of the urgency of the question on the Security
Council’s provisional agenda. As you have emphasized,
however, Mr. President, the questions my delegation has
raised are as important in your view as in that of the
Algerian delegation. I should like to assure my distinguished
colleague and friend, the representative of Ethiopia, that
my concern is not to prolong the Council’s debates,
particularly in view of the urgency of the situation, which
you, Mr. President, and our colleague from Ethiopia have
stressed, as did I at the beginning of my remarks.

33. I should like to note that the statement just made by
the representative of Algeria is, in my opinion, completely
in accordance with the rules of procedure and the functions
which the Secretary-General must discharge under the
provisions of the rules of procedure. These have already
been referred to by the representative of Algeria and I do
not propose to repeat them since, in my opinion, the
matter is clear enough. I wish to state my strong support of
the interpretation of the relevant provisions given by the
representative of Algeria regarding the procedure for
verification of the credentials of members of the security
Council and the submission of the results of such verification to the Council for ratification. I would stress the fact
that the representative of Algeria said, in ‘his latest
statement, that such a procedure naturally applied to all
members of the Council without exception.

25. Mr.

French):

26. Nevertheless, my delegation considers that clarification is necessary with respect to the last question: namely,
are we to understand that, if there are objections to the
reports submitted by the Secretary-General on the credentials of representatives, those reports are subject to the
Council’s decision precisely for that reason?

34. The PRESIDENT: I take note of this statement by the
representative of the Soviet Union.
3

Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory
Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan, Syria,
Thailand, Togo, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab
Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta,
Yemen,Yugoslaviaand Zambia(S/8355);
Letter dated 23 January 1968 addressedto the President
of the Security Council by the Presidentof the United
NationsCouncilfor South West Africa (S/8353)

35. Mr. BERARD (France) lf~cl,rslrrtc,tllj7)~11I+cnc!l): I do
not intcndztcj take up the Cluimcil‘s time with this question.
I should like merely to say that my dclcgation has listened
most
attentively
to the hlgerisn rcprescn tative’s statement
concerning rules 16 arrd 17 of our r&s of procedure, that
my
dclegatiw
shares the views of the Algcriarl delegation
011
this point and that we heard with great interest,
Mr. Prcsidcnt, your remarks to the effect that this matter
does indeed require claritication, which the Council will be
given. I therefore look forward to that clarification with
interest.
36. The PRESIDENT: I take it that no other member of
the Council wishes trl mrtkc observations on this important
matter this afternoon. 1 have taken note of the csprcssion
of views of the representative of Algeria, the representative
of the Soviet Union and the representative iIf France. I have
already stated that a report on the practice in this regard
will be awaited by the Security Council from the
and I have no doubt that he will also
Secretary-General,’
deal with the very important question raised in the
statcmcnts of the three representatives that the report on
the credentials should include the status of the credentials
of all members of the Security Council.

41. The PRESIDENT: The representativeof Nigeria has
submitted a request that he be invited to participate
without vote in the Council’sconsiderationof the question
which hasjust beeninscribedon the agenda.In accordance
with the practice followed by the Council in connexion
with questionsconsideredpreviously I propose,if there is
no objection, to invite the representative of Nigeria to
participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
It wzssodecided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. B. A. Clark
(Nigeria), took a placeat the Council table.

37. I trust that this summing up by the President is
satisfactory to the Council. If I hear no opinion to the
contrary, i shall proceed with the business of the Council
for this afternoon.

42. The PRESIDENT: This meeting of the Security
Council has been convened after consultation with my
colleagueson the Council, in responseto the requestsigned
on 24 January 1968 by the representativesof forty-nine
Member Stateswhich wascirculated in document S/8355. I
have beeninformed that Ceylon, Cyprus, Japanand Tunisia
are being added to the list of sponsorsoriginally listed in
that document,asis indicated in documentsS/8355/Add.l
and 2, dated 2.5January 1968.

38. The provisional agenda for this afternoon’s meeting of
the Security
Council is contained in document
S/Agenda/l 387. The first item on that agenda is “Adoption
of the agtxida”.
If I hear no objection, I shall . . .
39. Mr. MISHRA (India): My delegation wishes to draw
the attention of the Security Council to document S/8353
which contains a letter dated 23 January 1968 from the
President of the United Nations Council for .South West
Africa. My delegation wishes to suggest that this letter
should also be put on our agenda.

43. In this connexion I shouldlike to draw attention also
to the letter addressedto the President of the Security
Council on 23 January 1968by the Presidentof the United
Nations Council for South West Africa and contained in
document S/8353, which has also been included in the
agenda.The Presidentof the Council for South West Africa
has also forwarded a memorandumon the question this
afternoon which will be circulated assoon as possiblein
documentS/8353lAdd.l.

40. The PRESIDENT: The representative of India has
proposed that our agenda for this afternoon should in&de
document S/8353 which is a letter dated 23 January 1968
from the President of the United Nations Council for South
West Africa addressed to the President of the Security
Council. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council approves the inclusion of this document in this
aftmoon’s agenda.

44. Moreover, the Secretary-Generalhasprepareda report
on the matter which has been circulated as document
S/8357, dated 25 January 1968.

45. Mr. BOUATTOURA (Algeria) (translated from
Fre/&): I am very grateful for the kind words which you
The agcrrda, as atmvrderl, \tZZsadopted.
have addressed
to me, Mr. President,and I feel it is my duty
to placeparticular empha’sis
on the fortunate combination
of circumstanceswhereby during this first month, at this
The questionof South WestAfrica:
Letter dated 24 January 1968 addressed
to the President first meeting,the first time our delegationhastaken part in
the Council’swork, it is you, the representativeof Pakistan,
of the Security Council by the representativesof
Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cambodia,Cameroon, a country with which Algeria maintains and continues to
Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), develop the closest ties, who have taken up the task of
guidingour debates.Our views reflect thoseof the Council,
which placesits unqualified trust in you. The votes which
1 SW Official
Records
of the Srcttrity
Cowcil,
Twenty-third
have brought Algeria to the Security Council some five
Year, Stcppletuerlt
for Jmmry,
February
and March 1968, documcnt S/8365.
years after its admissionto this Organisation betoken an
4

encouraging spirit of goodwill, rather than any’ special
merit. We see this goodwill above all in the broad support
which Africans and Arabs, and the Third World in general
have given my country, That is a moral debt which we must
repay. In order that this objective may be achieved, the
implementation
of the principles set forth in our Charter,
towards which we all must strive, will be the object of our
highest consideration and devotion without pretence or
holding back.

52. Helpful decisions, no longer cloaked in ambiguity,
would then be reached almost of necessity and the present
apparently insurmountable obstacles to the achievement of
that harmony and balance we are all aiming at would,
without a doubt, vanish.

46. Our Organization is amply provided with machinery
for communicating the spirit of its active and unselfish
mission. Indeed, for the countries of the Third World, that
machinery and that mission are instrumental in inspiring
the gradual evolution of their world’s institutions, It is clear
that the changes we desire everywhere demand a reassessment of the facts and a constant, arduous search for the
means of achieving our ideal, By this I mean, of course, the
maintenance and preservation of peace, which, because of
its fundamental importance, has been entrusted to the
primary body of the United Nations, the Security Council.

53. Before I conclude this brief introduction, I should like
to pay a special tribute to the two representatives of our
sister African republics, Mali and Nigeria, for the dedication
and wisdom they have shown during the long and arduous
debates of this Council, particularly in the past year.
Ambassador Chief Adebo’s particularly helpful contributions have been justly rewarded by the confidence placed in
him by the Secretary-General, who has entrusted him with
functions of great importance in the United Nations. Our
friend Ambassador Kante, although he has joined us near
the end of his country’s tenure of a seat in the Security
Council, has quickly shown himself to be a diplomat of
great ability-a quality, I may say, which is by no means
rare in Mali.
54. In requesting an urgent meeting of the Security
Council in order to examine the situation created by the de
facto authorities in South West Africa, the African and
Asian delegations were voicing the emotions kindled by the
actions of South Africa in a territory no longer entrusted to
its responsibility.

47. We thus see that a close bond has been established
between this Council and the very concept of the preservation of peace. It may have appeared, it is true, that a certain
perhaps deliberate confusion had insinuated itself into the
minds of some when it became necessary to make. a
distinction between safeguarding security and preserving
established situations. To make this observation is not so
much to point an accusing Bnger, as to emphasize what we
truly consider to be the underlying disease preventing
calmness in international relations. Its symptoms can be
seen as soon as we look, however cursorily, at this Council’s
agenda,

5.5. They felt it necessary to draw the Council’s attention
to the dangers threatening the future of the peoples of
South West Africa and to the possible implications of the
situation for the peace and security in that part of the
world.
56. You will recall, Mr. President, that the General
Assembly, in adopting resolution 2145 (XXI), decided to
assume direct responsibility for South West Africa. Nearly
all the States Members of the United Nations considered
that the South African authorities were no longer in a
position to continue administering South West Africa, since
their policy of racial discrimination violated the principles
of the Mandate entrusted to them. Resolution 2145 (XXI)
thus terminated that Mandate and withdrew from South
Africa all the powers it had held. That decision reflected
the unanimous will of the United Nations to liberate the
people of South West Africa from domination and apartheid and to start them on the road to freedom and
independence.

48. Exactly what is this disease?
49. In the Middle East, it is not enough for nations to see
their existence threatened; their ancestral lands are overrun
as well. In South-East Asia, peoples are being subjected to
endless torments for no other reason than that they
vigorously assert their right to self-determination, to national unity and to political and territorial integrity, These
conflicts, because they pose a direct danger to international
peace, might lead some to misjudge the nature and to
‘underestimate the implications of other conflicts which,
since they are taking place primarily in southern Africa,
threaten suddenly to plunge one of the continents of the
Third World into the agonies of war.

57. Recognizing also the necessity of promoting conditions favourable to the establishment of an independent
State, the General Assembly, at its fifth special session,
created the United Nations Council for South West Africa.
That Council, which alone has authority, legally conferred
on it by the United Nations, over the region was entrusted
primarily with establishing conditions enabling the people
of South West Africa peacefully to achieve national
sovereignty and independence, In establishing the Council
the United Nations provided for the effective implementation of the responsibilities it had assumed in adopting
resolution 2145 (XXI).

50. This instability, these conflicts, these wars are, in our
view, the result of a twofold dichotomy: between action
and the philosophy upon which it is supposedly based, and
between the powerful and the less powerful.
51. The guiding principle of the members of this Council
and of this Council itself can and must be to substitute
harmony for discord and contradiction. If this aspiration
were to be generally accepted, the Security Council, even
though it would certainly not be able to resolve every
problem and every dispute, would enjoy greater authority
and prestige, which would help create the necessary
conditions for a coexistence which would be peaceful and
dynamic, because no one would be excluded.

58. In defiance of the majority of the United Nations,
South Africa rejected that decision. South Africa’s refusal,
5

its task in the long run. That is the only measure whereby
the South African authorities will understand that their
attitude of systematic refusal cannot persist indefinitely.
South West Africa must be guided towards full independence without threat or hindrance. It is one of the
Security Council’s duties to help attain that objective, so
that violence and instability may be banished from that
country and from the entire region of which it is a part.

to recognise the termination of the MandaTe it had
previously held and the authority of the Council established
by the United Nations, is merely a reassertion of the
contempt in which it has always held the United Nations.
59. By rejecting any contact with the Council for South
West Africa, South Africa wishes ta show clearly and
deliberately that it is capable of disregarding United
Nations decisions which would be harmful to its interests,
and intends, in doing so, to serve as an example to those
States which might still be afraid to defy the law.

68. In conclusion, may I be permitted to say that it would
be useful for our Council to reaffirm its authority in a field
where it has assumed such great responsibility. If we put
ourselves in a position now to respond forcefully to the test
which Pretoria would have us undergo-deliberately, believe
me-we shall effectively restore the prestige of our Organization, and we may be sure we shall not have to
demonstrate our authority again in the future.

60. This de fictu perpetuation of South Africa’s administrative authority in that Territory has served as a pretext
for arresting thirty-five South West Africans and bringing
them before South African tribunals which have no
territorial jurisdiction.
61. These irregular arrests violate the decisions of the
Gneral Assembly, for the inhabitants of South West Africa
are no longer under the authority of South Africa. This
travesty of a trial deliberately flaunts the authority of the
United Nations.

69. If we do not act in this way, our future work will
inevitably be more arduous, and we shall have demonstrated not only our incapacity, but also the inconsistency
of our ideal of international co-operation, to those who
dream of destroying it.

62. In threatening the lives of these thirty-five arbitrarily
detained prisoners, South Africa has once again deliberately
and provocatively chosen to outrage international opinion.
Having “wisely” postponed this illegal trial on the eve of
the opening of the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly, South Africa believed itself entitled to draw
from our work the lesson that it can do whatever it likes in
the future.

70. The PRESIDENT: There are twelve more speakers on
the list. Before giving the floor to the next speaker, the
representative of Ethiopia, I would express the hope that
members of the Council will bear in mind the urgency of
the situation which confronts it and the imperative need to
reach a decision in this matter before the conclusion of this
meeting.

63. It has taken steps intensifying persecution and repression-and I need hardly recall here their resemblance to
certain methods used in the recent past-directly threatening the existence of an entire population. The death
penalty which these condemned prisoners will face tomorrow will constitute, for the racist State of Pretoria, the
acid test of the weakness of the United Nations.

71. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Mr. President, I should like first of all to welcome you to the
Security Council and to congratulate you on your election
to the high office of President of the Council for the month
of January. It has been my pleasure and privilege to be
associated with you since your arrival here at the United
Nations,and all my contacts with you have confirmed my
expectation that the United Nations will benefit greatly
from the vast experience that you have gained in the service
of your Government both here at the United Nations
previously and elsewhere in the world. Your return to the
United Nations and your participation in the work of the
Security Council will, I am sure, prove to be a great asset to
our mutual endeavour in the Council and in the Organization as a whole. I wish to assure you of the co-operation
and goodwill of the Ethiopian delegation.

64. It was because the General Assem’,ly was aware of the
inevitable repercussions of this F‘ ;~y arrogant challenge
that it deemed urgent the necessity of taking a decision.
65. South Africa administers South West Africa and
exercises its repression over the inhabitants of that territory
by virtue of a law which is non-existent for all, with the
exception, needless to say, of its unhappy comrade,
Portugal.
66. The urgency of finding a solution to the problem with
which we are confronted certainly does not escape the
members of the Council. The lives of thirty-five persons
who legitimately lay claim to the protection of the United
Nations, because the United Nations is the trust authority,
are in danger. We are entirely responsible for the fate of
these people, for we have solemnly accepted that responsibility. Our most .urgent duty is therefore to prevent this
heinous crime from taking place, and the Council must take
the necessary measures to enjoin the Pretoria authorities to
free the thirty-five prisoners immediately and permit them
to return to their country,

72. I should also like to extend a hand of friendship and
welcome to the new members of the Council, my friends
and colleagues, the representatives of Algeria, Senegal,
Hungary and Paraguay, and to assure them of my delegation’s full and sincere co-operation.
73. South Africa’s mounting defiance of the United
Nations and its disregard of international opinion and of
the rules of international law is so evident in itself that it
hardly requires much effort to expose the cruel and sinister
character of this racist regime which oppresses millions in
southern Africa.

67. In any case, practical, concrete measures must be
envisaged, enabling the United Nations fully to accomplish

74. This is an open defiance which is now as old as the
United Nations itself. Be it the problem of apartheid, which
6

is an open denial of human rights, or the problem of South
Africa, which is a deliberate rejection of international
responsibility for an international territory, or again of the
alliance with the rebels in Southern Rhodesia and with the
Portuguese colonialists, which is an open attempt to
frustrate and undermine United Nations efforts-all these
problems taken separately or together constitute nothing
but an open challenge to the authority of the United
Nations by a regime that continues ?o enjoy the privileges
of membership without doing even the barest minimum to
fulfil the obligations incumbent upon Member States,

community of nations. But when it is extended to apply to
South *est Africa-for which territory the United Nations
has had a unique and unquestioned responsibility since the
dissolution of the League of Nations, a responsibility that
became immediate and direct after the termination of
South Africa’s mandate-the law and the trial being
conducted under it become a matter of direct challenge to
the United Nations and to the high principles for which is
stands.
78. As has already been pointed out by the representative
of Algeria, the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly, by an overwhelming majority, adopted resolution 2324(Xx11) of 16 December 1967, in which it
condemned the illegal arrest, deportation and trial at
Pretoria of the thirty-seven South West Africans as a
flagrant violation by the Government of South Africa of
the rights of these South West Africans, of the international
status of the Territory, and of General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI).

75. The background to this grave situation in southern
Africa and the serious developments that have led to the
urgent meeting of the Security Council today have been
described in the eloquent statement which we have just
heard from the representative of Algeria, Suffice it for me
to recall and emphasize that General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 terminated South Africa’s
Mandate over South West Africa and declared that henceforth South West Africa had come under the direct
responsibility of the United Nations. This wasa decision of
the overwhelming majority of the membership of the
United Nations which embodies the will of the international community. Yet, South Africa has not only openly
defied this decision by taking certain deliberate adniinistrative measures which are contrary both to the spirit of the
previous mandate and to the principles of the United
Nations Charter, but has further climaxed its defiance of
the international community by staging illegal trials of
South West African nationals under laws which it has no
right to promulgate and which are deliberately made
retroactive in order to enable the South African authorities
to carry their persecution and revenge as far back in time as
suits their sinister purposes.

79. The response of South Africa to this overwhelming
expression of international will has been to advance the
date of final judgement first by a number of weeks, and
lately by a matter of days. This is, of course, a well known
manoeuvre ‘of those who do not have the courage and the
clear conscience to face truth and justice. It is an obvious
attempt to forestall United Nations action and to confound
and mislead world opinion.
80. But no amount of manoeuvering can hide the shameful and cowardly act in which the South African Government is now engaged, and the eyes of the whole world are
turned today to this Council in the hope and expectation
that it will prevent the South African rCgime from getting
away with this cruel and illegal act of open terrorism and
naked persecution. For when everything is said and done,
what is at stake in these illegal trials goes beyond the life of
the South West Africans involved, important as this is in
itself. What 4s at stake is the very authority and responsibility of the United Nations. The experience of the League
of Nations shows very clearly that the authority of a world
body does not necessarily disappear overnight. It withers
away in a seemingly minor procession of erosions of
authority which, if unarrested in time, can lead step by step
downwards on the road of slow but sure disaster.

76. The law under which these South West African
nationalists have been charged, the so-called Terrorism
Act,2 is in itself a perverse law which runs counter to all
accepted concepts and norms of law and justice. As such it
is an ex post facto legislation which labels a certain act as
criminal long after it has been performed, and which
moreover did not constitute a violation of any law at the
time of its performance. This law has, naturally, aroused
the indignation of civilized mankind, and particularly of the
legal profession the world over. Commenting on this law,
The New York Times of 9 December 1967 said inter alin:

81, It is only by taking appropriate and timely action that
the Security Council can hope to avert such a disaster for
the United Nations, and surely no action is more urgent
than that required of us today in the face of the grave
challenge that the Pretoria trials present. We are duty
bound to speak with one voice today in saying to South
Africa that enough is enough and that the United Nations
cannot tolerate its defiance any more.

“A person arrested under that act is guilty unless he can
prove his innocence ‘beyond a reasonable doubt’. The
penalties for conviction are the same as those for treason,
including death. The range of ‘terrorist’ activities is so
sweeping that a man can be convicted if his alleged
offence is adjudged ‘to embarrass the administration of
the affairs of the State’.”

82. As time is of the essence in this grave development, it
is imperative that we adopt a resolution today confirming
the decision taken by the General Assembly and demanding
in clear and strong terms that the South African Govcrnment discontinue henceforth this illegal trial and release
and repatriate the South West Africans concerned.

77. This law, which is a facet of the apartheid rigime and
part and parcel of the machinery of persecution of the
non-white peoples of South Africa, is so outrageous in itself
that it deserves the condemnation of the international
2 Act to Prohjbit

Terroristic

Activities and to Amend the Law

83. Finally, important as it is to adopt a resolution in thr
Council today, that resolution will obviously have little

relating to Criminal Procedure; and to Provide for Other Incidental
Matters. Act No. 83 of 1967.

7

tives of the United States have already spoken out in other
United Nations forums against the admissibility of the
Terrorism Act. In the General Assembly, on 14 December
1967, Ambassador Goldberg3 described in detail the
reasons why we considered that the Act itself violates
elementary standards and why its application to South West
Africa is inadmissible. Today we reaffirm and reinforce
those same views.

cffcct unless we are all determined to set that it is
implcmentcd. A special responsibility falls in this feegird on
those Member States that maintain relations with South
Africa. It is obvious that South Africa uses those relations
as a convenient cover for its oppressive actions and that it
feels sustained and strengthened by the enormous benefits
it derives from them. On the other hand, the trade partners
of South Africa, some of which are countries with great
power and influence, could use that influence, if only they
would, at least to temper the excesses of South Africa’s all
too outrageous actions. That is the least that can be
eipec;ed of them as responsible Members of this Organization.

go. The United States neither condones violence nor
supports anarchy, Indeed, its position on the matter before
us springs from respect for the law and from its preference
for a peaceful solution of the problem. Therefore, it is
particularly tragic that the South African Government
should pursue policies which, by closing the avenues to
peaceful dissent in South West Africa, in and of themselves
breed violence.

84. We therefore appeal, and appeal in particular, to the
major Powers concerned, for on them, as permanent
members, falls a special responsibility. We appeal to one
and all to act promptly and decisively in order to prevent
these illegal trials, the outcome of which, if South Africa
has its way, would bring shame on the United Nations and a
heavy sense of guilt on the conscience of all mankind.

91. The prosecution and sentencing of the thirty-five
South West Africans under the Terrorism Act is without
justification and can only be interpreted as a repudiation of
respect for the rule of law. It is the view of the United
States Government that these trials should be halted and
that the defendants should be freed.

85. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): Today, if
our search of the records is correct, is indeed a historic
occasion. This is so because it marks the first time in the
history of this Organization that the Security Council has
been seized of problems relating directly to South West
Africa.

92. On 14 December 1967, two days before the nearly
unanimous adoption of resolution 2324 (XXII),
which
condemned the trial and of which we were a sponsor,
Ambassador Goldberg asked why the South West Africans
had been held incommunicado and why they had been tried
far from their own homes. No logical response has been
forthcoming from the South African Government. Despite
repeated and numerous requests from various organs of the
United Nations and various Member States, as well as
certain private groups, to that Government to honour the
international status of the Territory and to observe resolution 2145 (XXI), the South African Government has thus
far ignored those appeals and continued with the trials.

86. Fifty-three Members of our Organizarion have requested this meeting in the hope that the Council will add
its weight to that of the General Assembly to secure the
release and repatriation of thirty-five South West Africans
now being tried at Pretoria under inadmissible legislation,
the so-called Terrorism Act of 1967. The General Assembly, in resolution 2324 (XXII), has already overwhelmingly denounced the trial and the Act, yet the South
African authorities have ignored that resolution.

93. We believe that the entire international community
has a responsibilty to these individuals who are now on
trial. This responsibility derives from the international
status of South West Africa, from the undertakings given in
Chapters IX and XI of the United Nations Charter, from
the general principles of international law, and from a very
fundamental and basic concern for humanitarian treatment
of fellow human beings. This is a responsibility that weighs
very heavily on this Council at this time when the lives and
freedom of these inhabitants of the international Territory
of South West Africa are at stake.

87. The concern widely felt about the <ate of those men is
shared by my Government. We sha..: also the sense of
urgency foi this meeting, particll’ :y in view of the fact
that the judgement on the individuals concerned may be
handed down tomorrow. This concern is highlighted by the
continuing disregard of the Government of South Africa for
the rights of the inhabitants of South West Africa, the
authority of the ,United Nations and the humanitarian
concern of the people of the world for the welfare of the
people of South West Africa.
88. By its resolution 2145 (XXI), which was adopted by
an overwhelming majority, rhe General Assembly has
already decided that South Africa’s Mandate for South
West Africa was terminated and that henceforth South West
Africa came under the direct responsibility of the United
Nations. The decision of this Organization was clearly based
on South Africa’s own actions in breach of its obligations,
its disavowal of the Mandate and its disregard of the
opinions of the International Court of Justice.

94. My Government is of the opinion that the extension
of the terrorism laws to South West Africa is illegal, and we
are thus prepared to join with other members of the
Council in expressing such a view. Indeed, we think it
entirely appropriate that, in view of the urgency of the
situation, the Security Council should be asked now to add
its influential voice to the call for the discontinuance of this
illegal trial, and to do so today. Accordingly, we welcome
this move; we support the call on South Africa to release
and repatriate those being tried and to cease its application
of the Terrorism Act to the Territory and to its people.

89. The current arrest and trial of thirty-five South West
Africans under an offensive Terrorism Act which violates
the most basic standards of justice to which my own people
are dedicated, is particularly serious. Various representa-

3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1632nd meeting.

8

9.5. We believe very strongly that it is important that the
action of this Council on such a basic and important issue
should be taken with the same unity of purpose and intent
that existed when resolution 2324 (XXII) was adopted in
the General Assembly, and I can only say that it is with
great gratification and appreciation that it now appears,
Mr. President, that under your wise leadership this will be
the case. For its part, the United States will support the
draft resolution as submitted and will continue to exert
every appropriate effort in seeking to secure the release of
the prisoners. It is our earnest desire to see that the people
of South West Africa as a whole will be able, through
peaceful means, to achieve their goal, and that they will be
in a position to exercise fully those basic rights to which all
men are entitled.

99. Mr. MISHRA (India): It is a matter of satisfaction to
my delegation that it will have, during 1968, the privilege
and the pleasure of working in close co-operation with the
delegation of Pakistan in the Security Council. The geographic proximity of the two countries, their common ties
rooted in history, civilization and culture, the close identity
of views on many international issues such as the one we
are discussing today, are self-evident and need no particular
emphasis.
100. May I also take this opportunity of welcoming the
other new members of the Security Council. The delegations of Algeria and Senegal, our fellow delegations within
the Afro-Asian family, are well known for their active
interest in, and constructive contribution
to, all the
activities of the United Nations. My delegation looks
forward to working with them closely in the Security
Council. We are similarly happy to extend our warm
welcome to the delegations of Hungary and Paraguay, with
both of whom we have worked closely in the past and with
whom, we have no doubt, we shall be working together
with a view to promoting our common objectives.

96. Mr, IGNATIEFF
(Canada): I shall accede to your
request, Mr. President, addressed to members of the
Council earlier, to keep our statements as short as possible.
May I first, however, be permitted to congratulate your
country, Sir, on its election to the Security Council, and
yourself on your assumption today of the responsibilities of
the Presidency of the Council at this first meeting. My
delegation has already been impressed by the wise words
with which you launched the Council on this year’s work
and the manner in which you conducted the consultations
leading up to this meeting.

101. We shall be missing the benefit of the rich experience
of Chief Adebo of Nigeria, who, by his wise and tactful skill
in handling difficult and delicate situations, contributed
greatly to the smooth functioning of the Council, particularly during his Presidency through the month of December
1967.

97, I should also like to welcome very warmly the
representatives of Algeria, Hungary, Paraguay and Senegal.

102. My delegation would also like to thank the delegations of Mali, Japan, Argentina and Bulgaria for their
co-operation with us during the period of our common
membership in the Security Council.

98. Today we are considering a further appeal to the
Government of South Afri’ca in respect of the South West
African prisoners who are on trial in Pretoria. The Canadian
delegation,4 at the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly, has already expressed its grave concern at the
detention of the South West Africans, the provisions of the
Terrorism Act-to which my friend and colleague the
representative of Ethiopia so eloquently referred earlierand its extension to South West Africa. Along with the
overwhelming majority of the United Nations, Canada
voted in favour of resolution 2324 (XXII), adopted by the
General Assembly on 16 December 1967. In that resolution
the General Assembly called on the Government of South
Africa to discontinue the trial forthwith and to release and
repatriate the prisoners. My delegation regrets very much
indeed that up to this time the Government of South Africa
has given no indication that it intends to heed the request
contained in that General Assembly resolution. We agree,
therefore, that we should now add the voice of this Council
urgently, and I do hope unanimously, to the weight of
opinion already expressed by the General Assembly. The
United Nations, after all, was established in the hope that
the decent opinion of mankind would have an influence on
the actions of Governments. The attitude of the Organization towards these trials in Pretoria has been clearly
expressed. It is” being given further emphasis today in the
meeting of the Security Council. My Government considers
that South Africa, as a Member of the United Nations, has
an obligation to respect the opinions of this Council and to
heed the call which is being made today.
albid.,

1624th

103. Mr. President, may I, on behalf of my delegation and
on my own behalf, congratulate you on your assumption of
the high office of President of the Council. During the
informal con@tations which have preceded this meeting, as
also during the consultations relating to other issues, it was
evident that in your person the Council had a very wise
leader, The speed with which you concluded the informal
consultations in regard to this meeting, and the very fact
that we are here today instilled with a sense of urgency,
testify to your ability in obtaining the maximum co-operation quickly and effectively.
104. The Security Council’s meeting today has been
convened at the urgent request of a great many Afro-Asian
Member States of our Organization. The United Nations
Council for South West Africa also has addressed a letter
[S/83.53/ to you, Mr. President, tihich has now been
included in our agenda, in which it has expressed grave
concern at the situation prevailing in South West Africa and
has requested the Security Council to take up the matter
immediately.
105. As members will recall, the General Assembly at its
twenty-first session adopted the historic resolution
2145 (XXI) by which it terminated the Mandate of South
Africa over South West Africa and decided that South
Africa had no further rights in the Territory and that South
West Africa henceforth came under the direct responsibility
of the United Nations. This decision of the General

meeting.
9

standardsof fair procedure,we, the undersigned,protest
the unlawful prosecutionof South WestAfrican citizens
under the Tcrrurism Act, rind we call upon our brethren
of benchand bar to join usin this protest.”

Ass~‘mbly ~nust be rq,ardcd 3s 3 point of departure for the
United Nstions on which ;ill our ;lutictns subsequent to 27
October 19(h must bc based. The Govcrninent uf South
Africa, instc;td of respecting the near unanimous decision of
the United Nations, has persisted in its illegul ~lccupi~tion of
the international Territory of South West Africa and has, in
fact, taken on measures to implement the recoa~lncndations
of the Odendaal Commissiorr,s that inftrmous (‘urnmission.

109. Members must also be aware of the resolution
recently adopted by the Associationof the Bar of the City
of New York which declared that the Terrorism Act
offends citilized prjnciplesof law including due processand
violatesthe UniversalDeclarationof HumanRights.

106. The delegation of lnditl like the dclegstions of other
members here has much to say on the question of South
West Africa. Today, however, we have met to consider and
act with speed in regard to a more limited hut importunt
aspect of the situaticln. The human rights of thirty-five
South West Africans 1lilVC been placed in jcopnrdy by the
Government of South Africa. Indeed the lives of most of
them depend upon the action of this Council and the
compliance which it obtains from the South African
Government. We are literally racing against time. The racist
r&me of Pretoria, as we all know, had originidly fixed the
date for the resumption of the illegal trial on 5 February
196X. When it became clear to the rulers of South Africa
that the international community was planning to take
some action, it advancedthe date of the trial to 29 January.
Subsequently,the date wasfurther advancedto 26 January,
that is, tomorrow. In the face of such a stubborn and
arrogant defiance of world opinion by South Africa, it is
the clear duty of the Security Council to take speedyand
effective action so asnot to let South Africa confront the
United Nations with a fait accompli,

110. What WBSthe reaction of the Government of South
Africa to resolution 2324 (XXII) which embodies the
genuineconcernsharedby all Membersof the world body?
On the very day that resolution wasadopted, Mr. Vorster,
the Prirnc Minister of South Africa is reported to have said
that “South Africa would not allow anything or anybody
to interfere with the trial”.
111. Further we have learned that on 11 December
another South West African was arrestedin Ovamboland
underthe Terrorism Act. The memorandumof the United
Nations Council for South West Africa throws adequate
light on the attitude of the Governmentof South Africa. It
is thus clear that the resolutionsof the GeneralAssembly
and other organsof the United Nations calling on South
Africa to discontinuethe trial have met with a stubborn
defiance.
112. It is, therefore, incumbent on the Security Council,
which is the highest organ of the United Nations dealing
with the problemsof peaceand security, to expressitself
firmly on this issue. In the view of my delegation the
Security Councilmust, in unequivocal terms, call upon the
Government of South Africa forthwith to discontinuethe
illegal trial and to releaseand repatriate the South West
Africans concerned. My delegation is confident that the
Security Council would be able to take that step without
any delay since all its members, permanent as well as
non-permanent,voted for resolution 2324 (XXII) which
calledfor preciselythe sameaction.

107. In the past several months the Terrorism Act of
South Africa and the illegal arrestand trial of thirty-seven
South West Africans under it have been the subject of
innumerable statementsby hlember States as well as of
consensusadopted by severalorgansof the United Nations.
The latest resolution on this subjectadoptedby the General
Assembly, resolution 1314 (XXII), which received the
approval of 110 Members, condemnedthe illegal arrest,
deportation and trial at Pretoria of the thirty-seven South
West Africans asa flagrant violation by the Governmentof
South Africa of their rights, of the international statusof
the Territory and of General Assembly- resolution
2145 (XXI).
1OS. The action of South Africa in enactingthe so-called
Terrorism Act and in arrestingandprosecutingpeopleover
whom it has no legaljurisdiction, hasprovoked, in addition
to the censureof the llnited Nations,the moral indignation
of many private humanitarian, professionaland other
associationsthe world over. Of specialsignificanceis the
opinion of many eminent private lr~dl associations.A
statement issuedon 13 December1967 by more than 200
American attorneys protesting the trial concluded with
thesewords:
“As membersof the legal professionconcernedby the
imminent threat of deathof thirty-five of our fellow men
resulting from South Africa’s illegalassertionof jurisdiction and its violation of the rule of law and of civilized

113. I should like to conclude my statement by saying
that what we are discussingtoday is not solely a political
questioninvolving the lack of sovereigntyor jurisdiction of
South Africa over South West Africa. This aspect of the
question, of course, is fundamental and most important.
But the immediateissuefacing us today is a humanitarian
one. Thirty-five South West Africans may well lose their
lives due to no other crime but their yearning to liberate
their homeland,a yearning which the United Nationshas
long recognizedasan inalienableright and has encouraged
by the adoption of resolution2145 (XXI) with the avowed
aim of enablingthe South West Africans to achieve their
independence.The prestigeand authority.of the Security
Council would be gravely underminedif it fails to act and
act quickly.
114. Mr. BERARD (France)(translatedfrom French): Let
me very briefly say with what pleasurewe welcomehere in
the Security Council the presenceof countries with which
we have particularly closeties, such as Algeria, Hungary,
Paraguay, Senegaland, Mr. President,your own country,
Pakistan.

5 “Commissionof Enquiry into South West Africa Affairs”
established
in 1962by the Government
of SouthAfrica underthe
chairmanship
of hfr. F.H. Odendaal.
10

11.5. On 16 December 1967 the General Assembly drew
the attention of the Council to its resolution 2324 (XXII),
which reflected the legitimate concern of that United
Nations body as to the conditions of the trial, by the South
African Government on 7 August 1967, of thirty-seven
South West African nationals accused of terrorism by
Pretoria.

this table the representatives of the States recently elected
members of the Security Council: Algeria, Hungary, Pakistan, Paraguay and Senegal. I should like to express the
conviction that they will make a valuable contribution to
the fulfilment of the responsible task entrusted to us under
the United Nations Charter-the maintenance of international peace and security.

116, The proceedings, which opened on 11 September,
were adjourned on 12 December, and the decision of the
court, if not its sentence, was to be pronounced on 5
February. But that date was first of all advanced to 29
January and later-we are told-to 26 January, Under those
circumstances, my delegation was extremely willing to
agree to the urgent meeting of the Security Council
requested by the African and Asian States.

122. Mr. President, may I congratulate you personally on
occupying the Chair of this Council for this month and
expr1’ssthe hope that under your guidance the Council will
take useful steps to settle the matters it has to deal with.
123. I should like to take this opportunity to associate
myself with those who have expressed their gratitude to our
colleagues who left the Council this year, and note, in
particular, the valuable contribution to the work of the
Council made by the representative of Bulgaria, the
representative of Mali and the representative of Nigeria,
who served effectively as President of the Council last
month. I should also like to note the contribution made by
the other outgoing members of the Council.

117. We fully share the emotion which those facts have
aroused in the United Nations and throughout the world.
The charge involves nationals of a Territory for which the
international community bears a special responsibility,
because of the international status of South West Africa,
We therefore have the right to give it the attention it merits.

124. The delegation of the Union of the Soviet Socialist
Republics shares the deep concern and indignation aroused
by the illegal acts of the racist regime in Pretoria against the
people of South West Africa, as expressed in the letter from
representatives of over fifty African and Asian countries
dated 24 January 1968 and in the statements of the
representatives of those countries at this meeting.

118. From the information received, which has so far not
been challenged, it appears that the accused were arrested
in Ovamboland, that is to say, in South West Africa, for
alleged crimes committed on that Territory. They were
then transferred to South Africa and held incommunicado
for more than a year. They have been charged with
violating a law on terrorism, adopted on the very eve of
their prosecution and made retroactive to 27 June 1962.
They are being prosecuted under exceptional legislation
which flouts our humanitarian feelings and our sense of
justice. Its provisions are reprehensible attacks on solidly
established legal principles.

125. The reprisals that are being prepared in Pretoria
against the leaders of the National Liberation Movement in
South West Africa are, as has been rightly shown here,
incompatible with the principles and aims of the United
Nations and of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

119. The explanations offered on 11 December 1967 to
the General Assembly by the South African representatives
have not-1 must say this in all sincerity-dispelled my
delegation’s* unfavourable opinion regarding the principles
involved and the procedure followed in this case. That is
why my delegation supported the draft resolution submitted to the General Assembly by seventy-four States,
condemning the arrest, deportation and illegal trial of the
thirty-seven South West African nationals and inviting
South Africa to stop the trial immediately and to free and
repatriate the accused persons.

126. This is further evidence of the defiant contempt
shown by the South African authorities for the numerous
decisions of,, the United Nations demanding that an end
should be put to arbitrary oppression by the police and
other illegal activities against the people of South West
Africa, who should be granted immediate freedom and
independence. It is a gross violation of the inalienable legal
rights of the people of South West Africa and of the
international status of that Territory.
127. Examining the dangerous situation in South West
Africa, we come up repeatedly against one of the manifestations that are most abhorrent to the human conscience of
the policy of perpetuating colonial and racist domination,,
interference and aggression practised by the forces of
imperialism in various parts of the world.

120. Today we express the fervent hope that the South
African Government will listen to the voice of reason and
humanity and act in conformity with recognized rules of
law and justice by respecting the international character of
South West Africa. Any decision to the contrary would
provoke the keenest condemnation and could only increase
the hostility of the peoples of the Territory against a policy
of racial discrimination,
a policy which my country
condemns root and branch.
lics) (translated f?om Russian):

(Union of Soviet Socialist RepubMay I first of all welcome to

128. In recent years, particularly since the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peopies, many peoples have freed themselves from colonial
dependence and created their own national States. Farreaching social and economic changes are taking place in
the vast expanses of the African continent and a genuine.
national renaissanceis in progress.

6 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1624th meeting,

129. However, the policy of the colonialists and racists,
supported by the international forces of imperialism and

121. Mr. MOROZOV

11

reaction, and the obstinate refusal to carry out the
provisions of the aforementioned Declaration in respect of
a number of countries and peoples, still prevent the total
liberation of mankind from the shame of colonialism.

of the United Nations without the active support accord
to it by its allies whom it is customary to refer to modes
as its “main trading partners”. It is well known that the
include first and foremost the United States of Ameri
the United Kingdom and the Federal Republic of Germs

130. The fate of the people of South West Africa, too, is
most tragic. The partisans of freedom and independence
have waged a constant struggle for the liberation of that
people. They have more than once raised their voices in
protest against the South African racists here in the United
Nations. It has already been mentioned here that, at the
twenty-first session of the General Assembly, it was decided
by an overwhelming majority to terminate the famous
League of Nations Mandate, under cover of which the
South African racists had established a colonial r&ime in
South West Africa,

137. The ruling circles of these countries continue to
guided by selfish political, economic, military and strate
interests. During a lengthy debate on the question of SOI
West Africa at the twenty-second session of the Gene
Assembly, the Soviet Union and many other countries w#
able to adduce numerous facts showing the deep-sea.
interrelation and community of interests between
colonial imperialist western Powers and their like-mint
allies in Southern Aftica.
138. Therefore, we are not going to present again th
numerous facts which are sufficiently well-known to
Members of our Organization. We shall refrain from dc
so also because the Security Council has to take
immediate decision on this item which is on its age]
today. However, we recall these facts in order to stress t
the key question, if we wish to obtain freedom
independence for the people of South West Africa, c
tinues to be that of the cessation of all kinds of ,politi
economic, financial and other support for the so-ca
South African Republic from its main allies, the Wes
Powers.

131. Twice in the past year, the General Assembly, at its
fifth special session and at the twenty-second regular
session, confirmed its decisions with regard to South West
Africa and called for the immediate implementation of that
people’s inalienable rights to freedom and independence.
132. The Pretoria r&ime, however, not only refuses to
carry out the United Nations decisions to put an end to the
illegal annexation, but openly challenges the authority of
our Organization and world public opinion, and is taking
measures applying to South West Africa the regime of
repression and terror against the indigenous population
which it practises in South Africa itself and which is
condemned by the whole world.

139. Resolution 2324 (XXII) on the question of SC
West Africa, adopted at the twenty-second session of
General Assembly, contains an appeal to all States to
their influence with the Government of South Afric
order to obtain its compliance with the General Asseml
call to put to put an end to repression against
inhabitants of South West Africa and to grant free:dom
independence to the people of that country.

133. The South West African patriots, who are continuing
their heroic struggle for the liberation of their homeland,
are being subjected to cruel persecution, arrest and torture.
134. In the past few months a number of United Nations
bodies, including, as we said, the General Assembly, have
often drawn the attention of the peoples of the world to
such blatant illegalities as the arrest, deportation and trial in
Pretoria of thirty-seven leaders of the South West African
national liberation movement. The threat of open reprisals
is hahging over these South West African patriots.

140. In connexion with the telegram of the Secre,
General of the United Nations dated 23 January 1
concerning the resolution just mentioned, the delegatic
the Soviet Union to the United Nations today comn
cated to the Secretary-General an answer which
technical reasons has not yet been mentioned amonE
replies of the nine States referred to in the report o
Secretary-General [S/8357/ which is before the Cound

135. In its resolution 2324 (XXII) adopted on 16 December 1967, the General Assembly condemned the illegal
activities of the South African r&me against the South
West African freedom fighters. It called for an immediate
end to the odious parody of a trial and for the release and
repatriation of those fighting for the freedom and independence of South West Africa. However, despite the
decision of the General Assembly, despite the protests of
progressive world opinion, the South African authorities
intend to carry through this legal farce in Pretoria as
quickly as possible. Naturally we have been and are
wondering what the redsons may be for this open defiance
of the United Nations by the South African racists.

141. The reply sent by the Soviet Government states:
“The Soviet Union has consistently opposed
continues to oppose the inhuman policies of ~zpart
terror and oppression directed against the national Ii
tion fighters of South West Africa. The criminal poli
the racist Pretoria r@irne constitutes one of the 1
manifestations of colonialism and a violation o:
principles of the United Nations Charter and th.e De
tion on the Granting of Independence to Co’
Countries and Peoples.

136. The whole course of debate on the question of South
West Africa in the United Nations at previous sessions of
the General Assembly and today’s debate on the question
in the Security Council show very clearly that the Pretoria
regime would not be able to oppose for long the categorical
demands of the overwhelming majority of States Members

“The peoples of the Soviet Union and public erg:
tions in the USSR have resolutely condemned
continue to condemn the policy of arbitrary polict
and oppression pursued by the South African rBgim
the impending judicial reprisals against the leaders (
national liberation movement in South West Africa.
12

“For its part, the Soviet Union has taken and is
continuing to take the necessary steps in the international
arena to protect the inalienable right of the people of
South West Africa to freedom and national independence,
demanding an end to the shameful policies of colonialism
and racism. Accordingly, the Soviet Union in particular
supported the adoption, at the twenty-second session of
the General Assembly, of General Assembly resolution
2324 (XXII), which condemns the unlawful arrest and
trial of South West African patriots and includes a
demand for the immediate termination of the unlawful
judicial proceedings against them and the release and
repatriation of all those arrested.”
We repeat this demand categorically today at this meeting
of the Security Council. The letter continues:
“As one of the measures for influencing the racist
regime of the Republic of South Africa, the Soviet Union,
as is well known, has broken off all relations with that
regime, and at the present time has no diplomatic,
consular or commercial relations with it.”
142. The letter concludes with the statement that the
Soviet Union will continue in future to support the just
struggle of the people of South West Africa for its
liberation from the yoke of colonialism.
143. It has been quite rightly pointed out here that the
resolution of the General Assembly on South West Africa
demands energetic measures by all other States Members of
the United Nations, and in this connexion we must express
our regret that the report of the Secretary-General, presented to the Council today notes that, with the exception
of the Swedish reply, not one of the replies of the nine
States which have been present so far-and 1 have already
explained that the Soviet Union’s reply, for technical
reasons, is not among these-mentions any measures which
are to be taken by their Governments in response to the
resolution adopted by the General Assembly. We expect
that, before it is too late, the steps needed to put an end to
the crimes committed by the South African racists will also
be taken by other States, including the main political and
military allies of the South African racists, whom 1
mentioned previously.

Pretoria of thirty-seven South West Africans as a flagrant
violation of their rights, of the international status of the
Territory and of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI).
147. We supported that resolution, we fully subscribed to
its terms, and we firmly maintain that position today. In
the plenary meeting of the General Assembly on 16
December 1967, I had occasion to say that Denmark would
positively ccnsider supporting further constructive moves
with a view to assisting these unhappy men.7 In accordance
with this policy, we consider it is only appropriate that a
great number of Afro-Asian Members of the United Nations
have taken the initiative to have this meeting of the Council
convened today, As the Government of South Africa has
not yielded to the call by the General Assembly in
resolution 2324(Xx11) to discontinue the illegal trial and
to release and repatriate the South West Africans concerned, the Security Council should now let its voice be
heard in the exercise of the responsibility of the United
Nations for South West Africa,
148. It has been pointed out repeatedly in this Council
and in the General Assembly that the trial of the South
West Africans is a mockery of justice. The principle of
retroactivity, the unjust rules or the burden of proof, the
vagueness of the definitions of the delicts, all these make
the so-called Terrorism Act under which the South West
Africans stand accused a highly objectionable piece of
legislation, to say the least.
149. Our concern today must be to make a determined
and concerted effort in this Council to help these South
West Africans standing trial in Pretoria. In the opinion of
my delegation, it is incumbent upon the Council to call
upon the Government of South Africa to comply immediately with General Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII), to
release the ‘South West Africans concerned, and to discontinue the trials against them. My delegation is prepared to
support such a move, by which this Council would also
reaffirm that the trial and the arrest and deportation of the
South West Africans is a violation of the international
status of South West Africa which was accepted by the
entire international community in General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI).
150. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): Mr. President, in
expressing my thanks to you and to all the members of the
Council who so kindly addressed personal greetings to the
new members of the Council, including myself, allow me to
commence my intervention with a word of congratulation
to you upon your election to the Presidency of the Security
Council. Your country, Pakistan, which has been maintaining friendly relations with mine, was simultaneously
elected to membership of the Council with my country.
From your very first day in the Council, Mr. President, you
have been called upon to assume the high office of the
Presidency. It is with real pleasure that I wish to express the
deep appreciation of my delegation for the experience, tact
and expertise that have characterized your activities during
this month.

144. The Soviet delegation shares the views which have
been expressed in this Council by the representatives of
Asian and African countries. We agree that the question
raised by them is urgent and cannot be postponed.
Therefore, the Soviet delegation is ready to support a
decision of the Security Council which would be in keeping
with the Charter and which would be aimed at putting a
stop to the arbitrary activities of the racist Pretoria regime.
145. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): May I first join in the
tribute paid to the outgoing members of the Security
Council who, by their character and intelligence, sustained
the high traditions of this body. 1 should also like to join in
the hearty welcome to our new colleagues that was
expressed to you, Mr. President, and to the representatives
of Algeria, Hungary, Paraguay and Senegal, and, of course,
to you as President,

151. I cannot fail to thank the outgoing members of the
Council for their work, and in this connexion I may be

146. Denmark was a co-sponsor of General Assembly
resolution 2324 (XXII), which condemned the trial at

7 Ibid.,

13

1635th

meeting.

permitted to express a special word of appreciation to the
representative of the Bulgarian People’s Republic, Ambassador Milko Tarabanov, for the selfless and devoted pursuit of
the cause of peace and security that he demonstrated in this
Council during his tenure of office.

repeatedly to rescue a people that has suffered so much
from the yoke of the white settlers rigime. There have been
numerous attempts to draw the attention of the minority
r&me of South Africa to the possible consequences of its
senselesscolonial policy to the indigenous population, and
even to international peace and security.

152. It is a great honour for the Hungarian People’s
Republic to serve for the first time on this Council, which is
one of the principal organs of the United Nations. We
consider our election to this important post as an expression of the recognition of the peaceful nature of the
foreign policy of my country. It is in this spirit that 1
express my sincere thanks to all those who were so kind as
to congratulate us on the occasion of our election to the
Council.

158, It seems that, in the defiance of its international
obligation under the Charter of the United Nations, and in
total disregard of world public opinion, a Member State
-namely, the Republic of South Africa-has continued and
even expanded the application of its generally condemned
policy of apartheid in the Territory of South West Africa,
159. One may raise the question: what are the motives
behind this arrogant policy of the South African Government’? For this question there can be only one explanation: South African white imperialism, in close co-operation with the Smith regime and Portugal, is trying to
expand, to get hold of South West Africa and other
territories in order to impose upon them its policy of
domination, to use them for profitable capital investment,
and to exploit their natural resources and cheap labour.

153. To be a member of this Council is not only a matter
of great distinction and honour, but one of serious
responsibility as well. Guided by this recognition, my
delegation will do everything in its power so that its
activities in the Council will reflect the basic principles of
my country’s foreign policy, the strengthening of peace and
security, the promotion of peaceful co-operation of COUIItries with different social and economic systems, the
lessening of international tension, the fight against aggressive tendencies in international life and the complete
elimination of the remnants of the colonial system which
constitute so grave a threat to world peace.

160. In these endeavours South Africa could not, however, carry on alone; it receives active support from other
Powers which are also interested in maintaining the present
status of the Territory and of the neighbouring colonies.
The major trading partners of South Africa work hand in
hand with the champions of apartheid for the purpose of
prolonging their economic and military domination and
police oppression in South West Africa.

154. The Hungarian delegation has received with deep
anxiety and indignation the recent information on the
decision of the Government of South Africa to resume the
illegal trial at Pretoria of thirty-five South West African
patriots, It fully shares the opinion of fifty-three Member
States that the illegal trial at Pretoria and the persistent
defiance of General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI),
2324 (XXII) and 2325 (XXII) by the Government of South
Africa call for an urg$nt consideration of the problem by
the Security Council.

161, The Hungarian People’s Republic, as a member of the
Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the
Government of the Republic of South Africa, has always
called for the most concrete and speedy action to eliminate
the crimes arising from the policies and practices of
apartheid.

162. At its last regular session the General Assembly
adopted resolution 2324 (XXII), in which the world Organization condemned the illegal arrest, deportation and trial
at Pretoria of thirty-seven South West Africans. This
resolution also called upon the Government of South Africa
to discontinue forthwith this illegal trial and to release and
repatriate the people concerned. Unfortunately, a deaf ear
was turned by the white settlers @ime in South Africa to
this and former appeals of the General Assembly.

15.5. The examination of the problem before us should be
based on the fact that the General Assembly, in its
resolution 2145 (XXI), terminated the Mandate of South
Africa over South West Africa and placed that Territory
under the direct responsibility of the United Nations.
Consequently, any step or measure by the South African
authorities in South West Africa can only be considered as
an act of aggression.

163. The illegal trial at Pretoria is only part of a complex
problem which was created by the establishment of an
apartheid regime in the southern part of Africa.

156. The situation has become more serious -by the
arbitrary mass arrest of South West African patriots, The
minority white settlers r&me has no right whatsoever in
South West Africa. It .has flagrantly violated the international status of the’ Territory and directly challenged the
authority of the United Nations. This act of the minority
r&ime in South Africa was aggravated by the illegal trial of
thirty-five South West African patriots.

164. My delegation strongly supports the draft resolution
which will be a proper answer to the challenge by the
minority settlers rBgime in South Africa, and we hope that
it will result in stopping the illegal trial and in the release of
the South West African patriots. However, the Security
Council can be satisfied with its own achievements only
after the total removal of the illegal presence of South
Africa from South West Africa and the attainment of the
complete independence of that Territory.

157. The apparent reason behind this tyrannical behaviour
is the fear of the struggle to regain the inalienable rights of
the people of South West Africa to freedom and independence, which has been continuing for more than two
decades in the United Nations, and even longer outside it.
During this period the United Nations has endeavoured

165. The Hungarian delegation joins the world community
in condemning the South African minority regime for its
14

refusal to comply with the relevant General Assembly
resolutions. At the same time it wishes to express its
admiration to the South Wsst African patriots who, under
the terrorism of the white settlers rCgime, dare to fight not
only for the liberty and freedom of their country, but also
for the dearest cause of all humanity.

our election to the Security Council. Senegal is fully aware
of the great international distinction which the United
Nations has conferred upon it by electing it a member of
the Security Council. This honour obliges us to make our
chief objective the exercise of every effort to make a
constructive contribution to the settlement of any dispute
brought before the Council.

166. Mr. President, with your kind permission, 1 should
like to read out a text which I have just received from
Budapest and which is a cablegram of protest sent by the
Hungarian Solidarity Committee-comprising
representatives of all mass organizations of my country, thus
reflecting the opinion of the whole Hungarian people-to
Mr. Balthazar Vorster, Prime Minister of the Republic of
South Africa in Pretoria:

171. As you all know, Senegal is a country which has
always advocated discussion and which is firmly convinced
of the usefulness of the United Nations and of the need to
strengthen the Organization and ensure its survival, There
have been, there still are and there always will be
international disputes; antagonisms and differences are a
law of life. They cannot be prevented or suppressed. But
the problem is not to suppress them; the problem is to act
so that these disputes may be settled through discussion
and peaceful compromise, not by violence. In every
conflict, we must replace the sound of gunfire by the voice
of discussion and peaceful compromise.

“Hungarian public opinion has been shocked to hear
about the illegal arrest, deportation and trial in Pretoria
of thirty-seven South West Africans.,
“This is clear-cut and flagrant violation of basic human
rights and of the elementary rules of international law,

172. This, indeed, is the very purpose of the United
Nations, which is endeavouring to set up an international
society wherein all problems will be Settled peacefully in
accordance with international law. We are fully aware of
the preponderant role which the Security Council must
play in such a system, since this organ is the nerve centre
for all our organization’s decisions.

“The Hungarian Solidarity Committee, fully aware of
Hungarian public opinion, most categorically condemns
the illegal actions taken against the South West African
patriots, all the more so because the Republic of South
Africa has no legal grounds whatsoever for trying South
West Africans.
“On the ground of fundamental human rights and of
legality, the Hungarian Solidarity Committee resolutely
demands the immediate release of the thirty-seven South
West Africans, the cessation of all, legal proceedings
against them as provided for in General Assembly
resolution 2324 (XXIK) of 16 December 1967, which
called upon the Government of South Aftica to implement it.”

173. I can assure you, Mr. President, that Senegal will not
cease to co-operate constructively in this task. We shall
always do everything in our power to bring together the
most diverse points of view and to achieve settlement
through peaceful compromise; for, if we fail in that, what
will our situation very soon be? We shall come to the edge
of the abyss, we shall face the primeval and brutal law of
the strongest, a law all the more dangerous in our epoch,
when the nations, as a result of incredible technical
advances, have at their disposal methods, such as thermonuclear bombs, of bringing about apocalyptic destruction,

167. The Hungarian delegation, as a newcomer to this
highly respected organ of the United Nations, will do its
best to contribute in accordance with its modest ability to
the earliest realization of this obligation and to the settling
of this problem and the many other outstanding issues of
peace and security in the world.

174. Therefore, during the two years in which Senegal will
participate in the work of the Security Council, our role
will be essentially that of exerting every effort to establish a
world order which will settle the inevitable conflicts
between nations by discussion and peaceful compromise.

168. Mr. Ousmane So& DIOP (Senegal) (translated from
French): i should like first, Mr. President, to congratulate
you on the way in which you have directed the work of the
Security Council to everyone’s satisfaction throughout the
month of January. With your wisdom and tact, you have
been able to achieve the consensus without which the
Security Council cannot accomplish any effective work.

175. With the adoption of resolution 2145 (XXI) on 27
October 1966, the General Assembly came to the historic
decision’ending the Mandate of the Republic of South
Africa for the administration of South West Africa. From
that time on, responsibility for the administration of South
West Africa and international sovereignty over South West
Africa has fallen solely to the United Nations.

169. Next I should like to thank our colleagues who are
leaving us and who have also given constructive assistance
to the Security Council. I refer in particular to the
representatives of h;fali and Nigeria who, throughout the
two years in which they participated in the work of the
Council, gave outstanding service to the countries under
colonial domination, especially with regard to problems of
decolonization and violations of human rights similar to
that which we are discussing today,

176. It was only logical to believe that the Republic of
South Africa, a Member of the United Nations, would bow
to the unanimo’us wishes of our Organization. The Senegal
delegation thought so, at any rate, because we have a
special responsibility in the settlement of the South West
African problem, Senegal having been appointed by the
General Assembly as a member of the .&Hoc Committee
for South West Africa set up to report to the General
Assembly and recommend practical means by which the

170. Senegal would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
the congratulations you addressed to us a little while ago on
15

South West African nationals within their own territory,
&polt them to Pretoria and place them Oil trial before its
own court, and this in application of its Terrorism Act, a
law wgc]l defies the conscience of the world and violates
the terms of the solemn Universal Declaration of Human
Rights as proclaimed by the United Nations?

Assembly would guide the people of South West Africa
towards self-determination and national independence.
177. But in truth, the Senegal delegation had little faith in
South Africa’s sincerity, nor did we believe that South
Africa would take any measure to implement resolution
214.5 (XXI), in view of its constant defiance of United
Nations resolutions. South Africa has trampled underfoot
and poured scorn upon seventy-six United Nations resolutions. This is why we were not surprised when, in spite of
resolution 2145 (XXI), South Africa continued to administer South West Africa in defiance of the will of the General
Assembly, That is why, in its subsequent resolution
2248 (S-V), the General Assembly requested the United
Nations Council for South West Africa to enter immediately into contact with the South African authorities in
order to lay down procedures in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), for the transfer of the
administration of the Territory to the United Nations.

182. The General Assembly when it dealt With this illegal
trial, adopted by 110 votes resolution 2324 (XXII) submitted by seventy-four Asian, African, American ‘and
European States.Only two votes were cast against it, those
of Portugal and South Africa, and there was one abstention.
183. Resolution 2324 (XXII) condemned the illegal arrest,
deportation and trial at Pretoria of the thirt)WWXI
SOUth
West Africans. It called upon the Government of South
Africa to discontinue forthwith this illegal trial and to
release and repatriate the South West Africans concerned.
Yet the South African Government has continued to ignore
the wishes of the United Nations and this injunction of the
General Assembly. It has even turned a deaf ear to the
appeals of the United Nations Commission OII HUIIXIII
Rights, which spoke out against the illegal trial.

1’78. On 28 August 1967, the United Nations Council for
South West Africa addressed a letters to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of South Africa, inviting him to indicate
what measures his Government would take to facilitate the
transfer of the administration of South West Africa to the
United Nations. The dialogue was cut short, for South
Africa, still contemptuous of the United Nations, replied in
no uncertain terms that it would not only refuse to carry
out the terms of resolution 2145 (XXI), but that it would
also continue to administer the Territory of South West
Africa.

184. So South Africa decided to resume the trial on 26
January, thereby continuing, as I have already said, to flout
and act in contempt of the wishes of the United Nations.
185. The sentence which will be pronounced in application of the Terrorism Act can be predicted; it will be handed
down by the South African Government, and it will create
a dangerous situation in southern Africa, south of the
Zambezi River, where a multinational white minority’Portuguese, South African and Southern Rhodesian-wishes
to maintain its colonial domination over millions and
millions of Africans. But these rearguard actions on the part
of the last slave traders of the black continent are already
doomed to defeat. They cannot stop the march of history,
Such rearguard actions will be swept away like wisps of
straw by the political winds of the future and by the
African national liberation movement, which is irrcvcrsiblc.

179. It is plain that South Africa does not heed and does
not wish to heed the voice of reason, Resolution
2145 (XXI) is thus in danger of remaining indefinitely a
dead letter, unless the United Nations adopts coercive
measures forcing South Africa to respect its decisions, To
this end, the Security Council must take effective steps to
divest South Africa, once and for all, of its sovereignty over
the Territory of South West Africa. This will enable the
United Nations to assume its responsibility for that
Territory. In the first place, any other course of action
would have the effect of prolonging the suffering of the
South West African peoples, subjected, as they are, to
increasingly brutal oppression, of which the trial we are
discussing today is irrefutable proof; and secondly, the
question involves the prestige of the United Nations and the
trust which the small countries and peoples still under
colonial domination have placed in this Organization’s
genuine desire to put into practice the lofty principles upon
which its Charter is based.

186. Moreover, this illegal trial will cause the nations and
countries under colonial dominalion to doubt the genuine
desire of the United Nations to shoulder its responsibilities
in South Africa.
187. Senegal is convinced that the unanimity WC have
already seen in the General Assembly when it dealt with
this problem will be displayed here again, and that the
Security Council will unanimously adopt the draft rcsolution.

180. Under the terms of the Charter, the Great Powers
have a special responsibility with regard to this problem,
They are in duty bound to do all in their power to force
South Africa to respect those United Nations decisions
which it continues to trample underfoot and to ridicule
with impunity.

188. Sir Leslie GLASS (United Kingdom): Mr, l’rcsident, 1
will heed your appeal to be brief’, b,ut I would not wish to
lose this chance of associating my delegation with the
tributes paid to our outgoing President, Chief Ad&o, and
with the welcome which we give you, in whom we llavc the
greatest confidence.

181. Is it not brazen audacity for South Africa, despite
resolution 2145 (XXI), to have dared arrest thirty-five

189. I should aIs0 wish to join in paying tribute to t]lc
outgoing members and to join in the welcome to our new
colleagues.

grbid.,

annex I.

Twenty-second

Session, Annexes, document A/6897,

190. On 16 December last year the United KiIlgdoln
delegation, in common with almost the entire nlen~bersllip
6

of the United Nations, voted in favour of General Assembly
resolution 2324 (XXII) which sought the discontinuance of
the trial at Pretoria of thirty-seven South West Africans
under the Terrorism Act of 1967. That Act was adopted by
the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa on 12 June
1967. Its provisions are, in various respects, abhorrent to
my Government.

rare in the annals of the United Nations. I also salute the
other States elected to servein 1968 and 1969 as a result of
the elections held in November 1967, namely Algeria,
Hungary and SenegaI, as well as all the members of the
Council. On behalf of my country, I wish to reiterate to
one and all what I have said in the past, namely that I
pledge the sincere and true co-operation of my delegation
in the fulfilment of the common task we have to carry out
here in the Security Council.

191. In speaking about that resolution in the General
Assembly I said that the reservations of my Government in
respect of resolution 2145 (XXI) remained unchanged.9
But the United Kingdom delegation wished, by its vote, to
associate itself with the international concern provoked by
the trial and with the plea made to the South African
authorities.

197. I cannot let this opportunity pass without expressing
our great appreciation to the States that served on the
Council in 1967 and concluded their term of office last
December. The problems dealt with in the Council in that
year were undoubtedly extremely complex and difficult,
and I need hardly add that the value of their contribution
has been of the utmost importance. In citing those
members: Bulgaria, Japan, Mali and Nigeria, allow me to
make special mention of the Argentine Republic, which my
country is replacing, and of its outstanding representative,
Mr. Josh Maria Ruda.

192. That remains the position of my delegation today,
We have listened to the statements which have been made
in this Council this afternoon. We do not necessarily agree
with everything that has been said. But to my delegation, as
trr every member of this Council, it must be a matter for
very grave concern that the Government of South Africa
has not modified its course of action in response to the
pleas from the international community.

198. Mr. President, you have appealed to speakers to be
brief, and I shall comply with your appeal.

193. The provisions of the objectionable Terrorism Act
are unusually broad and sweeping. It operates retroactively
and purports to make a criminal offence conduct which
may not have been unlawful at the time of its commission.
The Act transfers, in a very wide range of circumstances,
the burden of proof from the prosecution to the defence, in
such a way as to undermine the basic principle that it is for
the prosecution to establish the guilt of the accused. The
Act stigmatises, as an offence punishable by the same
penalties as are provided for the offence of treason,
virtually any conduct of which the South African administration disapproves. In all these respects the Terrorism Act
is, in the view of my Government, offensive to the
principles which it is generally accepted should underlie the
framing of criminal legislation. It is at variance even with
the standards which the South African Government itself
professes to support.

199. This first meeting in 1968 is being held to consider a
case which profoundly affects not only the members of the
Council but also the United Nations as a whole. I do not
intend to speak at undue length in the debate; what there is
to be said has already been said and said again, both in the
General Assembly and in the Security Council. However, I
must say one thing: that neither legal, moral nor any other
reasons justify the Government of South Africa in continuing the trial we are here to discuss.
200. On 27 October 1966, by an overwhelming majority
of votes, including that of my delegation, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 2145 (XXI) in which it
declared:
“ . +I that the Mandate conferred upon His Britannic
Majesty to be exercised on his behalf by the Government
of the Union of South Africa is therefore terminated, that
South Africa has no other right to administer the
Territory and that henceforth South West Africa comes
under the direct responsibility of the United Nations”.

194. What my Government particularly abhors and condemns is that t&s retrospective criminal legislation carries
the supreme penalty of death.
195. Mr. President, my delegation will support the draft
resolution which we understand you, after successful
consultations all around, will shortly present. I shall,
however, need to make a brief statement later in explanation of vote.

201. It is primarily in the light of the provisions of that
resolution that we must consider the question before us,
and it idin consequence of those provisions that the United
Nations in general, and the Security Council in particular,
must adopt the necessary decisions in order to honour its
“direct responsibility” as set forth in that resolution.

196. Mr, SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated fionz
S~anislz): Mr. President, as my country and my delegation
begin to participate in the work of the Security Council, I
should like my first words to be words of congratulation to
you and your country. To you because of the high honour
that has fallen to you of presiding over the Security
Council, and to your countrv on its election to a
non-permanent seat on the Co&i1 by a unanimous vote
9 Ibid.,

meeting.

Twenty-second

Session, Plenary

Meetings,

202.
A large number of persons living and resident in the
international Territory of South West Africa have been
illegally detained, deported, and are being tried, by an
authority-that of the Government of South Africa-which
in the solemnly expressed opinion of the United Nations
possessesno right whatsoever to carry out any of those
acts. The lives of those thirty-five persons are in imminent
danger. The General Assembly already declared its position
when on 16 December 1967 it adopted resolution
2324 (XXII); my delegation voted in favour. The passageof

1635th

17

the General Assembly, has refused to release and repatriate
the South West Africans and has decided to go ahead with
the illegal trial of those men. However, that trial should also
be considered in the light of those human rights which have
been enshrined in the United Nations Charter, and to which
all Member States of this Organization are firmly committed.

time has meanwhile increased the danger which threatens
these persons, but perhaps it is not too late for a new and
urgent appeal, reiterating and reinforcing those already
made by the General Assembly.
203. Be that as it may, here and now the Security Council
has but one course open to it-to add the weight of its voice
and its influence to the decisions taken in the General
Assembly. My delegation will have no hesitation in voting
for such a move,

212. My delegation is ready to support an appropriate
decision of this Council on this matter.

204. In concluding, all(;w me to express my very sincere
thanks to all those who have so cordially welcomed my
country as a partner in the deliberations of the Security
Council.

213. The PRESIDENT: The next name on my list is that
of China. In my capacity as President of the Security
Council, and without prejudice to the position of my
Government on the question of the representation of China
in the United Nations, in all its organs and in other
international organizations, I now give the floor to Ambassador Liu.

205, Mr, DESETA (Brazil): Allow me first to extend to
you, Mr. President, our sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the Presidency of this Council. All of USin
this chamber and in the United Nations already admire
youi c’iplomatic tact, competence and restraint, outstanding qualities that will no doubt be of great assistance
to the Council in the days ahead.

214. Mr. LIU (China): Mr. President, in reference to your
wishes to accelerate the proceedings, I shall refrain from the
usual formalities. I shall also refrain from going into the
many aspects of the case, important as they are. The status
of South West Africa and the arrest and trial of South West
Africans have been extensively discussed in the General
Assembly, which adopted resolution 2324 (XXII) only a
month ago, My delegation voted for that resolution in the
Assembly and is now prepared to support a similar measure
to reinforce the action of the General Assembly.

206. Permit me also to welcome on behalf of the Brazilian
delegation the new members of this Council, among which
your own country is included. We all look with hope and
satisfaction to the invaluable contributions that Algeria,
Hungary, Senegal, Pakistan and Paraguay will certainly
make to our deliberations.

215, The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Nigeria.

207. I should also like to say to the departing members,
Argentina, Japan, Nigeria, Mali and Bulgaria, how much our
delegation enjoyed and learned from working with them
and sharing with them the burden and responsibilities of
the many decisions which their wisdom and dedication to
the cause of peace assistedin shaping.

216. Mr. CLARK (Nigeria): May I, with your permission,
Mr. President, thank you and your other colleagues for the
very kind and generous sentiments which you expressed for
my country’s services to the Security Council, and particularly for Mr. Adebo’s contribution to the work of the
Security Council during our tenure of office in the past two
years.

208. The Security Council has before it today a request by
fifty-three countries for an urgent meeting of this organ to
examine the question of the illegal trial at Pretoria of
thirty-five South West Africans, The Brazilian Government’s position on the problem of South West Africa in
general and on the question of the thirty-five prisoners in
particular has already been made clear on past occasions, It
must be understood not only in the light of the decisions
taken by the General Assembly, but also in the light of the
Brazilian tradition of anti-colonialism,

217. I am sure that I am speaking for Mr. Adebo when I
say that Nigeria’s role in the Security Council would have
been of no avail if we had not had the support of the
Afro-Asian colleagues of the Council and those of the
General Assembly as a whole.
218. I wish, on behalf of my Government and the United
Nations Council on South West Africa, to thank you,
Mr. President, for the honour of allowing me to address the
Security Council,on this important question of South West
Africa. For the last two years, I had the privilege of
representing my country, Nigeria, on the Security Council
as an alternate representative. For the two years, I had the
rare honour of attending all the meetings of the Security
Council in awe of its high authority and its weighty
responsibilities. And for two years I never uttered a word.
If on this occasion I should appear before the Council to
break my silence, it is for three reasons.

209. Brazil and the Latin American countries have played
a significant role in the adoption of General Assembly
resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-5) respectively, which
terminated South Africa’s Mandate over South West Africa
and established the United Nations Council for South West
Africa.
210. In conformity with those resolutions Brazil voted in
favour of General Assembly resolution 2325 (XXII) and
co-sponsored General Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII).
This last resolution established quite clearly that the illegal
arrest, deportation and the trial of thirty-seven South West
Africans were decided in disregard of resolutions
2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-5).

219. First, my country has an abiding faith in the United
Nations and in the competence of the Security CounciI to
exercise its authority and power in furtherance of the
principles and purposes of our Charter. My country feels

211. Today this Council is confronted by the fact that the
Government of South Africa has ignored the decisions of
18

that, as the last court of appeal for those who seek redress
of their grievances within the possibilities of our Charter,
the Security Council must not appear to them to be an
agent of disillusionment. It must not be indifferent to the
suffering of the oppressed. And, above all, to quote a great
Englishman, it must be the perpetual residence.of inviolable
justice. The question of South West Africa, which is before
the Council, has a deep and profound meaning and
significance for all who believe in justice, liberty and human
decency. It is coming to you for the first time, Mr. Presi.
dent, even though you are not a stranger to it.

Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-V) makes
it impossible for the Council to discharge effectively all of
the functions and responsibilities entrusted to it by the
Assembly.“1 1
Whereupon it recommended to the General Assembly to
take necessarymeasures, including a request for appropriate
action on the part of the Security Council, in accordance
with section IV of resolution 2248 (S-V), to enable it to
perform its functions and responsibilities effectively.
223. In the meantime, what have the South African
authorities been doing to the Territory which the United
Nations has taken over? The United Nations as a whole
must accept full responsibility for the current sad state of
affairs. If we had stood firm by our pledge to the people of
South West Africa; if we had convinced ourselves of the
righteousness and necessity of resolution 2145 (XXI); if we
all, in particular the major trading partners of South Africa
and its traditional friends, had agreed to translate their
votes for resolution 2145 (XXI) into policy and effect; if
we had agreed to match our words with practical action
South Africa would hot be challenging and affronting the
United Nations today; South Africa would not be carving
up a common fatherland which we have taken into trust
into so-called tribal and unstable “homelands”.

220. Secondly, the United Nations Council for South West
Africa, over which we have the honour of presiding this
month, is a legitimate organ cf the United Nations. It was
established in a rare gesture 0; solidarity with the cause of
the people of South West Africa and in a timely manifestation of the mood of the world community, It could not
have come into being otherwise. Outraged by the prospect
of South Africa intensifying further its apartheid policies
a;.d practices, which it has illegally exported into the
Territory, and in gross violation of its original and only
Mandate to treat it as a sacred trust of civilization, the
United Nations no longer regarded South Africa as an
acceptable administrator of South West Africa. Consequently and quite rightly, the United Nations decided to
take over the responsibility for the Territory of South West
Africa from South Africa.

224. At a time when the whole of Africa is moving
towards viable unity and recovering its lost dignity, at a
time when even Europe is shedding its traditional rivalries
and boundaries to forge a continental entity, South Africa
turns its back on the tide of history.

221. The purpose and significance of General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI) have been acclaimed throughout the
world. By this resolution the General Assembly terminated,
once and for all, South Africa’s Mandate over the Territory
of South West Africa. By this resolution the General
Assembly decided that thenceforth South Africa would
have no other right whatsoever to administer the Territory.
Having thereby assumed direct responsibility for the admin.
istration of the Territory, the General Assembly had no
other alternative but to decide how best to fulfil its
responsibility, Resolution 2248 (S-V) came therefore not as
a surprise, It was clearly a logical follow-up of the original
decision to terminate the Mandate of South Africa over the
Territory.

225. Through its fascist and racist laws and doctrine,
South Africa is ramming the recommendations of the
Odendaal Commission down the throat of the Africans,-nay
of the United Nations. Mr. Vorster, the Prime Minister of
South Africa, has stated officially that major constitutional
changes affecting the status of South West Africa would
soon be introduced in the South African Parliament,
thereby making it an integral part of unhappy South Africa.
The statement of the South African Minister of Bantu
Administration at Oshakati on 21 March 1967 was not an
idle threat. The reckless partition of South West Africa into
so-called “homelands” is now in full swing. First the
Ovambo people and then the brave Herero people. Wards of
the United Nations are being herded, like cattle, into
enclaves of humiliation and degradation, dispossessed of
their country and robbed of their sovereign and human
rights.

222. Established for the specific and sole purpose of
administering South West Africa until independence, with
the maximum participation of the people of the Territory,
the United Nations Council for South West Africa, in
furtherance of its’ prescriptive mandate and rights, addressed a letter, dated 28 August 1967, to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of South Africa with a view
to laying down procedures for the peaceful transfer of
power and administration.’ ’ Misjudging again the mood of
the world, the South African authorities arrogantly ignored
the communication of the United Nations Council for
South West Africa. Unable thereby to gain access to the
Territory over which the United Nations had asked it to
exercise authority, the United Nations Council for South
West Africa submitted a report to the twenty-second
session of the General Assembly pointing out:
‘I
that the refusal of the Government of South
Africa to co-operate in the implementation of General
lOIbid.,

Twenty-second

Session, Annexes,

226. Consistent with our mandate, the United Nations
Council for South West Africri has rejected and will
continue to reject, because it considers them absolutely
invalid and void, any and all laws and legislation enacted by
South Africa which have the effect of partitioning the
Territory of South West Africa or of annexing it to South
Africa. We shall consider ways and means of abrogating all
and any laws or legislation enacted by South Africa after
the adoption of resolution 2145 (XXI) as illegal and of no
consequence. Whatever authority South Africa continues to
exercise in the Territory must be regarded as a usurpation

agenda item 64,

11 Ibid., documant A/6897, para. 18.

document A/6897, annex I.
19

including due process, and violates the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on three counts: it was made
retroactive for five years; defendants are guilty unless
they can prove innocence ‘beyond a reasonable doubt’,
and the crime of terrorism is defined so broadly that
someone could be hanged for an act adjudged to embarrass
‘the administration of the affairs of the State’.

of power, piratical and illegal. Its continued presence in the
Territory must be regarded as an act of open aggression
against the people of South West Africa and a flagrant
defiance of the authority and resolutions of the United
Nations. Only the United Nations, acting through its
Council for South West Africa, has the legitimate right to
assist the people of the Territory at this moment in their
declared quest for self-determination and independence,

“The Association correctly points out that the defendants were imprisoned, held incommunicado, ‘stripped of
rights essential for proper defence’, and are being tried in
South Africa, more than 1,000 miles away from their
homes in Ovamboland. Furthermore, South Africa is
applying this act to territory it does not own, the
international status of which has been confirmed by the
World Court and actions of the United Nations General
Assembly.

227. As anticipated in resolution 2248 (S-V), the United
Nations Council for Sonth West Africa cannot discharge its
functions and responsitilities effectively until and after the
South African authorities have withdrawn from the Territory. This expectation unhappily so far has not been
attained. In the meantime South Africa answersour call for
withdrawal with tendentiously prepared surveys and
studies, If anything, its publication Soutlz West Africa
Survey, 1967 justifies adequately the necessity of terminating
South Africa’s sadistic Mandate over the
Territory. More interested in tourist attractions and sociolp$cal aberrations, its achievements in the economic,
sociai dnd political fields have been stated to appeal to
quaint foreigners. There are, however, enough facts in the
Survey to justify part III of resolution 2248 (S-V) that “the
administration of South West Africa under the United.,
Nations shall be financed from the revenues collected in the
Territory”, A country so richly endowed with much land,
human and material resources as South West Africa is not a
mini-State. Development of its agriculture, fishing industry,
minerals and mining provides a prospect of stability and
self-sufficiency. Its resources that now flow to enrich South
African and other foreign coffers will be garnered for the
benefit of the African population who own the country.
This is the task the United Nations Council for South West
Africa has set before itself in the coming months. The
people of South West Africa need education, they need
health, they need freedom, and justice, they need the
protection and membership of the United Nations, they
need life itself. We hate been encouraged and strengthened
by General Assembly resolution 2325 (XXII).to use every
available means to honour the United Nations pledge to the
people of South West Africa.

“It is very rare that the New York Bar comments on the
administration
of justice in foreign countries, but its
appeal for support in this protest merits wide response
and will surely get one, perhaps even from lawyers in
South Africa.”
230. The aforementioned editorial is typical of the feelings of indignation and outrage that civilized men all over
the world have for the trials and the so-called Terrorism
Act. Numerous letters from learned societies, organizations
and individuals from all walks of life have been received by
the Council decrying and condemning the trials as a
travesty of law and human dignity. With regard to the ex
post $zcto laws and the instruments of terror, it is
significant that in his reply to the Executive Committee of
the New York Bar Association, the Ambassador of South
Africa shamelessly stated that his country did not believe in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
23 1. I will read this section of his reply:
“You will have noted that in the above analysis I havo
refrained from referring to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. The reason for this omission is that the
Declaration is not a treaty or some kind of legal
instrument which imposes binding obligations on States.
It is a resolution of the General Assembly and should be
seen more in the light of a general statement of principles
than anything else. My Government, consequently, does
not recognizl hat its legislation can legitimately be tested
against the articles of the Universal Declaration with a
view to determining the validity of such legislation as part
of generally accepted principles of law .”

228. The third reason for my being here is to protest with
all the emphasis at the disposal of United Nations Council
for South West Africa against the current illegal trials of
tNrty-five South West Africans, the wards of the- United
Nations, at Pretoria. Torn from their homes and families
and impudently snatched from their country, they are
being held, tortured and tried in a foreign land, known all
over the world for its man’s inhumanity to man. They are
being tried at Pretoria where colour and not character
determines the role a man should play in his own country.

232. This is the type of people with whom we are dealing
today. The changing of the date of reconvening the Court,
purportedly to beat the vigilance of the Security Council, is
tragically typical of South Africa’s total refusal to take
advantage of the winds of change now blowing across
Africa and the world.

229. In a remarkable editorial on 23 January 1968 The
New York Times said as follows:
“In terms almost as strong as those we have already
used in these columns, the Association of the Bar of the
City of New York has now voiced its protest against the
infamous trials of thirty-five South West Africans under
South Africa’s Terrorism Act.

233. The United Nations Council for South West Africa
has prepared a short memorandum on the trials, and I have
the honour to present it formally to you. Sir, I have
referred to it in my letter of 23 January 1968 [S/83531.

“The resolution, virtually unprecedented in its nature,
declares that this act offends civilized principles of law,
20

The memorandum is contained in document S/8353/Add.l
of 25 January 1968 and speaks for itself, It recounts the
various efforts of the world community in general and of
the United Nations in particular to ask the South African
authorities to terminate the shamefully illegal trials. It
recalls the consensus of 27 November 1967 in which the
Council drew attention to the fact that the actions of the
South African authorities were a blatant violation of the
international status of the Territory of South West Africa, a
Territory under the direct responsibility and care of the
United Nations, as well as of the detainees’ fundamental
human rights. It goes on further to advise that when the
Council for South West Africa met on 23 January 1968 it
was anxious that the thirty-five South West Africans sliould
not be sacrificed on the altar of bigotry and racist
intolerance and, therefore, again made an urgent appeal to
the South African authorities in this regard. It also appealed
to those with influence with them, either bilaterally or
through the United Nations, particularly through you, Sir,
in the Security Council, to take quick and effective
measures to ensure that the South African authorities
discontinued this farce and the mockery of time-honoured
judicial process.

representatives, have made to peace and the promotion
friendly relations among nations.

of

239. This debate has revealed that the Security Council is
deeply concerned over the trial of thirty-five South West
Africans. There is complete unanimity among the members
of this Council that the Government of South Africa should
discontinue this illegal trial forthwith and release and
repatriate the prisoners. The deep indignation voiced in the
statements made this afternoon stems from the outrage to
the conscience of mankind. My delegation is confident that
it will find forceful expression in a draft resolution to be
adopted unanimously.
240. But while the immediate and compelling need is to
secure the release and repatriation of the South West
Africans concerned, this trial is only one manifestation of
the grave situation in South West Africa of which the
Council is now seized. This situation is the result of the
continued defiance by South Africa of the will of the
international community as expressed in General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI), The refusal by the South African
regime to transfer the administration of the Territory to the
United Nations, as required by this resolution, constitutes a
direct challenge to the Organization.

234. In this connexion we should draw attention to
resolution 2324 (XXII)
which the General Assembly
adopted by an overwhelming majority at the last session.
By this resolution the General Assembly energetically
condemned the illegal arrest, deportation and trial as a
flagrant violation of the rights of the people concerned, of
the international status of the Territory, and of General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI). The General Assembly
likewise called upon the Government of South Africa to
discontinue forthwith the illegal trial and to release and
repatriate the South West Africans concerned.

241. There is no area of the world where the authority of
the United Nations is more directly involved than it is in
South West Africa. There is no area of the world where it is
more bluntly defied.

242. This challenge we are called upon to meet. The time
for exhortations is past. Even condemnation of the actions
and attitudes of the South African Government will no
longer suffice. In its resolution 134 (1960) the Council
recognized that the situation resulting from the policies of
235. It is a crying shame to note from the Secretarythe
South African authorities had led to international
General’s report of today [S/83.57/ that South Africa has
friction and, if continued, might endanger international
again ignored resolution 2324 (XXII).
peace and security. In its resolution 18 1 (1963) the Council
“strongly
deprecated these policies”. In its resolutions
236. At this stage the minimum that we can ask of you, /
182 (1963) and 190 (1964) the Council called upon the
Sir, is to uphold the wisdom and the good sense of
South African Government to release all persons imresolution 2324 (XXII). The peculiar and perverse pattern
prisoned,
interned or brought to trial under arbitrary laws
of justice in South Africa must not go unchallenged, at least
and
to
cease
its continued imposition of discriminatory and
not in this august body. The fight for independence and
repressive
measures.
Further, the Council has declared that
dignity in South West Africa will continue. The thirty-five
the
policies
of
the
Pretoria
regime are “abhorrent to the
men on trial will join the hall of fame in the hearts of all
conscience
of
mankind”.
civilized men, with other Atrican heroes, including the late
Albert Luthuli and Nelson Mandela. The United Nations
243. If the Council was impelled to pronounce itself in so
Council for South West Africa will continue to stand by
forthright
a manner in these resolutions in regard to the
these men and will assist them to put an end to their
situation
within
South Africa, it is clear that the Council is
servitude. We hope that the Security Council itself will not
under
a
much
greater
compulsion to take a stronger stand
fail them.
regarding the tragic and explosive situation in South West
Africa. The international status of this Territory is beyond
237. The PRESIDENT: *Since the list of speakers has been
question. It is simply intolerable that it should be subjected
exhausted, I am taking this occasion to make a statement in
to
the brutal laws and policies which are contrary to the
my capacity as representative of PAKISTAN.
general principles of law recognized by civilized nations and
which have been condemned by mankind.
238. First of all, I should like, on behalf of my delegation
and myself, to thank all the representatives here who have
244. Pakistan hopes that all Member States will exert all
made friendly references to my country and have spoken in
their influence in order to induce the Government of south
generous terms about myself. I deeply appreciate the
Africa to comply with the provisions of the resolutions of
confidence that they have reposed in me, I assurethem that
the General Assembly and the resolution which will, we
my country reciprocates the friendship of their peoples and
values highly the personal contributions which they, as trust, be adopted by the Security Council unanimouslY.
21

“1 Ib~t/c~~/s the refusal of the Govcrmnent of South
Aliica to comply with the provisions of Gene&
,kx~i~bly rosc~lution 2374 (XXII);
“2. Culls ~rp~~r the Government of South Africa to
discontinue forthwith this illegal trial and to release and
repatriate the South West Africans concerned;
“3. /mites all States to exert their influence in order to
induce the Government of South Africa to comply with
the provisions of the present resolution;
“4. Xrc~ucsfs the Secretary-General to follow closely
the inlplcmentation of the present resolution and to
report thereon to the Security Council at the earliest
possible date:
247. Speaking now
3s I’RESIIX3T
of the Security
Council. I sliuuld like to inform the members that 3s I
rcsuIt of the informal consultations on the course to be
followed by the Council in connesion with the matter
before it today. it is ;I matter of gratification that those
consultations have resulted in ;i general agreement 011the
text of a draft resolution which I shall read out. The draft
resolution reads as follows:

“5. Dccidcs to remain actively seized of the matter.”
248. If no member of the Council has any comment to
make at this stage, I shall take it that the draft resolution
meets with the approval of all. In the absence of any
objection, accordingly, I declare the draft resolution unanimously adopted.
It IWS so decided. ’ 2

of General Assembly resolution
“Taking
twtf
;! 145 (,XXE) of 27 October 1966, by which the Assembly
terminated South Africa’s hlandate over South West
Africa and decided, ir~er ulia, that South Africa has no
other right to administer the Territory and that henceforth South West Africa comes under the direct responsibility of the United Nations,
“Takittg no& fiuthcr of Geneml Assembly resolution
3314 (XXII)
of 16 December 1967, in which the
Assembly condemned the illegal arrest. deportation and
trial at Pretoria of thirty-seven South West Africans as a
flagrant violation by the Government of South Africa of
their rights. of the international status of the Territory
and of General .\ssembly resolution 2145 (XXI),
“(&zI$J
cotwtxed
that the Government of South
Africa has ignored world public opinion so overwhelmingly expressed in General Assembly resolution
2324 (XXII) by refusing to discontinue this illepl trial
and to release and repatriate the South West Africans
concerned,
“Takittg itrto wtrsidcmtiotz
the letter of 23 January
1968 from the President of the United Nations Council
for South West Africa (S/8353),
“fluting ~itll grelzt cotzccrtt that the trial is being held
under arbitrary laws whose Ypplication has been illegally
extended to the Territory of South West Africa in
defiance of General Assembly resolutions.
‘lllir?dfLl of the grave consequences of the continued
illegal application of these arbitrary laws by the Government of South Africa to the Territory of South West
Africa,
“Corlsciclrts of the special responsibilities of the LJnjted
Nations towards the people and the Territory of South
West Africa,

249. I would request the Secretary-General to take steps
immediately to transmit to the Government of the Republic of South Africa the text of the resolution which has
just been unanimously adopted by the Security Council.
150. Two representatives have expressed a desire to spe~ic
in explanation of their votes. I shall call first on the
representative of France.
751. Mr. GERARD (France) (translated from French):
The French delegation, sharing as it does the feelings of the
majority of delegations in the United Nations, particularly
the African delegations, has associated itself with the
decision taken on the resolution we have just adopted,
despite the fact that, as the Council knows, it did not at the
time vote in favour of General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI). to which reference is made in the first
preatnbular paragraph of the present resolution. My delegation still maintains the fundamental position which it has
already had occasion to state on that subject in the General
Assembly.
252. In the light of the division of areas of competence
among the various organs of the United Nations prescribed
in the Charter, moreover, my delegation takes the view that
the adoption of resolution 2145 (XXI) is not binding on
the Security Council, which consequently remains the
master of its own decisions so far as the question of South
West Africa is concerned.
253. The PRESIDENT: The other representative who has
asked to speak in explanation of his vote is the representative of the United Kingdom.
254. Sir Leslie GLASS (United Kingdom): I have made
clear the position of my Government with respect to the
12 Seeresolution 245 (1968).

Terrorism Act and to the present trial which is being
conducted under its provisions. I must now comment on
other aspects of the resolution just adopted by the Council.

to the Government of South Africa in respect of the trial.
Despite its continuing reservations regarding certain parts of
the wording of the resolution, my Government has therefore given its support to it.

255. This resolution, like General Assembly resolution
2324 (XXII), takes as its starting-point, and quotes in its
first preambular paragraph, resolution 2145 (XXI). The
United Kingdom delegation abstained in the vote on that
resolution in the General Assembly. We explained then, and
have repeated since, the reasons why we were unable to
support it. In supporting the resolution just adopted by the
Council, therefore, we must reserve our position on those
parts of it which refer to, or flow from, General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI), and our support for the resolution
and its wording must be understood in that sense. In
particular, my delegation must have doubts about the
unqualified use of the word “illegal” in this resolution.

257. The PRESIDENT:
I have no further speakers
inscribed on my list, and if no other representative wishes
to speak, I propose to adjourn the meeting. Another
meeting on the question will be convened by the President
after consultation with members of the Council. Before
closing the meeting, however, I should. like to say a few
words.
2.58. The Security Council has, a moment ago, taken a
historic decision. It has acted on behalf of decency,
freedom and justice. It has upheld the principles of the
Charter. The fact that the decision has been adopted
unanimously demonstrates conclusively that this Council
has this day spoken in clear and unequivocal terms as the
conscience of all mankind.

256. To sum up, my Government finds repugnant this Act
under which men are now on trial, perhaps for their lives, at
P:r;toria; it desires to be associated with the plea which, by
the resolution just adopted, the Security Council addresses

The meeting roxe at 8.5 p.m.

23
