S/PV.8259

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8259th meeting

Tuesday, 15 May 2018, 3.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Dah
Mr. Sipaco Ribala
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Melki
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Ms. French

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2018/411)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-14805 (E)
*1814805*

S/PV.8259

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.

the needs and ambitions of today’s young Somalis,
many of whom lack education and job opportunities
and, as a result, feel marginalized.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

In Baidoa, federal member state Presidents are
meeting in the Council of Interstate Cooperation to
prepare for engagement with the Federal Government
on critical issues, such as security, resource and revenue
sharing and relations with Gulf partners.

The situation in the Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2018/411)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michael
Keating, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, and Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia.
Mr. Keating and Mr. Madeira are joining this
meeting via video tele-conference from Mogadishu.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/411, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating: At the outset, let me to express my
best wishes to members of the Security Council and
to Somalis around the world at the beginning of the
holy month of Ramadan, a time of peace, forgiveness
and compassion.
Events in the past 48 hours in Somalia serve to
highlight the complexity of the situation facing its
people. Today saw the conclusion in Mogadishu of
the National Constitutional Convention, a milestone
marked by strong commitment to an inclusive
constitutional review process with clear and ambitious
targets. That augurs well for strengthening the rule of
law and stability and advancing reconciliation.
Today happens to be the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the foundation of the Somali Youth League.
Celebratory events around the country are highlighting
2/13

15/05/2018

The African Union (AU) and the United Nations
joint review team are meeting Somali and international
actors in Somalia. The focus of discussions has been
the implications of the national security transition plan
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
In Beledweyne, humanitarian colleagues are
working round the clock with local authorities and
communities to address the catastrophic consequences
of floods for over 200,000 people. Forces from
Somaliland and Puntland have been exchanging fire in
Tukaraq and the region of Sool, with an as-yet-unknown
number of casualties reported. There is a serious danger
that that conflict could escalate, with devastating
implications for local people, as well all Somalis.
There is a lot going on. To its great credit, unforeseen
events are not deflecting the Federal Government
from its determination to pursue an agenda embracing
economic and financial reform, revenue generation,
security sector reform and inclusive politics — all with
a view to an irreversible and positive transformation of
the country’s prospects. That agenda deserves timely
and coherent support from the Council and Somalia’s
international partners, while recognizing that the
many risks facing the country need to be managed
and mitigated.
The Government has vigorously pursued the
objective of putting the country on a sounder economic
and financial keel. In February the International
Monetary Fund welcomed progress under the staffmonitored programme and reiterated its support to help
Somalia reach a heavily indebted poor country decision
point as soon as possible.
The High-Level Roundtable on Somalia held
in Washington, D.C., on 19 April opened the path
towards a pre-arrears clearance grant. That was a
vote of confidence in the Government’s achievements
in engaging with the private sector, improving public
financial management and increasing domestic
revenues. A number of partners are already providing,
18-14805

15/05/2018

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia

or now plan to increase, budget support, including the
European Union, Norway, Sweden and Turkey.
Additional resources are needed to address the root
causes of fragility, chronic poverty and low human
development affecting the majority of the population.
Longer-term investment is needed to build resilience
to climate shocks and break the cycle of recurrent
crises that cause much suffering and undermine the
State-building process.
The humanitarian situation is not as bad as it
was a year ago, but by any global measure it remains
very grave. The gu rains and flooding have affected
more than 718,000 people in the central and southern
regions of Somalia. The consequences of the floods
include large-scale population displacement, economic
damage and diseases, including cholera. A rapidresponse allocation to address flood response of up to
$5.1 million has been endorsed and is pending final
approval. The 2018 humanitarian response plan calls
for $1.5 billion. As of today, the plan is only 24 per
cent funded, and is therefore inadequate to support the
flood relief operations under way. Allow me to use this
occasion to appeal to international donors once again
to provide generous and timely support, while thanking
them for the prompt and unprecedented amount of
funding that enabled the prevention of famine last year.
Success in raising revenues, attracting grants
and budget support provides a firm basis not only for
investment and creating jobs, but also for tackling
Somalia’s security and State-building challenges and
strengthening relations with federal member states, not
least through resource- and revenue-sharing agreements.
Insecurity remains a constant concern. Despite
increasing pressure on the group, including an increase
in air strikes, Al-Shabaab has continued to demonstrate
its ability to execute deadly terrorist attacks against
civilian and military targets, including AMISOM,
notably through the use of improvised explosive
devices. The factors that breed terrorism, including
youth unemployment, corruption, a sense of injustice
and unresolved conflicts, cannot be left until later.
The truly formidable challenge facing Somalia and its
AU and other partners is simultaneously to fight the
insurgency and reform the security sector.
The President is leading defence reform. The
Government is taking bold steps, including biometric
registration, payroll reform and operational readiness
assessments, while recognizing that much more

S/PV. 8259

needs to be done. The list includes — as the Prime
Minister phrased it — turning the national security
architecture into construction, agreeing the basis upon
which regional forces will be integrated into the army
and police, passing essential legislation, conducting
asset inventories and weapons management and
developing transparent procurement procedures and
greater accountability.
A measure of progress is that the security transition
plan was adopted by Somalia’s Council of Ministers
on 19 April. The plan is designed to build Somali
operational and institutional capacity not only for the
armed forces, but also in areas of the most basic security
concern to the population, including justice, accountable
local governance, freedom of movement and provision
of services. The plan was endorsed by the AU Peace
and Security Committee on 30 April and welcomed by
all partners at the high-level security meeting held in
Brussels on 2 May. The imperative now is to implement
it. Critical will be ensuring national ownership and
leadership of the plan through the National Security
Council structures under Somali leadership.
AMISOM continues to play an indispensable role,
at great human cost, in protecting population centres,
main supply routes and Somalia’s overall political
progress. The Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia will shortly
address the many challenges that that entails. Suffice it
to say that a successful security transition will require
not just deep reform of the Somalia security forces,
but also, as the Chairperson of the AU Commission
and the Envoys of the Secretary-General noted,
transformation of AMISOM, whether relating to more
flexible joint operations and combat mentoring, greater
emphasis on policing, adequate enablers and force
multipliers or stronger accountability systems, whether
for assets or relating to human rights. More flexible
operational support by the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia will also be required, together with
predictable financing.
The AU-United Nations joint review is likely to
underscore that the foremost requirement for success is
the need for unity of purpose among Somali actors, as
well as among the Somalis, the African Union, troopcontributing countries and principal security partners.
The comprehensive approach to security structures is
designed to ensure coherent and coordinated approaches.

18-148053/13

S/PV.8259

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia

Somali politics remain as lively as ever, punctuated
by crises relating to competition for power and resources,
complicated by the weakness of Somali institutions and
ambiguities in the provisional Federal Constitution,
particularly with regard to relations among the three
branches of Government, the growing pains associated
with the emergence of federal arrangements and the role
of untraceable money in the political marketplace. The
most prominent fault lines have related to the impact of
the Gulf dispute, the role of parliamentarians in politics
and relations between the leaders of the federal member
states and the Federal Government. Those issues both
overlap and have distinct contours. The stand-off
between the Federal Government and Parliament was
resolved in early April when the Speaker of the House
of the People resigned. The new Speaker was elected
peacefully and inaugurated this past week. That creates
an opportunity to fast-forward the legislative agenda,
taking advantage of a phenomenon rare in Somali
politics — unity among the President, the Prime
Minister and the Speaker.
But, as with tensions that continue between the
Federal Government and federal member states,
structural deficits may again contribute to future
crises. Those need to be addressed, including through
the electoral law and political party law, while moving
towards a constitutionally compliant forum that brings
the Federal Government and federal member state
leadership together, and measures to regulate motions
of no confidence and impeachment procedures, as well
as nothing less than a campaign to fight corruption.
The role of the United Nations and international
community continues to be to insist upon adherence to
the rule of law, inclusive processes and zero-tolerance
for the use of violence by any party in the resolution of
political disputes. Sometimes that results in us being
accused by one side or another of being biased, but I
believe that the record will speak for itself in terms
of consistent support for a gradual change in Somali
political culture.
Relations among powerful Somali actors are being
tested as a result of the Gulf dispute, with actors taking
positions that accord with their economic interests,
security and political objectives. Somalia needs
respectful relations with all its international partners,
recognizing that it is the prerogative of the Federal
Government to lead foreign policy and that member
states need to be fully consulted if they are to support
policies that have a direct bearing on them.
4/13

15/05/2018

The best way to minimize the impact of the Gulf
dispute is through greater Somali unity. It is ordinary
Somalis that will suffer the most from a failure by
political leaders to resolves those issues, whether
through the constitutional review or through ad
interim agreements. The upcoming National Security
Council session provides an opportunity to do that
under the President’s leadership. Disputes that result
in the reduction of aid flows and economic ties, or
that increase tensions and the risk of violent conflict,
only play into the hands of extremists and retard the
State-building agenda that Somalia has set for itself in
the coming year.
With regard to the dispute in Tukaraq, the facts
are still coming in, but fighting has erupted and there
are reports of deaths and casualties. I associate myself
fully with President Farmajo’s call a few hours ago for
an immediate ceasefire and a resumption of political
dialogue between the leaders of Somaliland and
Puntland. In the past few days, both President Bihi
Abdi of Somaliland and President Gaas of Puntland
have assured me that they want to avoid, and cannot
afford, hostilities. The approach of Ramadan makes a
ceasefire particularly important.
At risk is not only the welfare of hundreds of
thousands of people and the possibility of mass
displacement at a time when humanitarian funds are
already low, but the remarkable progress that both
Somaliland and Puntland have made over the years.
Conflict could unravel more than 20 years of relatively
peaceful coexistence. I urge Council members to
engage with all concerned to reduce tensions and
discourage those who may be seeking advantage from
that situation.
The Tukaraq crisis could distract attention from
the progress that has been made in resolving conflicts
elsewhere, notably in Galkayo, which is more peaceful
today than for many years, as well as in Merka in Lower
Shabelle and Galmudug, where, despite the hurdles,
there is forward momentum. The Government is moving
forward with a national reconciliation framework,
supported by the United Nations and other partners,
recognizing that the many conflicts in Somalia,
whether over resources, clan disputes or federal state
formation, need to benefit from the engagement of civil
society, women and youth groups, the business sector,
traditional elders and conflict mediation experts.
18-14805

15/05/2018

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia

Unfortunately, the human rights situation
remains deeply problematic, with many groups being
particularly vulnerable, including women, internally
displaced persons, minorities and journalists. The
signing of the joint programme on human rights in
February was a positive step towards strengthening
protection frameworks. I urge the Federal Government
to move forward the process of establishing the human
rights commission.
The situation of children affected by armed
conflict remains dire, with a marked increase in
abductions and the recruitment and the use of children.
Impunity for sexual violence continues to be of great
concern. I strongly urge the Federal Government to
enact the sexual offences bill, which will strengthen
the legal framework and reduce impunity for crimes of
sexual violence.
In conclusion, the people of Somalia continue to
face extraordinary challenges. They are fortunate to
have a Government that is serious about tackling them.
Key to its success will be unity among Somali leaders,
complemented by the coherent support of the Council
and the broader international community.
The President: I thank Mr. Keating for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. Addressing the Council remains a
great honour and privilege for me.
As we approach Ramadan, the advancement of
peace and security in Somalia continues to be attainable
today through the concerted effort of the Somali national
security forces, the African Union Mission forces and
the visible action by the Government of Somalia to bring
into play the factors that contribute to the enhancement
and consolidation of stability through a comprehensive
approach to a security framework. I pay tribute to the
brave sacrifices that Somali national security forces
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
have continued to make over the years with a view to
building a peaceful and prosperous Somalia.
Since my previous briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.8165), Somalia has been confronted with many
challenges, some of which, if not addressed in a timely
manner, will negatively impact the current efforts of
the Federal Government and reverse the progress made
so far. As we speak, AMISOM soldiers are valiantly

S/PV. 8259

supporting and assisting the populations of Beledweyne,
on the margins of the Shabelle River, who have been
flooded out and have had to abandon their homes as
a result. They are doing that with immense sacrifice
in the middle of a shortage of means of transportation
and resources to support the population. But they
are receiving profound support from the President
of HirShabelle.
That and other challenges have become more
evident lately, with a spillover effect on Somalia over
international rivalries and divisions within the Gulf
countries. Those external crises are quickly provoking
further divisions among Somalis and forcing them
to choose sides. There are warning signs that the
crisis could have negative implications for the fragile
relations between the Federal Government of Somalia
and its federal member states. I ask the Council to make
a strong and unequivocal statement to the opposing
sides in the Gulf region to refrain from any actions that
may further heighten tensions and affect the unity and
stability of Somalia.
A year ago Somalia was presented with a fresh
start with the election of President Farmajo and the
appointment of Prime Minister Hassan Ali Khayre.
They offered an important opportunity for the
rebuilding of Somalia’s national institutions and
providing the country with what it needs to foster unity
and prosperity. Recent political crises in Parliament
not only heightened the absolute need to expedite the
building and strengthening of Somali State institutions,
but also the importance for all parties in the Somali
political construct to begin to identify and embrace
the common factors that unite all Somalis and do away
with those divisive issues that are ongoing sources of
weakness, tension and division among them. The people
speak the same language. They belong to the same
nation. They have the same aspirations. They profess
only one religion. The best use of such attributes can
effectively contribute to fortifying the unity and peace
in this great country.
In that context, AMISOM applauds the efforts made
by the executive and the former Speaker in resolving
the recent crisis, the outcome of which offers hope for
a brighter future for all Somalis. As the new Speaker,
Mr. Mohamed Mursal Abdirahman, indicated in his
inaugural address last week, the Federal Parliament
will refocus its efforts to ensure that the constitutional
review is completed and pave the way for multi-party
elections to move forward with the necessary legal

18-148055/13

S/PV.8259

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia

framework by 2020 or 2021. The holding, earlier this
week, of the national constitutional convention in
Mogadishu is a clear demonstration of the Government’s
commitment to match its words with action.
Despite challenges, there is real reason for optimism
across Somalia, as the Federal Government continues to
make great strides in the right direction. The executive is
already delivering on improving fiscal management and
strengthening the financial institutions, while placing
transparency and the fight against corruption at the
heart of its economic priorities. We now have a federal
budget that is supported by realistic revenue measures
and an effort to modernize the urgently needed tax
collection and taxpayer registration. That is in addition
to the ongoing consultations on tax legislation.
While delivering all of this, the Government is also
focusing on financial sustainability through its domestic
revenue collection. In a similar vein, the Government bill
for the establishment of the anti-corruption commission
is taking shape, with the implementation of the open
government initiative. With the Government’s recent
announcement off its third International Monetary
Fund staff-monitored programme and its success at this
year’s spring meetings in Washington, D.C., Somalia’s
pathway to debt relief is fast becoming a reality.
In April, as Council members are aware, the
Somalia transition plan was widely endorsed, first
here in Mogadishu by the Comprehensive Approach to
Security Executive Group, chaired by Prime Minister
Khayre, and later by the African Union during the Peace
and Security Council on Addis Ababa on 30 April.
Supporting the Federal Government in implementing
the transition plan remains AMISOM’s key priority.
As I reminded partners during the high-level security
meeting on Somalia in Brussels earlier this month,
AMISOM endorsed, and is firmly committed to, the
implementation of the transition plan.
AMISOM is currently undergoing its fourth review
pursuant to its mandate under Security resolution 2372
(2017). In the past three days, AMISOM has been
clear: in order to effectively support the transition,
the Mission must adjust its approach and reconfigure
its components to suit the demands of the transition.
We are ready to undertake such an exercise. In that
regard, AMISOM uniformed personnel will require
the following: additional multipliers and enablers; a
mandate to conduct combat-readiness mentoring for the
Somali security forces, availed to them and co-located;
6/13

15/05/2018

to undertake joint, well-coordinated operations with
AMISOM; and a more flexible approach to its logistical
support from the United Nations and other partners.
The civilian component will require consideration of
the strengthening of its capacity and presence in the
field across the federal member states.
As AMISOM and the Federal Government begin
focusing on the stadium and the main supply routes
from Mogadishu to Baidoa and the town of Leego as top
priority objectives in the first phase of the transition, it
is important that the international community’s efforts
be directed towards addressing the gaps identified in
the last operational readiness assessment of the Somali
National army, the police and local forces. Efforts
must seek to provide a swift response to issues of
force generation at both the federal and regional levels
in Somalia, in addition to satisfying key operational
requirements such as communications, transport,
casualty evacuation, medical evacuation, supplies and
logistics, as well as IED defeat capabilities.
In the coming weeks and months, AMISOM and
the Somali security forces will be implementing the
operational phase of the transition plan. To be effective
and attain its objectives, the transition cannot continue
spending resources and losing lives to recover towns
and territory from Al-Shabaab only to see them returned
to the enemy. The transition, as it has been conceived,
must be comprehensive and effective, that is to say, it
must bring on board everything that is required for the
effective recovery, occupation and permanent holding
on towns and cities, and the effective protection of
their population.
We must therefore ensure that the population
centres and locations we capture from Al-Shabaab
are recovered and transformed into inhabitable places
where humanitarian agencies provide emergency
assistance to the liberated population; administrators
manage the liberated population, govern the town
and provide essential services and amenities to the
population; police protect the citizens and maintain law
and order; conditions are created for the local economy
to beginning to take shape, for trade and commerce
to be possible and for citizens to be able to go about
their lives freely, securely and confidently without fear
of being mugged or killed by Al-Shabaab around the
next corner.
All that requires commitment. It requires the
Government to be present and fully committed to
18-14805

15/05/2018

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia

creating institutions. It requires United Nations
agencies to engage in strengthening the institutions
of Government and local administrations. They must
be present and fully committed in the places we are
going to liberate, starting with Leego. We are ready and
willing to work hand in hand with the United Nations
and other institutions, as well as the Government,
to realize those objectives — to ensure that once we
liberate a city it transitions to Somali security forces
and remains in their hands, not falling back into those
of Al-Shabaab.
The reality of the current threat landscape across
Somalia is that Al-Shabaab has gradually increased
its military capacity and resilience, resulting in
widespread attacks using IEDs as the weapon of
choice. To successfully and sustainably counter that
threat and disrupt and destroy Al-Shabaab, I urge the
Council to remain seized of the issue of predictable
and sustainable funding for AMISOM and the Somali
security forces, and the provision to our forces of the
means and enablers required to minimize casualties,
defeat IEDs and identify and neutralize the enemy.
In that regard, I would like to express AMISOM’s
gratitude to the United States Department of State
for the provision of the Intelligence, Surveillance and
Reconnaissance system, which is a very important
force enabler. As we speak, the system and its effect are
already being felt in the theatre of operations. We are
grateful that partners have started to understand the full
meaning of the reality in which we are living. The recent
meeting in Brussels showed that partners are now ready
to be generous in terms of supporting both the Somali
national security forces and AMISOM in strengthening
their capacity to face Al-Shabaab successfully.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): As on previous occasions and on behalf of the
delegation I represent, I would first of all like to thank
Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM),
and his team for the clear and detailed briefing on the
most recent developments in the country. His briefing
reflects a situation that is of concern, in particular with
regard to issues of State-building, the strengthening of
security institutions and economic fragility.

S/PV. 8259

Somalia has made very significant progress since
successful parliamentary and presidential elections
transferred power to the current President, Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, nearly a year ago. He
outlined a political programme that convinced his
own people, as well as the international community,
and encouraged international partners to continue to
support the process of national reconstruction. The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like to take this
opportunity to express its gratitude and appreciation
to the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
other international actors for their contributions to
address the major challenges encountered during this
important political process.
In spite of international support, Somalia continues
to face monumental challenges, first and foremost
the mighty threat posed by the Al-Shabaab terrorist
organization, which, despite financial pressures and
counter-terrorism activities, including air strikes,
continues to commit murders and detonate bombs
throughout the country. That ongoing threat could be
linked to the country’s socioeconomic ills, such as the
lack of educational and work opportunities for young
people, unfulfilled demands flowing from unresolved
disputes, a weak national justice system and the
interests of third parties.
The differences between some leaders of a number
of federal states and the federal authorities constitute a
major obstacle to reforms seeking to promote national
reconciliation and reconstruction. To that end, Somali
politicians should commit to understanding each other
in order to create a healthy political environment
that encourages support from, and collaboration
with, international actors. Nonetheless, we commend
President Farmajo and other politicians on their efforts
to promote national reconciliation, as demonstrated by
the smooth election of the former Minister of Defence as
the new Speaker of Parliament following the resignation
of his predecessor, ending weeks of political crisis that
could have increased the security threat. However,
more must be done. We also commend the President,
who, in spite of insecurity in the country, decided to
visit the federal states of Puntland and Gamuldug in an
attempt to address their problems.
Despite all that, and according to reliable reports
on the situation, Somali security and State institutions
are not yet able to provide proper security and
socioeconomic conditions throughout the country in

18-148057/13

S/PV.8259

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia

the short and medium term. Therefore, the work and
support of UNSOM, AMISOM and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia continue to be indispensable.
We believe it is important to secure prior funding to
enable efforts to continue.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM),
Mr. Michael Keating, and the Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), Mr. Francisco Madeira, for their
briefings at today’s meeting.
We begin by commending the United Nations and the
African Union on their coordinated and joint efforts in
Somalia to build peace, rebuild the State, strengthen the
rule of law, reform the security sector and achieve other
important goals. Their work reflects relevant ongoing
efforts to seek stability and security in the country
and the region. The continuous support and assistance
provided by AMISOM, UNSOM and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia should reflect a high degree
of transparency and information-sharing to enable the
Federal Government of Somalia to continue its efforts
to counter the serious threat posed by terrorist groups
and with regard to constitutional structure in order to
strengthen the Federal State. We believe that stabilizing
Somalia should be achieved mainly by formalizing the
status of the federal member states, implementing the
security strategy, building resilience and promoting
socioeconomic transformation. The Government of
Somalia must determine its priorities according to its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
We commend the President of Somalia on his recent
visits to various regions of the country in order to step
up and accelerate efforts at dialogue and reconciliation.
At the political level, the political road map for
inclusive politics for the period 2017-2020, outlined by
the Council of Ministers of the Federal Government,
along with the efforts of the National Security Council,
has led to significant progress, which we believe will
be mutually beneficial for the Federal Government and
for federal states.
With regard to security, we believe that it is
essential that the transition plan developed by Federal
Government be reflected when the security, military
8/13

15/05/2018

and police forces, as well as the judiciary and correction
authorities, are fully operational. Similarly in that area,
we note that it is imperative that Somali ownership
develops within a relationship based on trust, consensus
and inclusiveness among the Federal Government and
federal states alike. In addition, UNSOM support to
the National Intelligence and Security Agency is vital
to improve the capacity required for demobilization,
reintegration and disarmament and weapons and
maritime security management.
Bolivia fully supports all African Union efforts
to implement mediation, preventive diplomacy and
dialogue initiatives to promote a peaceful and lasting
solution to the conflict. We highlight the meeting of the
African Union Peace and Security Council on 30 April,
during which it committed to providing full support to
Somalia in achieving its transition goals. Nonetheless,
we believe that the Security Council, the United
Nations and the international community as a whole
must continue to work together to build the capacity
of AMISOM to ensure that the Somali security forces
can assume full responsibility for maintaining their
country’s security in the near future.
Al-Shabaab continues to pose a latent threat to
Somalia. The attacks perpetrated by that terrorist
group have again served to underscore the importance
of identifying measures to counter it, in particular in
Mogadishu, where attacks carried out with improvised
explosive devices, car bombs and heavy weaponry have
claimed the lives of hundreds and caused major damage.
We also note with alarm the ongoing high levels of
sexual violence perpetrated against women and girls,
particularly those who have been forcibly displaced.
Finally, but no less important, is economic
transformation. Bolivia believes that in order to ensure
lasting, sustainable peace and to alleviate the fragility
of the Somali State, there is a need to reform the security
sector, and the international community must work to
restructure its external debt, as in a post-conflict phase
there cannot be sustainable peace without development,
and there can be no development if this important issue
is not resolved.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We express
our gratitude for the convening of this afternoon’s
meeting and our thanks for the briefings we have
heard from Mr. Keating and Mr. Francisco Caetano
Jose Madeira.
18-14805

15/05/2018

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia

Peru has been keeping a close eye on the situation
in Somalia, where, despite the progress made in recent
months, the humanitarian crisis continues to affect
more than 5 million people. In addition, the security
situation remains unstable, and human rights, including
those of women and children, continue to be violated.
We deem positive the new focus adopted to
address the humanitarian situation through the 2018
Humanitarian Response Plan for Somalia and the
recovery and resilience framework, which are aimed
at breaking the cycle of vulnerability and deprivation
by 2022. We highlight also the significant progress
made by Somalia in the economic area, which has been
acknowledged by the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund. We hope that the technical support
provided by those institutions will make it possible to
implement the economic reforms necessary to improve
the living conditions of the Somali people.
We condemn the attacks committed by Al-Shabaab
and support the Secretary-General’s call for the Federal
Government and international partners to develop a
coherent approach to mitigating the threat posed by
improvised explosive devices, which are often used by
that terrorist group.
We underline also the importance of the transition
plan as a vehicle for the Somali authorities to assume
full responsibility for security. Said transfer must be
implemented in an orderly and gradual manner, so
as to safeguard the existing achievements. We also
highlight the need for the provision of the financial
support required for coordinated implementation by the
Federal Government and the federal states, backed by
the African Union and international partners.
We welcome the significant headway made in the
strengthening of Somali security institutions, including
the new police model adopted at the state and federal
levels, the political agreement on the justice and
corrections model for Somalia, as well as initiatives to
curb violent extremism. We welcome also the efforts
of the Federal Government to promote the peace and
reconciliation process, as well as the rollout of the
peace process aimed at easing tensions between clans
in Marka.
We hope that, now that the political crisis in the
Federal Parliament is behind us and the new Speaker of
the House of the People has taken up his post, Somalia
will be able to undertake the institutional efforts
required to sustain peace, including power-sharing,

S/PV. 8259

resource management, the allocation of fiscal revenues
and the electoral model. We emphasize the importance
of the National Security Council moving forward
in the implementation of the road map to prepare for
the general elections, to be exercised by universal
suffrage in 2020-2021, prioritizing the constitutional
review process and the establishment of an electoral
legal framework.
We deem it important to promote the active
participation of women in national processes,
particularly given that Somalia is a country marred by
high levels of sexual violence. We wish to pay tribute
to the victim-advocacy work carried out by the United
Nations Population Fund. Likewise, we commend the
initiatives aimed at empowering young Somalis, in
particular the establishment of an interim national
youth council and the launch of the Open Innovation
Challenge, which is led by young people and aimed at
finding solutions to the plight of internally displaced
persons in Somalia.
We also wish to welcome the strategy of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM)
to achieve gender parity in its ranks by 2021 and
the appointment of a gender adviser to the National
Independent Electoral Commission. We also voice
our support for UNSOM and stress our expectations
regarding its proposals aimed at an appropriate
reconfiguration of the components required for an
effective implementation of the broad security approach
of the Mission, the national security structure and the
transition plan.
I wish to conclude by underscoring the need for
the Gulf countries to lend their support to the Federal
Government of Somalia as it seeks to improve its
relations with its federal member states and undertake
reforms aimed at State-building.
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to thank Mr. Michael Keating,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), for his presentation of
the Secretary-General’s report on the implementation
of the mandate of UNSOM and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) (S/2018/411). My
delegation wishes also to thank Mr. Francisco Caetano
Jose Madeira, Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM).

18-148059/13

S/PV.8259

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia

My statement will focus mainly on developments
in the political, security and humanitarian situation
in Somalia.
On the political situation, my country welcomes the
improved relations between the Federal Government
and the federal states, which led to an agreement on
financial and operational support for the regional
security forces in the framework of their incorporation
into the state police forces. My country welcomes also
the progress made in the establishment of a functioning
federal State in Somalia, including the adoption by the
various parties of the political road map for the period
2017-2020, the establishment of the memorandum of
understanding on the constitutional review process,
the involvement of the federal authorities in the various
national reconciliation initiatives, and the progress
achieved in preparing for the 2020-2021 elections by
universal suffrage.
On this last point, my country welcomes the
inclusive approach adopted by the National Independent
Electoral Commission in the context of consultations
aimed at overcoming possible obstacles to the holding
of free, democratic and transparent elections.
However, Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned at the
continuing tensions in the federal Parliament and the
resulting impact on the adoption of several draft laws
that are essential for building the Somali State. We
urge the Somali political actors to resolutely engage
themselves in building a strong and prosperous Somali
State. Côte d’Ivoire therefore welcomes the appointment
of the new Speaker of the House of the People and
hopes that this will lead to a constructive relationship
between the country’s legislative and executive powers.
On the security front, it is clear that despite the
air strikes against the strongholds of the Al-Shabaab
terrorist group, the latter continues to pose a serious
threat to security in Somalia, as evidenced by the
attacks carried out during the first quarter of this year
against Somali national army soldiers and those of
AMISOM. These attacks confirm once again the need
for the international community, including the Council,
to support Somalia in its security-sector reform process
in order to enable the effective implementation of the
transition plan aimed at a handover of responsibilities
from AMISOM to the country’s security forces.
My country calls upon all national and international
actors working in Somalia to pool their efforts in
10/13

15/05/2018

providing operational and financial support for the
successful implementation of the Somali transition plan.
In this regard, Côte d’Ivoire commends the
support provided by UNSOM, UNSOS and the other
United Nations agencies present in Somalia to the
Somali security institutions in the framework of the
strengthening of their operational capacities. We note
with satisfaction that the Somali authorities, in spite of
the difficulties encountered, continue to work towards
the implementation of the national security architecture
through, inter alia, the incorporation of the regional
security forces into the national army.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the commitment
of the Federal Government and the federal states to
work together constructively in building a State based
on the rule of law, as demonstrated by the signing of
an agreement on the justice and corrections model in
Somalia. It also encourages the leaders of the federal
states to accelerate their justice and corrections plan.
My country remains concerned about the
increasingly worrisome humanitarian situation.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, the level
of malnutrition is among the highest in the world, as
5.4 million people require humanitarian assistance,
with 2.1 million others displaced and dependent on
international support. That situation is exacerbated
by floods as a result of heavy rains in several parts of
the country in recent weeks, leading to the destruction
of crops and people’s properties and significantly
reducing their means of livelihood. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, to
date approximately 718,000 people have been affected
by the floods.
Humanitarian needs continue to increase, while the
humanitarian aid plan developed for 2018 is only 19 per
cent funded. Given that situation, while recognizing
the considerable financial and material efforts already
made, my delegation encourages international partners
and donors to mobilize in order to contribute to the
financing of the 2018 humanitarian assistance plan and
to respond urgently to the humanitarian needs of the
Somalis in need.
Like the Secretary-General, Côte d’Ivoire also
urges the Somali authorities and its development
partners to draw up an integrated strategy in order to
find viable solutions to the root causes of the famine in
the country.
18-14805

15/05/2018

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its thanks to
UNSOM, UNSOS and all international partners working
in Somalia for the multifaceted assistance that they
continue to provide to the country under very difficult
conditions. We call on them to further coordinate their
efforts and strategy in support of Somalia.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia.
A little more than a year has passed since the
election of President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
Farmajo in Somalia. The new Government was able to
develop an effective plan of action, including financial
sector reform, job creation, a social cohesion policy,
conflict resolution and security sector reform. We
commend and support the efforts and the political
will of the Federal Government of Somalia and of
the federal member states for strengthening ties and
for promoting State-building and peacebuilding by
initiating dialogue on defining a federal model. At the
same time, it is important to follow up with steps to
formalize agreements on the division of powers, the
management of resources and the sharing of revenues.
We welcome the efforts of the National Independent
Electoral Commission to conduct nation-wide
consultations aimed at identifying the optimal electoral
model. To build on that, the electoral legal framework
needs to be adopted so as to organize the 2020-2021
universal elections.
We remain concerned about the continuing attacks
by Al-Shabaab on the Somali National Army (SNA) and
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
the causing of civilian casualties, which is exacerbated
by inter-clan violence. The AMISOM troops who
provide secuity on the front line play a critical role
in the restoration of State authority. However, the
predictable and sustainable funding of the Mission
remains a challenge for its adequate operationalization.
We welcome the efforts of the Federal Government
and the regional Governments to continue the work on
the integration of the regional armed forces into the
Somali National Army and the police as an integral
part of the national security architecture. It is vital that
international partners continue to provide coordinated
support for building the capacity of the SNA in more
coherent manner.

S/PV. 8259

We also commend the Federal Government of
Somalia for finalizing the transition plan. Realistic
time frames and conditions are necessary to comply
with the outlined priority tasks and benchmarks. In
implementing that comprehensive agenda, the Federal
Government faces a number of serious problems. In
particular, the financial situation is acute. There is a
need for a coordinated approach on the part of national
and international actors in order to establish effective
cooperation and confidence-building measures between
the Federal Government and the member states.
In conclusion, I would like to draw the attention
of members to my visit to the Horn of Africa last week
in my capacity as Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009), concerning
Somalia and Eritrea. A report will be presented in
the near future. In the meantime, having observed it
at first hand, we acknowledge the work of the United
Nations country team and the European Union in
promoting local peace initiatives, peacebuilding and
national reconciliation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): As this is the first time that
my delegation addresses the Security Council during
your presidency, Madam President, allow me to begin
by congratulating you and your delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I wish you every success in your
leadership. Let me also take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Keating and Ambassador Madeira for
their briefings.
At today’s meeting of the Security Council on
Somalia, I would like to share with members the fact
that it is also the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
founding, on 15 May 1943, of the first political party
in Somalia — the Somali Youth League, which has
done much to advance the Somali cause. Indeed, the
youth party was singularly instrumental in achieving
the independence and unity of the Somali people in
1960. In the process, it helped to create one of Africa’s
first democracies. The optimism and hope created by
the Somali Youth League nearly a century ago are also
a major source of our current optimism for achieving
peace and prosperity, thereby leading towards a
resurgent Somalia.
On this occasion, I would also like share the sad
news of the passing away, at the age of 89 years, of

18-1480511/13

S/PV.8259

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia

Ambassador Abdulrahim Abby Farah, one of our most
prominent Somali diplomats, who served as Permanent
Representative of Somalia to the United Nations. He also
held several high-level positions at the Organization. I
take this opportunity to also convey our thoughts and
prayers to his family and the Somali people around
the world.
We believe that supporting and safeguarding our
hard-earned political stability is a prerequisite for
the long road ahead in terms of security, economic
development and recovery. In the current report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/411) we are concerned
about the inclusion of some inaccurate statements
on the political situation, which could jeopardize
the legitimacy of the Government, as well as our
national reconstruction efforts. While the report
covers most developments that have occurred in the
period under review, we suggest that there is a room
to more adequately address the political progress and
developments on the ground. However, we are happy
to note that the tensions within Parliament mentioned
in current report have been resolved. That is clear
testimony to the resilience of the Somali people and
their capacity to absorb political shocks and to engage
in peaceful, lasting and democratic solutions while
respecting parliamentary rules of procedures, as well
as our Constitution.
A little more than a year ago, President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo joined our international
partners at the London Somalia Conference and made
a steadfast commitment to accelerating progress on
security sector reform and to setting security as a
priority for his Administration. Since the previous
meeting of the Council (see S/PV.8215), tangible
progress on that commitment has been made. Somalia
has developed a realistic, phased and conditions-based
transition plan, working closely and collaboratively
with the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs),
the United Nations and the European Union, as well
as other key partners. That process was inclusive
and comprehensive and included field consultations
to incorporate the perspective of local stakeholders,
including federal member states.
The transition plan was endorsed by the Somali
Cabinet and by the African Union Peace and Security
Council. It sets out the strategic guidelines that will
enable detailed planning over the next few years. It
places a particular focus on the institutional capacity12/13

15/05/2018

building of our forces, while at the same time outlining
the necessary security operations and supporting
stabilization efforts.
As we prepare for the transition plan, I take
this opportunity to thank the TCCs and PCCs that
have contributed their forces for their honorable
and courageous sacrifices. The support provided
by the United Nations to AMISOM should also be
acknowledged and must be continued in order to
continue the momentum. My Government welcomes the
appointment of Ambassador Lisa Filipetto of Australia
as Head of the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia. The gains made by AMISOM and our national
armed forces against Al-Shabaab over the past year are
astonishing. Nonetheless, we recognize that Al-Shabaab
will not be defeated by military means alone.
The stabilization efforts undertaken with the
support of our international partners are just as critical
in helping us to adddress the roort causes of fragility
and conflict in our communities. It is our firm belief
that our credibility and legitimacy as a Government
hinge on our ability to promote social reconciliation
and good governance and provide public services to
help improve the lives of our citizens. We know that the
Somali National Army (SNA) faces challenges, but we
believe that the only way to implement the transition is
to commit the SNA to undertake joint operations with
AMISOM and the support of international partners.
That would help acquire the requisite experience, selfconfidence and capacity to undertake major operations
and eventually assume the responsibility for the
security of the whole country.
President Farmajo and Prime Minister Hassan Ali
Khaire are sparing no effort to reconcile the people
of Somalia and provide a national vision that will
further enhance national unity and reconciliation. The
transition plan will therefore become the centrepiece
of security sector reform in Somalia, as it is rooted
in our national security architecture, which is closely
interlinked with the President’s two other priorities,
namely, inclusive politics and economic reforms.
Following the World Bank and International
Monetary Fund spring meetings in Washington, D.C.,
this year, we, the Federal Government of Somalia, are
now closer than ever in our efforts to normalize our
relations with international financial institutions and
on a pathway to eventual debt relief.
18-14805

15/05/2018

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia

Meanwhile, on the political front, the Federal
Government of Somalia, together with the federal
member states, continues to work to implement an
ambitious political road map that includes the revision
of the provisional Constitution and the preparation
for the next elections, in 2020, which will require the
renewed focus of Parliament in the swift passage of
key legislation that is currently pending approval. We
believe that the peaceful election of a new Speaker in
Parliament will enable this process and advance the
legislative agenda.
I would now like to turn to the statement made
by President Farmajo on the unfortunate flare-up
of hostilities in Tukaraq and El Afweyn, in the Sool
region of the Somali Republic. In that connection,
the President appealed to all the parties concerned
to stop all hostilities immediately. President Farmajo
urged leaders, elders and civil society to negotiate
for peace and an agreeable coexistence and to resolve
their differences through dialogue and respect for the
sanctity of life. He also expressed his deep regret over

S/PV. 8259

the loss of Somali lives in this recent conflict, sent
his heartfelt condolences to the families affected and
prayed for the quick recovery of the wounded.
In conclusion, Somalia’s challenges remain
significant, including our vulnerability to extreme
weather, the long-term demands of State-building and
tackling active and vicious terrorist groups. All of
that requires long-term work in order to address the
structural, political and legacy issues of corruption,
including the lack of oversight and accountability in
the status quo, and building and resourcing legitimate
institutions. But we are on the right path. The continued
support of the Council will enable us to continue to
make progress and to shift the perception of Somalia
from decline to growth and from weakness to resilience.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to continue or
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

18-1480513/13
