r
r

IUNITED NATIONS
I
~
~

t
~

~

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE- SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

N'o. 60
I

I161st meeting
!,18 July 1947

161eme seance
.18 juillet 1947

~

!

i

I

II
!

I. (22 p.)
'en'bi "'~"_

Lake Success
New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and sixty-first meeting

Cent-soixante et unieme seance
Page

Pages

228. Provisional agenda
1389
229. Adoption of the agenda
1389
230. Application of Roumania for admission
to membership in the United Nations .. 1389
231. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek .question.. '"
"
1391

228. Ordre du jour provisoire .. :
1389
229. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1389
230. Demande d'admission au sein des Nations Unies presentee par la Roumanie.1389
231. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque
1391

Document

Document

The following document, relevant to the hundred
and sixty-first meeting, appears as follows:

Le document se rapportant a la cent-soixante et
unieme seance figure dans la publication suivante:

Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Special Supplement No. 2

Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special No 2

Report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document S/360) .

Rapport presente au Conseil de securite par la
Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere grecque (document
S/360).

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 60

HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIRST MEETING

DEUXIEME ANNEE
CENT~SOIX4NTE ET UNIEME

N~

60

SEANCE·

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Friday, 18 July 1947, at 10.30 a.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York
le vendredi 18 juillet 1947, a 10 h. 30.

President: Mr. O. LANOE (Poland).

President: M. O. LANGE (Pologne).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Clllne, Colombie,
Etats-Unis . d'Amerique, France, Pologne,
Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

228. Provisional agenda (document 5/422)

228. Ordre du iour provisoire (document
5/422)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Letter, dated 10 July 1947, from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of Roumania to the
United States addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, and enclosed telegram (document

2. Lettre, en date du 10 juillet 1947, adrfflSee
au Secretaire general par le Charge d'affaires
par interim de Roumanie aux Etats-Unis, et
teIegramme joint (document S/411) 1.

S/411).1

3. The Greek question: report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document 5/360).2

3. La question grecque: rapport presente au
Conseil de securite par la Commission
d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la
frontiere grecque (document S/360)2. .

229. Adoption of the agenda

229. Adoption de I/ordre du iour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

230. Application of Roumania for admis-, 230. Demande d/admission au sein des
sion to membership in the Unated
Nations Unies presentee par la Roumanie
Nations
The President read two communications addressed to the Secretary-General: a letter from
the Charge d'affaires ad interim of Roumania to
the United States and an enclosed telegram from
the Vice-President of the Council of Ministers
and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Roumania.
These communications were as follows:

Le President donne lecture de deux communications adressees au Secretaire general: une
lettre du Charge d'affaires' par interim de
Roumanie aux Etats-Unis et un teUgramme,
joint a cette lettre, du Vice-President du Conseil
des Ministres et Ministre des affaires etrangeres
de Roumanie. V oici le texte de ces communications:

See page 1390.
• See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
....,~e:,,~~ecial Supplement No. 2.

1 Voir page 1390.
• Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiM,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special No 2.

1

~

1390

[Original text: English]
Royal Legation of Roumania ,
Washington, D. C.
10 July 1947

[Texte original en anglais]
Legation royale de Roumanie
Washington, D.C.
10 juillet 1947

Dear Sir,

Monsieur le Secretaire general,

I have the honour to forward to you, attached
hereto, the text of the telegram sent to you by
His Excellency Mr. Gh. Tatarescu, Vice-President of the Council of Ministers and Minister of
Foreign Affairs, requesting the admission of
Roumania as a Member to the United Nations
.and declaring that she accepts all the obligations
stipulated in the United Nations Charter.

I'ai l'honneur de vous transmettre ci-joint le
texte du telegramme que vous adresse Son
Excellence M. Gh. Tataresco, Vice-President du
Conseil .des Ministres et Ministre des affaires
etrangeres de Roumanie, pour demander l'admission de la Roumanie comme Membre de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies, en declarant
que la Roumanie accepte toutes les obligati.ons
enol1cees dans la Charte des Nations U nies.

(Signed) Vlad. MARDARESCU
Charge d'affaires ad interim of Roumania
to the United States

(Signe) Vlad. MARDARESCO
Charge d'affaires par interim
de Roumanie aux Etats-Unis

[Original text: English]
".Mr. Secretary-General:

[Texte original en anglais]
"Monsieur le Secretaire general,

"Ever since the proceedings connected with
the Peace Treaty concluded with the Allied and
Associated Powers were in progress, the Roumanian Government has manifested both its decision to adhere to the principles specified in the
United Nations Charter, and its desire that Roumania should become, as soon as possible, a
Member of this Organization.
"Thus, in the statement made on behalf of
the Roumanian Government, in the .plenary
meeting of the Paris Conference, on 13 August
1946, the first delegate of Roumania pointed out
that 'in this solemn hour, when Roumania seeks
the co-operation of all peace-loving nations desirous of freedom, she is willing to adhere entirely, and wit~out delay, to the principles of the
United Nations Charter, which principles Roumania has already enforced, by granting to all
persons subject to her jurisdicti.on, without any
discrimination of race, ethnical origin and religion, the full and entire enjoyment of the rights
of man and of their basic freedom'.

"Alors que se deroulaient les negociatioIl5
relatives au Traite de paix conclu avec les
Puissances aIIiees et associees, le Gouvernement
roumain a manifeste sa decision de donner son
adhesion aux principes enonces dans la Charte
des Nations Unies et son desir de voir la
Roumanie devenir, des que possible, Membre de
l'Organisation.
"C'est ainsi que, dans la declaration faite au
nom du Gouvernement roumain a la seance
pleniere de la Conference de Paris qui s'es~ tenue
le 13 aout 1946, le chef de la delegation
roumaine a dit qu' "en cette heure sol.ennelle ou
la Roumanie recherche la collaboration de tous
les peuples epris de paix et de liberte, elle entend
apporter sans ·plus tarder son adhesior~ totale aux
principes de la Charte des Nations U nies,
principes qu'elle a, d'ores et deja, traduits en
faits en assurant ~ toutes les personnes soumises a
sa juridiction,sans aucune distinction de race,
d'origine ethnique et de religion, l'usage plein et
entier des droits de l'homme et de ses libertes
foncieres.
"De plus, au cours des declarations qui ont
ete faites a l'occasion de la signature du Traite
de paix, les pIenipotentiaires roumains ont dit,
au nom de leur GOllvernement: "La Roumanie
signera le Traite de paix parce qu'elle desire
reprendre sa place, des ·que possible, parmi les,
autres nations libres du monde. La Roumanie a
. deja reorganise la vie interieure de l'Etat en
realismt un vaste programme de reforrnes
democratiques; elle est egalement desireuse
d'apporter sa contribution a l'organisation de
la paix et a la cooperation internationale. Sa
cooperation s'orientera conformement a l'id~al
de la Charte des Nations U nies et dans le cadre
des principes qu'elle definit. Le Gouvernement
roumain s'inspirera exc1usivement, dans ses actes,
du principe permanent qui exige aujourd'hui
que toutes les nations, grandes et petites,
s'organisent pour vivre cote a cote en appliquant
des methodes de conciliation et en pratiquant le
re.spect du droit."

"Moreovei', in the closing remarks accompanying the signine of the Peace Treaty, the
Roumanian Plenipotentiaries made the following
statement on behaH of their Government: 'Roumaniawill sign the Peace Treaty, being desirous
to resume her place, as soon ~ possible, among
the other free nations of the world. Having
already re-organized the domestic life of the
State by carrying out a large programme of
democratic reforms, Roumania is desirous to
bring her contribution to the organization of
peace and international co-operation. Her cooperation will develop according to the ideals
and within the frame of the principles provided
in the United Nations Charter. The actio:l of
the Roumanian Government will be exclusively
guided by the permanent principle that requires,
at present, that all nations, both large and small,
organize themselves and livt side by side applying conciliatory methods and by practising the
. respect of Law'.

1391

"The Roumanian Government, without
awaiting the coming into force of the Peace
Treaty, wants to take advantage of the last moment within the time stipulated by the reg>.llations, in order to present Roumania's formal ap·
plication for admission to the United Nations.
"Consequently, I have the honour to forward
to you, in accordance with Article 4 of the
United Nations Charter, Roumania's request for
admission as a Member of the United Nations
as well as the declaration that she accepts all the
obligations provided in the United Nations
Charter.

"Sans attendre l'entree en vigueur du T:l'aite
de paix, le Gouvernement roumain tient a
profiter de ce que le reglement lui en laisse
encore la possibilite pour solliciter officiellement
l'admission de la Roumanie comme Membre de
I'Organisation des Nations Unies.
"En consequence, j'ai I'honneur de vous
transmettre, conformernent a l'~-'\rticle 4 d.: la
Charte . des Nations Unies, la demande que
presente la Roumanie pour etre admise comme
Membre de I;Organisation des Nations Unies,
ainsi que la declaration par laquelle e1Ie accepte
toutes les obligations preVut:s par la Charte.

(Signed) Gh. TATARESCU
Vice-President of the Council
of Ministers and Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Roumanian

(Signl) Gh. TATARESCO
Vice-President du Conseil des Ministres
et Ministre des affaires etrangcres
de Roumanie"

The PRESIDENT: According to rule 59 of our
rules of procedure, unless the Council decides
otherwise, an application for membership shall
be referred by the President to a committee of
the Security Council, the Committee on the Admission of New Members.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de IJ anglaiJ):
Conformement a l'artide 59 de notre reglement
interieur, une demande d'admission, a moins que
le Conseil n'en decide autrement, doit etre renvoy€e par le President a un comite du Conseil·
de securite, le Comite des demandes d'admission
de nouveaux Membres.
Y a-t-il des cbjections?

Is there any objection?
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I think the
President refers the application to the Committee
unless the Council decides otherwise. That does
not necessarily mean that nobody objects. My
delegation objects for reasons which we have
already expressed. I do not wish to go into those
reasons again. To our minds, there is no point
in sending an application to the Committee because that Committee ca.nnot deal with it; it is
just a question of "passing the buck". We do not
think these applications should be received at all.

The PRESIDENT: I have taken notice of the
declaration of the representative of Australia.
The President automatically refers the application to the Committee unless a different decision
is taken by the' Council. As there is no motion
to the contrary, I shall act as provided for in rule
59 of the rules of procedure and send the application to the Committee on the Admission of
New Members.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
de l'anglais): Je pense que le Pr~sident renvoie
la demande au Comite a moins que le Conseil
n'en decide' autrement. Mais cette procedure ne
signifie pas necessairement que personne n'y aitd'objections. Ma delegation s'y oppose pour des
raisons que nous avons deja. indiquees. ~Je ne
veux pas les exposer a nouveau. A notre avis, il
ne saurait etre question d'envoyer une demande
d'admission au Comite, puisque ce Comite n'est
pas qualifie pour prendre une decision en la
matiere; il s'agit tout simplement de "se renvoyer
la balle". Naus estimons que ces demandes ne
devraient pas etre re~ues du tout.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):

Je prends note de la declaration du representant
de l'Australie. Le President renvoie automatiquement la demande au Comite, a moins que
le Conseil ne prenne une decision contraire.
Comme il ne se presente pas de motion contraire,
je vais agir conformement a l'article59 du
reglement interieur et renvoyer la demande au
Comite des demandes d'admission de nouveaux
Membres.

231. Continuation of the discussion on. the
Greek question

231. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque

At the invitation of the President, Colonel
Kerenxhi, representativ{' of Albania, Mr. Mevorah, representative of Bulgaria, Mr. Dendramis, representative of Greece, and Mr. Vilfan,
representative of Yugoslavia, took their seats at
the Council table.

Sur [,invitation du President, le colonel
Kerenxhi, representant de l'A.lbanie, M. M evorah, representant de la Bu,lgarie, M'. DendramisJ
reprisentant de la Grcce et M. Vilfan, representant de la Yougoslavie, prennent place ala table
du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: Although the rules of procedure do not provide anything about closing the
debate, I believe that, as a matter of order, I
am free to ask the membe}S of the Council and

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Bien que le reglement interieur ne contienne
aucune disposition concernant la cUlture des
debats, je crais avoir toute latitude, puisqu'il

"t f' .

.

I

the representatives of the interested countries
who sit at the Council table whether any of them
still wish to make some general remarks. If nobody wishes to speak, I shall declare the general
debate closed.

s'agit d'une question de procedure, pour demander aux membrcs du Conseil et aux representants
des pays interesses, assis a la table du Conseil,
si l'un d'entre eux a encore des remarques
d'ordre general a presenter. Si personne ne desire
la parole, je declarerai la discussion generale
close.

I would also request all the members to avoid
general discussions in the future, if possible, and
to concentra~e on the concrete resolutions which
are before us.

Je voudrais egalement inviter tous les membres
du Conseil a eviter dorenavant, si possible, toute
discussion d'ordre general et 'a se limiter aux
resolutions concretes dont nous sommes saisis.

Do any of the representatives wish to spea~ on
the general subject?

Quelqu'un desire-t-il prendre la parole sur le
sujet dans son ensemble?

Mr. MEVORAH (Bulgaria) (translated from
French): Let me express my disappointment to
the Council and, before the general discussion
closes, mention certain considerations which, it
seems t<;> me, are important.

M. MEVORAH (Bulgarie): Permettez-moi
d'exprimer ma deception au Conseil et de lui
hire part, avant la cl6ture de la discussion
generale, de quelques considerations qui me
paraissent importantes.

We subIllitted many theoretical and practical
problems to the Council, but these were passed
over in silence. No one is dwelling on them, and
yet the solution which might have been given to
these problems would indubitably have influenced the final decision on the question with
which we are concerned. If there had been a
preliminary decision, it would not have failed to
affect the conclusion to be adopted.

Nous avons soumis au Conseil de nombreux
problemes d'ordre theorique et pratique qui ant
ete passes sous silence. Personne ne s'y arrete, et
pourtant la solution que 1'0n aurait pu dG>lner a
ces probU:mes aurait eu inevitablement pour effet
d'influencer la decision finale en ce qui concerne
la question qui nous interesse. S'ily avait eu une
decision d'ordre preliminaire, elle n'aurait pas
manque d'avoir une repercussion sur la conclusion a adopter.

All these problems, I repeat, were passed over
in silence. Was the subject a very obvious one?
Surely not, for it was discussed at length by the
Commission and in the report itself. Was it an
unimportant question? Again, no! The question is one of the highest importance, since it is
only if a definite stand is taken on it that a decision is likely to eventuate.

Tous ces problemes, je le repete, ont ete passes
sous silence. S'agissait-il donc d'une chose tres
evidente? Mais on en a discute longuement a
la Commission, et dans le rapport iui-meme.
S'agissait-il d'une question sans importance? Au
contraire, elle est de premiere importance,
puisque c'est justement par une prise de position
sur cette question que la decision devra intervenir ulterieurement.

What does this silence mean? I cannot find
a reply to this question, so important to me, and
to be more specific I shall go into some detail.

Que signifie ce silence? Je n'arrive pas a donner de reponse a cette question si importante
pour moi, et, pour etre plus concret, j'entrerai
un peu dans le detail.

Yesterday the Pre~ident made a very fine and
eloquent speech l in which he criticized the Commission's report for being dra'Vm up with a certain lack of method or, rather, according to a
faulty method. This gave rise to a short discussion, but I think that we are concerned not with
a dispute on wording, but with a dispute on
substance.

Hier, le President a prC'llOnCe un tres beau et
tres eloquent discoursldans le cours duquel il a
formule, en ce qui concerne le rapport de la
Commission, le reproche d'avoir ete etabli avec
un certain manque de methode, ou plutot selon
une methode erronee. Ceci a donne lieu a une
courte discussion, mais, a mon avis, il ne s'agit
pas ici d'une querelle de mots, il s'agit d'une
- querelle de substance.

The President emphasized that the report reversed the order of things by placing the burden
of proof on the accused and obliging him to
prove his innocence even before the charge was
proved. This is obviously incorrect. The United
Kingdom representative was kind enough to
point out that in the first part of the sentence
which the President quoted from the reporf the
Commission is referring to the documentation

Le President a souligne que le rapport a
interverti les choses en mettant la preuve a la
charge de l'accuse, et en mettant ce dernier dans
I'obligation de se disculper avant mem~ q'le
l'accusation ait ete etablie. Cela est evidemment
errone. Le representant du Royaume-Uni a eu
1'0bligeance de rappeler qu'au debut de la phrase
dU'rapport citee par le Presidenf, la Commission
parle de la documentation recueillie, et il a dit

'. See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 59, 159th meeting.
2 Ibidem.
.

I

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels d~ Conseil de securitt!,
Deuxieme Annee, No 59, 15geme seance.
2 Ibidem.
</'

1393
collected; he said that stress should be laid on
the first part of the sentence, and not on the last.
As you see, we are faced with a rather vague
question on which much may be said; but we
should go into detail and discover the real basis
on which this sentence and this conclusion rest.
In discovering this basis, we find indubitable
proof that the method was incorrect. Why? I
shall recall in the first place, in order to convince
you, the French argument, of which I have read
an account in the Journal de Geneve. I think
you will also find it in the report itself. According to that view-and that is the conclusion
reached by the author-the Commission endorsed the Greek charge in a given case and
quoted this case amongst the proofs as though
it were a fait accompli.

This problem found no hearing: no one is disturbed about it; we are jumping to conclusions
and decisions are taken as if ou~ country's guilt
were manifest.
But you cannot say that there is anything
manifest ab0ut this case. In logic and philosophy

qu'il faudrait mettre l'accent sur la premiere
partie de la phrase et non pas sur la derniere.
Il s'agit, vous le voyez, d'une question un peu
vague sur laquelle il y aurait beaucoup a dire;
il faudrait entrer dans les details, et en degager la
base meme de cette phrase et de cette conclusion.
En degageant la base de cette conclusion, on
y trouve la preuve indubitable que la methode
a ete faussee. Pourquoi? Je rappeIlerai tout
d'abord, pour vous convaincre, la these fran~aise
dont j'ai lu le compte rendu daI1ll le Journal de
Geneve et que I'on peut, je crois, retrouver dans
le rapport lui-meme. SeIon cette these - et c'est
la conclusion a laquelle arrive son auteur - la
Commission a pris a son compte une accusation
forrnulee par la Grece dans un cas donne, et eIle
a cite ce cas parrni les preuves retenues, le
considerant comme un fait accompli.
La these fran~ai5e estirne tout a fait inacceptable le fait de p~endre une accusation comrne
preuve d'un fait accompli; car I'accusation ne
prouve rien; ce sont le..'l faits qu'il faut prouver.
Mais la charge d'etablir la preuve, onus probandi, incombe a, celui qui a formule l'accusation.
Un autre aspect du meme probleme est la
question que j'ai posee devant la Commission et
a laquelle je n'ai obtenu jusqu'a present aucune
reponse.
La base sur laqueIle ont ete prises toutes
les decisions relatives a la Bulgarie - Oll l'on
retrouve cette phrase toujoun; vague seIon
laqueIle la Bulgarie "dans une mesure moindre
[que les autres pays, est coupable d'~voir]
soutenu la guerilla de Grecc1" - cettebase est
constituee par un fait figurant dans le rapport
et qui, ni theoriquement, ni pratiquement, ne
peut etre accepte: le fait d'avoir ajoute foi aux
temoignages presentes par le Gouvernement grec
dans le Livre blanc, sans que ces temoignages
eussent ete confirmes devant la Commission.
J'ai deveIoppe longuement cette these devant
vous, et j'avais cru que tout le monde me
donnerait raison. On ne peut ajouter foi aux
resumes figurant dans le Livre blanc, puisque
c'est I'une des parties - le Gpuvernement grec,
c'est-a-dire I'accusateur - qui les a etablis.
Si l'~n n'ajoute pas foi aux temoignages euxmemes, si l'on se contente d'un resume fait par
une tierce personne, d'un resume omettant certains faits tres importants et en incorporant
certains autres, egalement tres importants mais
que le temoin n'a point cites, comment peut-on
arriver a la conclusion que la Bulgarie aurait,
dans une plus ou moins grande mesure, participe
a l'aide aux ,partisans grecs?
Ce probleme n'a pas trouve d'echo, personne
ne s'en inquiete, on va directement aux conclusions, et l' on decide, comrne si la culpabilite de
notre pays etait evidente.
Mais on ne peut pas id parler d'evidence.
L'evidence, au point de vue logique, au point de

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Special Supplement No. 2, "Report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council"."

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux offici.ls du Cons,il d. slcuritl,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special No 2, "R;o.pport
presente au Conseil de' securite par la Commission d'enqucte sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere grecque".

In the French view it is quite inadnllisible to
accept a charge as proof of the existence of a
fact. The charge alone proves nothing; the facts
must be proved, and the burden of proof, the
onus probandi, rests upon the accuser.
Anoth.e.~ aspect of thf. same problem is the
question which I raised before the Commission
and to which I have hither"') received no reply.

The basis on which all the decisions relating
to Bulgaria were taken-and there we keep on
finding the vague statement that Bulgaria '~to a
lesser extent [than the other countries] supported
the guerrilla warfare in Greece"1-;-s constituted by something appearing in the report but
inacceptable either in theory or in practice: the
evidence submitted by the Greek Government in
the White Book was believed even though it was
not substantiated before the Commission.

I developed this argument at length before
you and I thought everyone would agree that I
was right. We cannot credit the summaries
given in the White Book, since tney were drawn
up by one of the parties, the Greek Government,
that is to say, by the accuser.
If that evidence is not believed and if it is
thought sufficien.t to have a summary drawn up
by a third person which omits certain very important facts and incorporates certain others,
equally important, but not mentioned by the
witness, how can it be concluded that Bulgaria
participated to a greater or less extent in the
assistance given to the Greek guerrillas?

11111111....,..,. ..

to say that something is manifest has a definite
mea..rUng. Anything manifest is not open to discussion. In this case, however, a whole Commission was established in order to discuss the
question, and consequently you cannot say that
there is anything manifest.
Differences arose within the Commission itself. As I have observed, affirmed and reaffirmed, six votes against five were cast in
favour of establishing responsibility. Six votes to
five represents an extremely narrow majority, so
that the question remains open and discussion is
possible.
I would repeat for the third time that this
problem has not been given a hearing.
I now come to the second point, namely, the
internal situation in Greece. The report contains
vast documentation on this subject and I think
that we should give the authors. due credit for
studying the events most conscientiously and industriously in this connexion and for reaching a
conclusion which is clear and obvious to anyone
who wishes to read and understand it correctly.
I quoted the text of this conclusion the other
day, but it may be briefly summarized as follows: a situation prevails in GrFece which is not
called civil war, but "general unrest"-a new
technical term which will, of course, have to be
defined in the future. This "general unrest" is
due to the discrimination with which the present
Greek Government treats the opposition, minorities and Communists. That is the essential point
of the matter. Since I have reached this point,
with your permission, I shall remind you of the
little story which Mr. Lavrischev told the Commission at one stage of its long journey.

vue philosophique, est quelque chose de determine. C'est un fait qui ne prete pas a discussion.
Ici, on a cree 'toute une Commission pour
discuter; on ne peut done pas parler d'evidence.

Des divergences se sont manifestees au sem
meme de la Commission. Comme je l'ai note,
affirme et reaffirme, six voix contre cinq se sont
prononcees pour la responsabilite. Six voix contre
cinq, cela represente une majorite infime, de
sorte que la question reste ouverte, les discussions
sont possibles.
Cette question, je le repete pour la troisieme
fois, n'a pas trouve cl'echo.
J'arrive au deuxieme point: la situation interieure de la Grece. On trouve a ce sujet une
documentation volumineuse dans le rapport, et
je crois qu'il faut rendre cette justice aux auteurs
de ce dernier qu'ils ont etudie les evenements,
a ce point de vue, avec beaucoup de conscience
et d'application et qu'ils sont arrives a une
conclusion qui, pour celui qui veut bien lire et
bien entendre, est claire et manifeste. Cctte
conclusion, je l'ai eitee textuellement l'autre
jour, mais succinctement, on peut la resumer
ainsi: il existe en Grece une situation, que 1'0n
n'appelle pas guerre civile, mais "malaise
general", terme technique nouveau qu'il faudra
sans doute definir a l'avenir. Et ce "malaise
general" est dQ a la discrimination qne le
Gouvernement actuel exerce a l'egard de
I'opposition, des minorites et des communistes.
C'est la l'essentiel de l'affaire. Et, puisque j'en
suis arrive a cc point, permettez-moi de vous
rappeler la petite histoire que M. Lavrische'r a
racontee devant la Commission, quelque part au
cours de son .long itineraire.
Il a raconte l'histoire de cet habitant de Kiev
He told the story of the inhabitant of Kiev
who had lost his key in one of the dark alleys of qui avait perdu sa de dans une des ruelles
the suburbs. He ran from the fringe of the town obscures des faubourgs. Il accourut de l'eJeterieur
towards its centre, where it was light, and wnen vel'S le centre de la ville, la OU il faisait clair, et
asked why he was looking for his key there and comme on lui demandait pourquoi il y cherchait
not in the suburbs where he had lost it, he re- sa cle et non dans les faubourgs ou il l'avait
plied: "Why, because, I can't see anything there, perdue, il repondit: "Mais, parce que la-bas on
'it is too dark!"
n'y voit rien, il fait trop sombre!"
It is light here. For anyone who wishes to
Iei, il fait clair. POUf celui qui veut entendre,
understand it, the report is very clear and pre- le rapport est tres clair et tres precis. Ses auteurs
cise. Its authors have put their finger on the ont mis le doigt sur la plaie et ils ont indique
wound and have pointed out that the unrest in que le malaise en Grece provenait justement
Greece is a direct result of the discrimination de la discrimination manifestee a l'egard de
shown toward the opposition. What does the re- l'opposition. Que dit le rapport? AveG beaucoup
port say? With many reservations it provides de precautions, il stipule tout de meme que la
for a recommendation by the Commission to the Commission devrait recommander au Conseil de
Council that it (the Council) should declare its se declarer pret a venir promptement a r aide
readiness to render prompt assistance to the du Gouvernement grec, au cas ou celui-ci
Greek Government, on request, with a view to manifesterait le desir de recevoir l'aide du
applying a general amnesty.
Conseil en vue de l'application d'une amnistie
generale. "
Or, je declare que, de l'avis de mon GouI would say that, in the opinion of my Government, a g~neral amnesty would only re-enact vernement, une allllli3tie generale ne ferait que
that sad story of Varkiza, of the Varkiza A,gree- repeter la triste histoire de Varkiza, de cet
ment which the Greeks call "the Varkiza Sym- Accord de Varkiza, que les Grecs appellent "la
phony". The word symphony means agreement Symphonie de Varkiza". Le mot symphonie, en
in Greek, but you can see how inapplicable this grec, signifie accord, mais vous voyez comme cela

1395

J

is: "the Varkiza Symphony" was a cacophony,
something frightful. Much blood has been shed.
It is an agreement which has never been applied
and which has failed. We think that if an amnesty were declared by the present Government
it would merely be a repetition of this sad story;
still, the Commission came to this conclusion as
a result of its observations. It noted the general
unrest in Greece and indicated a remedy. It
said: "Do something, and we shall help you."
This statement should appear in the resolution,
and the resoluticn should show the influence of
the main consideration contained in the report.

choque: la "Symphonip. de Varkiza"; cela a
ete une cacophonie, quelque chose de terrible.
Beauco!.lp de sang a coule. C'est un accord qui
n'a jamais ete mis en application, qui a echouc.
Nous pensons qu'lLTle amnistie declaree par le
Gouvernement actuel ne ferait que repeter cette
triste histoire; cependant, c'est dans ce .'lens que
la Commission s'est pron0ncee a la suite de ses
constatations. Elle a constate le malaise general
en Grece, et eUe a indique un remMe. Elle a dit:
"Faites queique chose et nous vaus aiderons."
Eh bien, il faudrait aue cette declaration trouve
sa place dans la· resoiution et que celle-ci porte
trace de la constatation essenticlle contenue dans
le rapport.

The thirJ point is the right of asylum. This
is a fundamental prhlciple, and we should be
left without a tribunal for ill~minating these
questions if the Security Council failed to deal
with them. The President has informed us that
some kind of regulation is now being drawn up
on this subject. The preparation of a law or
regulation, however, should be'based on procedure, on specific cases, on life itself, and we are
at present confronted with a "living" case. The
President was kind enough to mention this question to us, but I have heard no other members
of the Council speak on this matter.

Troisieme point: le droit d'a3ile. C'est la un
principe fondamenta!, et nous n'aurions plus de
tribunal pour faire la lumiere sur toutes ces
questions si le Conseil de securite ne s'en occui.Jait
pas. Le President nous a informes que l'on
est justement en train d'elaborer une sorte de
reglement a ce sujet. Or, l' elaboration d'une loi
ou d'un reglement doit etre fondee sur· une
procedure, sur des cas precis, sur la vie ellememe, et nous nous trouvons justement, id,
devant un cas "vivant". Le President a eu
I'obligeance de nous parler de cette question,
maL" je n'ai pas entendu les autres membres du
Conseil se prononcer a ce sujet.
S'agit-il d'une question theorique? Pas du
tout, la question est d'importance primordiale,
car si vaus etudiez attentivement le rapport,
vous constaterez que le droit d'asile qui' a ete
reclame par les refugies et qui a ete accorde par
notre Gouvernement, est I'element essentiel de
I'aide que nom; avons apportee aux partisans, et
qui nous est reprochee maintenant comme une
faute. Si vous faites abstraction du droit d'asile
que nous avons accorde aux refugies, il ne
restera absolument rien. Si vous retranchez de la
responsabilite qui nous est imputee le simple fait
d'avoir soigne des malades et hospitalise des
blesses, hommes et femmes, vieillards et enfants,
il n'en restera rien, et s'il n'en reste rien, a quoi'
bon creer des commissions, emettre des avertissements et donner des conseils? Toute I'activite
actuelle du Conseil est fondee sur un fait acquis
au prealable, sur la constatation, justement, de
l'existence d'un etat de malaise dans les reiations
entre les Etats balkaniques et la Grece. Or, nous
affirmons qu'i! n'existe point de malaise entre
nous, qu'il n'y a eu que des bagatelles insignifiantes et que, s'il y a malaise, c'est le malaise
grec. Ce n'est pas un malaise greco-bulgare,
puisqu'il n'existe pas, mais un malaLe grec: il
nous faudrait done diriger nos regards de ce
cote et chercher a y remediez:.
Permettez-moi de dire encore quelques mots
au sujet des intimidations. Il paralt que ce mot
n'est pas approprie et que d'aucuns preferent
celui d'avertissements. Cela m'est tout a fait
egal: parlons d'avertissements. J'ai ete un peu
surpris, hier, en entendant M. Gromyko dire que
ces avertissements devraient ctre compris comme
etant adresses a la commission. Il s'agiratt
d'instructions destinees a la commission qu'on

Is this a theoretical quef'tion? Not at all, the
question is one of primary importance, for if you
study the report cart.~ully, you will see that our
assistance to the partisans in the main took the
form of granting refugees the asylum they demanded; and this is ....r:tat we are new being
blamed for. If you disregard the asylum which
we granted to refugees, absolutely nothing will
remain. If, against the guilt imputed to us yuu
set the mere fact that we cared for the sick and
hospitalized and wounded, men and women, old
people and children, our liability will appear to
be non-existent; and that being so, what is the
use of establishing commissions, issuing warnings
and giving advice? The entire present activity
of the Council is based on a preconceived notion,
on the argument that there is tension in the relations between the Balkan States and Greece. We
declare, however, that there is no such tension,
that only insignificant incidents have arisen and
that, if there is any tension, it exists in Greece.
There is no such thing as tension between
Greece and Bulgaria: tension exists only inside
Greece. It is on these lines that we should proceed in our quest for a remedy.

With your permission, I should like to say a few
more words on the subject of intimidations. Apparently, this word is not suitable and some prefer the term warnings. This makes no difference to me: let us speak about 1.varnings. I was
a little surprised yesterday to hear Mr. Gromyko
say that these warnings should be interpreted as
being addressed to the commission. These warn... ~~. apparently are to be instructions for the

1396

com.rnission which it is proposed to establish; veut ereer. C'est a celle-ci d'etre guidee par ces
these rules are to guide the commission and help principes et de tirer des conclusions.
it to reach conclusions.
I do not say that this interpretation is impossiJe ne dis pas que cette interpretation n'est pas
ble. Everything is possible under the terms of possible. Tout est possible, etant donne les termes
t.he resolution submitted by the United States de la resolution soumise par le representant des
representative. But if it is indeed a warning ad- Etats-Unis. Mais s'il s'agit d'un avertissement
dressed to the commission and relating to the adresse a la commission et se rapportant aux
four Balkan States, the question becomes con- . quatre pays balkaniques, on ne comprend plus
fused. What will the commission do? It will re- rien. Que fera la commission? Elle aura re<;;u
ceive this warning. Let us suppose that an inci- cet avertissement. Supposons qu'un incident se
dent occurs. The commission will have to under- produise. Il faudra qu'elle procede a des constatake investigations; these investigations will re- tations; ces constatations porteront sur des faits;
late to facts; once thf;se facts have been proved, une fois ces faits constates, un proces-verbal sera
a record will be drawn up. But at that point the dresse. n n'appartiendra pas alors a la commiscommission will not be empowered to define the sion de qualifier la situation de fait et de dire:
de facto situation and say: "This situation con- "Cette situation constitue une menace contre
stitutes- a threat to the peace." Even if this were la paix." Meme si l'on admettait cela, si l'on
admissible, even if the commission had the reconnaissait a la commission le pouvoir de
power to describe the situation as containing a qualifier la situation et de constater l'existenee
threat to the peace, the matter would necessarily d'une menace contre la paix, l'affaire viendrait
be brought before the Council, since that is forcement devant le Conseil, puisque c'est celuiwhere conclusions should be drawn and sanc- ci qui devrait en tirer les conclusions et appliquer
les sanctions.
tions applied.
Will the Council be bound by a decision of
Le Conseil sera-t-il alors lie par une de.::ision
the commission, a decision taken somewhere at de la commission, decision prise quelque part a
Salonika or at Geneva? Of course not. The Salonique ou a Geneve? Evidemment non. La
question will be brought before the Council.
question sera reportee devant le Conseil.
Hence, these recommendations are not inCes recommandations ne s'adressent donc pas
tended for the commission and, if they were, they ,a la commission, et si elles s'y adressaient, elles
would of course remain a dead letter since such resteraient sans doute sans efIet, car ce serait la
a state of affairs would. be absolutely unac- quelque chose de tout a fait inacceptable.
ceptable.
A recommendation granting the com.mission
Une recommandation tendant a octroyer a la
terms of reference which would authorize it vir- commission un mandat, autorisant celle-ci, en
tually to do the Council's work and would entitle quelque sorte, a proceder a une substitution, et
it to decide whether a situation does or does not lui donnant le droit de decider si un etat de fait
constitute a threat to the peace is indeed un- constitue ou non une menace contre la paix, est,
acceptable.
en effet, inacceptable.
Obviously, such a decision falls within the
Une telle decision est, evidemment, de la
competence of the Security Council and, as competence du Conseil de securite, et, comme
Mr. Gromyko so aptly said yesterday, the mem- l'a tres bien dit M. Gromyko hier, les membres
bers of the Council have no right to grant such du Conseil n'ont pas le droit de donner un tel
terms of reference amounting to a delegation of mandat, de se faire remplacer par d'autres
their powers to other representatives. If I may representants. Ces representants, permettez-moi
be allowed to say so, such representatives are not de vous le dire, ne sont pas membres du Conseil.
members of the Council. They are different rep- Ce sont d'autres representants, designes par les
resentatives appointed by the various Govern- divers Gouvernements.
ments.
Si nous examinons maintenant l'autre these,
Now, coming to the other point of view-my
own point of view-I will confess that I took celle qui est la mienne, je vous avouerai que je
these warnings as meant for the Balkan co~n­ pense que ces avertissements s'adressent aux pays
tries, but valid for the Council itself. The Coun- balkaniques, mais sont valables pour le Conseil
cil wishes to commit itself and to inform the lui-meme. C'est le Conseil qui veut se lier et dire
Balkan countries that any fresh incident will be aux pays balkaniques qu'il considerera tout
nouvel incident sous l'angle du Chapitre VII.
treated as coming under Chapter VII.
From this point of view the criticism is still
La critique, alors, est encore plus violente. Je
m0l".': devastating. If you bind yourself by a pense que" si on se lie par une definition comme
definition such as this, there are two possibilities: celle-la, il y aura deux pos3ibilites: ou bien cette
either this definition is in conformity with the definition est conforme a la Charte, et il est
Charter, In which case it is unnecessary to repeat inutile de la repeter, ou bien elle apporte quelque
it; or else it introduces something new, not CC-D- chose de nouveau, qui n'est pas contenu dans la
tained in ~ht Charter, in which case this repre- Charte, et alors c'est une innovation, et cela
sents an innovation requiring the exercise of a sanctionne l'exercice d'un pouvoir legislatif que
le Conseil ne possMe pas.
legislative power not vested in the Council.

1397

If we adopt these warnings in practice, what
would happen if a new case were to arise? That
case would have to be discussed. It would have
to be decided whether it is a political case. The
Council would consider what the case represented and decide whether it was a repetition of
former cases, whether there was any likelihood
of its recurring, whether many people were involved in it, whether the Government itself participated in it and, if so, how.
There are so many problems which might be
eventually brought before the Council, and the
decision as to whether or not a threat to the
peace existed would depend on the replies to the
questions enumerated a:"ove.
What does this prove? This proves that a
definition given in advance would be absolutely
useless. In t.~at case, why give such a decision?
That is why I would ask the Council, when discussing the voting on this point, to put these
"intimidations" aside and to leave itself free to
determine, in the event (which I trust will not
materialize) of any fresh incident taking place,
whether or not such an incident constitutes a
threat to the peace.
That is all I wanted to say. I am asking you
once again not to be over-hasty in adopting resolutions for indeed, as certain representatives have
said, we are now in the throes of a kind of'panic;
this panic is not justified. We think that something very serious is going on in Greece. That
is perfectly true. Something very serious is going on, but inside Greece. There is nothing
serious on the frontier. You must not believe
the yams in the newspapers, which publish funny
stories. They are talking about international
brigades. Mr. Kerenxhi and I have derived
much amusement from reading these newspapers. These jokes must not be turned into
tragic stories, for you know that when tragedy
and comedy are intermingled, the step to something really tragic is very short.

Si, en pratique, nous acceptons ces avertissements, que se passera-t-il dans I'eventualite ou
un nouveau cas se presenterait? Ce cas devra etre
mis en discussion. On devra determiner s'il a
un caractere politique; on examinera ce qu'il
represente, on deddera s'il est la repetition de
cas anterieurs, si une menace existe de le voir
se reproduire ulterieurement, si beaucoup de
gens y sont impliques, si le Gouvernement luimeme y a pris part, et de quelle maniere.
Tout cela constitue une quantite de problemes
qui se poseraient eventuellement au Conseil, et
selon les reponses qui seraient donnees a ces
questions, on deciderait s'il y a ou non menace
contre la paix.
Qu'est-ce que cela prouve? Cela prouve que
la definition que nous aurons preaIablement
dnnnee ne nous sert absolument a rien. A quoi
bon, alors, la formuler? C'est pour cela que je
prie le Conseil, lorsqu'il discutera ce point et le
soumettera au vote, de laisser ces "intimidations"
de cote et de se garder les mains libres pour
pouvoir a I'avenir, au cas ou se produirait un
nouvel incident,-j'espere que cela ne sera pas
- decider en toute liberte s'il constitue ou non
une menace contre la paix.
C'est tout ce que je voulais dire. le vous
demande encore une fois de ne pas aller trop
vite dans I'adoption des resolutions, car, en
verite, comme l'ont dit certains representants,
nous sommes en proie, en ce moment, a une
sorte de panique qui n'est pas justifiee. Nous
pensons que quelque chose de tres grave se passe
en Grece. C'est tout a fait vrai. n se passe en
effet quelque chose de tres grave, mais c'est en
Grece meme. A la frontiere, il n'y a rien de
grave. Il ne faut pas croire les racontars des
journaux qui impriment des histoires pour faire
rire. Ils parlent de brigades internationales.
M. Kerenxhi et moi-meme avons trouve dans la
lecture de ces journaux de nombreux sujets de
gaiete. Il ne faudrait pas transformer ces plaisanteries en histoires tragiques, car vous savez
que lorsqu'on melange la tngedie a la com6die,
on arrive tres vite a un tragique reel.

Mr. DENDRAMIS (Greece) (translated from
French): Mention was made yesterday of a
"second round," that is to say, of a resumption
of the general debate, although this debate had
been closed. For my part, I have no intention
of participating in this second round; indeed, it
would merely be a repetition of what has been
said at such length before the Commission of Investigation. I think the time has come for the
Security Council to consider the resolutions and
to take a decision.
In so far as I am concerned, I consider the
general debate closed.

M. DENDRAMIS (Grece): luer, on a parIe
d'un "second round", c'est-a-dire d'une reprise
de la discussion generale, alors que celle-ci etait
close. le n'ai pas, pour ma part, l'intention d'y
participer; ce serait, en efIet, repeter tout ce qui
a ete dit si longuement devant la Commission
d'enquete. le crois que le moment est venu pour
le Conseil de securite de proceder a l'examen des
resolutions et de prendre une decision.

Mr. PARODl (France) (translated from
French): I had no intention of taking the floor,
but I must admit I was struck by what the repres~ntative of Bulgaria has just said. I should
like, for my part, to answer his appeal to us and
to go back over at least some of.the points with
which he has dealt.

M. PARODl (France): le n'avais pas l'intention de prendre la parole, mais j'ai ete sensible,
je dois le dire, a ce que vient de declarer le
representant de la Bulgarie. le voudrais, pour
ma part, repondre a I'appel qu'il nous a adresse
et revenir sur quelques-uns, au moins, des points
qu'il vient de traiter.

~.

En ce qui me con~erne, je considere que la
discussion generale est close.

------_

.. ~~--~~

The representative of Bulgaria has raised,
among others, the question of the right of
asylum, that is to say, the right of certain countries to receive wounded from other countries. I
feel bound to state that I am personally in full
agreement with what the representative of Poland said yesterday and that, in any case, the
fact of receiving wounded cannot lay any country whatsoever open to a valid charge.
I did not state my views on this point in my
speech at a previous meeting, l because the
French delegation is far more concerned with
the solution of the problem than with an investigation of past guilt. This consideration leads
up to my second point. The representative of
Bulgaria has expressed regret that the Security
Council did not embark upon a detailed discussion of the evidence. This difficult and complicated discussion was conducted by the Commission on behalf of the Security Council. I have
just explained how the French delegation feels
about this point.

Le representant de la Bulgarie a incidemment
souleve la question du droit d'asile, c'est-a-dire
du droit, pour certains pays, d'accueillir des
blesses v~nus d'autres pays. Je tiens a declarer
qu'en ce qui me coneerne, je suis fmtierement
d'accord avec ce qu'a dit hier le representant de
la Pologne et qu'en aucun cas le fait de recevoir
des blesses ne peut donner lieu a un reproche
valable a l'egard de quelque pays que ce soit.
Si je ne me suis pas explique sur ce point lors
de mon intervention au cours d'une seance
pl'ecedentel, c'est parce que la delegation fran~aise R'est attachee surtout a la solution de la
question beaucoup plus qu'a la recherche de
responsabilites dans le passe. Cette derniere
consideration me conduit a examiner un second
point. Le representant de la Bulgarie a exprime
le regret que le Conseil de securite ne se soit pas
engage dans une discussion detaillee des temoignages. Cette discussion difficile et compliquee
avait ete menee par la Commission au nom du
Conseil de securite. J e viens de rappe1er quelle a
ete, ace'\: egard, la position de la delegation
fran~aise.

One final point remains. The representative
of Bulgaria, referring to an earlier meeting, has
said that we had alluded·-and we could not help
alluding-to the events which have taken place
recently on the northern frontiers of Greece or,
at least, to the reports about them published in
the newspapers. I should like to voice my

Puisque nous sommes arrives au terme de la
discussion generale et que nous nous trouvons en
presence de deux resolutions, quelles sont les
conclusions possibles de nos d6bats?
Si nous examinons ces deux resolutions, nous
constatons que l'une contient une accusation
dirigee, non contre la Bulgarie, mais, au contraire, en sens inverse; la deuxieme resolution,
celle du representant des Etats-Unis, ne contient
aucun jugement, aucune appreciation, et je ne
releve pas dans son texte d'allusion a aucune
responsabilite quant au passe. C'est la, me
semble-t-il, une reponse qui devrait donner
satisfaction au representant de la Bulgarie.
En prenant la parole a une seance precedente\
j'ai dit combien il me paraissait souhaitable que,
de la Fart des differents Etats interesses, nous
vinssent - non sur le terrain des responsabilites
que, pour ma part, je ne leur demande pas
de reconnmtre, mais sur celui de l'avenirquelques assurances de bonne volonte. Ces assurances, le representant de la Bulgarie, pour sa
part, dans une certaine mesure, les a formulees.
Mais je voudrais exprimer le regret de ne les
avoir entendues que de sa bouche et de n'avoir
vraiment Te~u des trois autres pays interesses
aucune indication encourageante quant a l'avenil' pour le. Conseil de securite, indication qui
nous permette de penser qu'il soit possible de
mettre uniquement, ou essentiellement, l'accent
sur des recommandations de conciliation.
Reste un dernier point. Se referant a une de
nos seances precedentes, le representant de la
Bulgarie a rappele qu'il avait ete fait id allusion
- nous ne pouvions pas ne pas le faire - aux
evenements qui se sont recemment produits aux
frontieres nord de la Grece, ou du mains aux
informations qu'en ont publiees les journaux. Je

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 58, 158th meeting.

1 Voir les Proces.verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiU,
Deuxieme Annee, No 58, 158eme seance.

Since we have reached the end of the general
debate and are now confronted with two resolutions, let us inquire what are the possible conclusions of our discussions.
If we consider these two resolutions~ we shall
see that one contains a charge dir~cted, not
against Bulgaria but, on the contrary, against
the other side; the second resolution, that of the
United States representative, <;ontains no verdict
or summing up, nor can· I find anything in it
speaking of guilt for the past. This reply should
satisfy the representative of Bulgaria.

When speaking at a previous meeting, l I said
how desirable I thought it would be if we received some assurances of goodwill from the various States concerned, not with regard to guilt,
which for my part I do not expect them to
acknowledge, but with regard to the future. The
representative of Bulgaria has, to some extent,
given such assurances, but I should like to express my regret at having heard them from nobody but him; I regret that none of the other
three countries concerned has given an indication about the future that might be encouraging
for the Security Council, an indication warranting the hope that it would be possible to lay
stress only or essentially on the conciliation aspect
of the recommendations.

1399

anxiety in this connexion. It is true that we were
disturbed by this news, received five or, six 'days
ago. I even took the view, explicitly and publicly, that the circumstances and the very uncertainty of the news we were receiving justified
our decision to leave observers on the spot and
that this decision constituted a guarantee benefiting both sides. I must say I am disappointed,
however, that we have hitherto received no information of any kind from the Subsidiary
Group, that is to say, from the observers whom
we have left on the spot. If tlye Secretariat holds
no kind of in.formation, could we not request the
Subsidiary Group (which we are told has sent
its representatives to the places concerned) not
to wait until it is in a position to provide us with
a complete, detailed an.d perfectly objective report, but to send us such information in its possession on the situation as even a rapid survey
may have yielded?

These are the remarks I wished to make in
reply to the representative of Bulgaria.

I

voudrais, a cet egard, exprimer une preoccupation. 11 est exact que nous avons ete emus par
ces nouvelles, donnees deja depuis cinq au six
jours. J'ai meme considere pour ma part - et
je I'ai fait valoir - que I'etat de choses et
l'incertitude meme des nouvelles que nous recevions etaient, a mon avis, une justification de
notre decision de laisser la-bas des observateurs
et que ce1a constituait une garantie jouant aussi
bien dans un sens que dans I'autre. Mais je tiens
a exprimer ma deception que nous n'ayons
jusqu'ici rec;u aucune espece de renseignements
de la part du Groupe subsidiaire, des observateurs que nom, avons maintenus sur place. Si le
Secretariat n'f~st en possession d'aucun element
d'information, ne pourrions-nous pas demander
au Groupe subsidiaire, puisqu'il nous a ete dit
qu'il avait envoye ses representants sur les lieux,
qu'il veuille bien ne pas attendre d'etre en
mesure de nous fournir un rapport complet,
detaille et parfaitement scrupuleux, mais qU'il
nous fa~se parvenir le~ informations dont il peut
disposer actuellement sur la situation telle qu'il
a pu, meme rapidement, la constater?
Telles sont les observations que je voulais
formuler, en reponse au representant de la
Bulgarie.

M. VILFAN (Yougoslavie): le n'avais pas
l'intention de prendre la parole aujourd'hui,
mais puisque le representant de la France attend
une preuve de bonne volonte de la part de mon
pays, je me departirai de mon attitude.
Notre bonne volonte est hors de doute, je
crois. Nous avons deja expose ce que, dans la
situation actuelle, nous estimons possible de faire
a l' egard des refugies, des minorites, etc.
Dans son intervention d'hier\ le representant
de I'URSS a souligne que c'est votre silence qui
etonne, et non pas le notre. Mais peut-etre
veut-on maintenant qu'il en soit autrement.
Dans ce cas, que desire-t-on?
J'espere qu'il n'existe aucun doute dans vos
esprits en ce qui concerne la bonne ~olonte
generale qui anime mon pays en matiere de
collaboration internationale, en particulier dans
ses relations avec ses voisins en vue du maintien
de la paix. La Yougoslavie en a donne des
preuves - et queUes preuves! - non seulement
dans la lutte, et alors qu'il fallait donner sa vie
pour atteindre le but, mais aussi depuis que 'la
guerre est terminee. le me bornerai a vous
rappeler que la Yougoslavie, bien qu'elle ait ete
obligee a la Conference de Paris a consentir a
des renonciations assez importantes, n'en a pas
moins signe le Traite de paix. Mais je crois qu'il
ne s'agit pas ici de cela, et que cette bonne
volonte de mon pays est si evidente qu'il est
inutile d'en parler.
I feel we are again concerned with the quesle crois qu'il faut voir une certaine coincidence
tion of susceptibilities. .. ,~ are advised to de- avec la question des susceptibilites. On nous
clare ourselves willing to consider the general conseille de nous declarer pr~ts a tenir la disdebate as closed and perhaps also to accept the cussion generale pour close, et peut-etre aussi
recommendations of the majority of the Security d'accepter les recommandations de la majorite

Mr. VILFAN (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): I had not proposed to speak today, but
since the representative of France expects a proof'
of goodwill from my country, I have changed
my mind.
I think that our goodwill is beyond all doubt.
We have already explained what, in the present
circumstances, we consider can be done about
refugees, minorities, etc.
The representative of the USSR emphasized
in his speech yesterdayl that it was your silence
that was surprising, and not ours. But perhaps
you now wish for a change in the position. In
that event, what do you wish?
I hope there is no doubt in your minds about
the general goodwill which moves my country
in the field of international co-operation and, in
particular, in its relations with its neighbours
with a view to the maintenance of peace. Yugoslavia has given proof-and what proofs I-not
only in war-time, when lives had to be sacrificed
to achieve our aims, but also since the end of the
war. I shall confine myseif to reminding you
that Yugoslavia, although obliged to consent to
heavy sacrifices at the Paris Conference, nevertheless signed the Peace Treaty. But I think that
is irrelevant here and that my country's goodwill
is so obvious that it is unnecessary to speak of it.

1 See Official Rt'~ords of the Security Council, Second
Y~ar, No. 59, 160th meeting.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiU.
Deuxieme Annee, No 59, 160eme seance.

l'tUU

Council "with gratitude", as it has been said. au Conseil de securite "avecgratitude", comme
ila ete dit. Nous ne pouvons suivre ce consei!.
We cannot follow this advice.
I repeat that we have asked questions; we
Nous avons pose des questions, je le repete;
have not received any reply. That is why we nous n'avons pas re~u de reponse. C'est pourquoi
cannot help regarding the conclusions of the ma- nous ne pouvons considerer les conclusions de
jority and the ensuing recommendations as un- la majorite et les recommandations qui en
founded and unjustified. I would insist once decoulent que comme non fondees et injustifiees.
again on the fact that our reproaches cannot be J'insiste encore une fois sur le fait que l'on ne
neglected under the pretext that the Security peut pas negliger nos reproches sous le pretexte
Council does not wish to duplicate the work of que le Conseil de securite ne veut pas refaire le
travail de la Commission.
the Commission.
Mr. President, what struck me in your speech
Monsieur le President, ce qui m'a frappe dans
yesterdayl was that you succeeded in expressing votre discours d'hier!, c'est que vous ayez reussi
in a few words what took me several pages, a formuler en quelques mots ce que je n'avais
namely, that the principle adopted by .the Com- pu dire qu'en plusieurs pages, c'est-a-dire que.
mission of Investigation for its discussions was le principe de discussion adopte a la Commission
equivalent to placing on the accused the burden d'enquete equivalait a 1'0bligation, pour les
of proving their innocence.. I believe that this parties accusees, de demontrer qu'elles n'etaient
is the real substance of the whole problem, as paS coupables. Je crois que telle est vraiment la
the representative of Bulgaria pointed out this substance de tout le probleme, comme le representant de la Bulgarie l'a souligne ce matin2 •
morning.2
If we consider the Commission's report and
En effet, si 1'0n examine le rapport de la
particularly the conclusions of the majority and Commission, et surtout les conclusions de la
if we then read the sentences quoted by the majorite, et si on lit ensuite les phrases citees par
United Kingdom representative we find that the le representant du Royaume-Uni, que voit-on?'
majority ,of the Commission considered the evi- On voit que' la majorite de la Commission
dence in support of the Greek charges as sub- considere comme fondes les temoignages venant
stantiated on the grounds that the parties against a l'appui des accusations grecques, parce que
whom these charges were levelled failed to dis- les parties contre lesquelles sont dirigees ces
prove them. That is why the majority of the accusations n'ont pas reussi a les infirmer.
Commission considers it unnecessary to weigh C'est pourquoi la majorite de la Commission
the evidence. If this were not so, I should be considere qu'il n'est pas necessaire d'apprecier
unable to understand how this evidence could les temoignages. S'il en ctait autrement, je ne
have been considered credible without admitting comprendrais pas comment on aurait pu accepter
th~ premise formulated in the first paragraph of
ces temoignages comme fondes sans accepter la
premisse formulee dans le premier paragraphe
the conclusions of the majority.
des conclusions de la majorite.
I repeat that if it is possible fo~ any country
Je repete que si l'on peut accuser tel Oll te1
(as was the case with our country) to be charged pays (comme cela fut le cas pour le notre)
with having taken hostages, and if this charge is d'avoir pris des otages et, ensuite, passer cette
then passed over in silence, anything is possible. accusation sous silence, tout est possible. i'ai
I already referred to this point in my short deja fait allusion a ce point dans ma breve
speech on Tuesday,S when I spoke of the inva- intervention de mardill, lorsque nous avons parle
sion. I repeat my words: if such charges are not de l'invasion. Je repete mes paroles: si on laisse
discussed and if conclusions are nevertheless de pareilles accusations non discutees, si l'on en
drawn from them, we shall be exposed to the tire des conclusions, nous serons toujours exposes
danger of seeing the Security Council consider au danger de voir le Conseil de securite consias established something that is not proven.
derer comme prouve ce qui ne l'est pas.
Mr. DENDRAMIS (Greece)' (translated from
French): I should like to make a slight amendment in reply to the statement made just now by
the representative of France.
In his appeal to the four Balkan States, the
French representative said that Bulgaria has
given certain proofs of goodwill and that the
other three countries had hitherto remained
silent. He probably did not listen carefully for,
according to the records, at the meeting of
27 June, I said:

M. DENDRAMIS (Grece): Je desirerais apporter une petite rectification a la suite de la
declaration faite, il y a un instant, par le representant de la France.
Adressant un appel aux quatrepays balkaniques, le representant de la France a dit que
la Bulgarie a donne certaines preuves de bonne
volonte et que, jusqu'a present, les trois autres
pays sont restes silencieux. Il n'a probablement
pas prete attention a mon expose; car, a la
seance du 27 juin dernier, d'apres les procesverbaux, j'ai declare:

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 59, 159th meeting.
• See page 1392
• See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 58, 158th meeting.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de s6curite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 59, 15geme seance.
• Voir page 1392.
• Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 58, 158eme seance.

--

1401
"The Commission of Investigation has made
certain recommendations. In themselves and
within the framework of the Commission these
recommendations are good. Greece is in favour
of their adoption by the Security Council, and
for her own part undertakes to apply them in
all good faith."!

"La Commission d'enquet~ a fait certaines
recommandations. Prises en elles-memes et dans
le cadre de la Commission, ces recommandations
sont bonnes. La Grece est en faveur de leur
adoption par le Conseil de securite et s'engage a.
les appliquer, en ce qui la concerne, avec une
entiere bonne foil."

Colonel KERENXHI (Albania) (translated
from French): I am taking the floor now in
order to say a few words about the past of which
the French delegation and several other delegations have spoken. I should merely like to point
out that this past constitutes the basis of the
Commission's conclusions and recommendations
and engendered the discussion in the Security
Council. I should like to emphasize that we are
rejecting this past because it is ill-founded.

As I said in my first speech,2 all these facts
prove that all the charges brought before the
Security Council by Greece and investigated by

Le colonel KERENXHI (Albanie): Si je prends
maintenant la parole, c'est pOUf dire quelques
mats sur le passe, sur ce passe qui vient d'etre
mentionne par la delegation fran~aise et qui,
auparavant a ete cite plusieurs fois par d'autres
delegations. Je voudrais seulement fain~ observer
que c'est sur ce passe que se fondent les conclusions et les propositions de la Commission et
que se deroulent les discussions au Conseil de
securite. Je desire souligner que c'est exactement
ce passe que nous rejetons, parce qu'il n'est pas
fonde.
Ce passe, vous le trouvez bien clans la partie
du rapport de la Commission qui a trait aux
faits, dans les conclusions de la majorite, dans
les conclusions de la delegation de I'URSS,
appuyee par la delegation polonaise; vous le
trouvez aussi dans la declaration de la delegation
fran~aise aupres de la Commission d'enquete.
Dans ce tas de materiaux, on peut constater
clairement, si on le veut bien, que ce passe n'a
pas de rapport avec ce que la delegation grecque
vous a presente, mais qu'il en est meme tout
I'oppose.
Ceci serait apparu avec plus de force encore
si, par exemple, la Commission d'enquete avait
procede au rassemblement des faits qui lui ont
ete presentes ou si elle avait consenti a. y ajouter
d'autres faits ou a entendre les exposes qu'on
etait pret a. lui faire. Je citerai, par exemple,
la demande que nous avons presentee a. la
Commission en vue d'obtenir une enquete plus
large, c'est-a.-dire une enquete portant sur les
accusations d'agression que nous avions nousmemes formulees contre la Grece; en ce qui
concerne ce cas particulier, vous troulfez dans
les conclusions de la Commission que les
demandes albanaises n'ont pas ete satisfaites
parce qu'il s'agissait de questions de revendications deja. connues de tout le' monde. Or, si la
Commission d'enquete avait pu agir d'apres les
propositions concretes soumises par la delegation
albanaise, il est certain que son expose des faits
et. ses conclusions auraient compris d'autres
points assez importants, qui auraient doune une
autre forme au rapport et a. ses conclusions.
Mais la Commission n'a pas voulu proceder
a. une telle enquete, bien que, lorsque le moment
fut venu d'en discuter, la decision prise ait ete
de proceder a. cette enquete au moment opportun.
Tous ces faits - je I'ai deja. dit dans man
premier discours2 - prouvent que toutes les
accusations portees devant le Conseil de securite

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 51, page 1129.
2 Ibid., Second Year, No. 58, 158th meeting.

1 Voir 1es Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitl.
Deuxieme Annee, No 51, page 1129.
2 Ibid., Deuxieme Annee, No 58, 158eme seance.

You will find this past in the part of the Commission's report on the facts, in the conclusions
of the majority and in the conclusions of the
USSR delegation, supported by the Polish delegation; you will also find it in the statement
made by the French delegation to the Commission of Investigation. From this vast documentation it may clearly be seen, if you wish to see
it, that this past bears no relation to the statements of the Greek delegation, but that it is absolutely contrary to these statements.
This would have been still more apparent if,
for instance, the Commission of Investigation
had collected the facts submitted to it or if it
had consented to add other facts or to hear the
statements we were prepared to make. I shall
quote as an example our request to the Commission for a wider investigation, that is to say,
an investigation into our own charges of aggression against Greece; in connexion with this
specific case, you will discover, from the Commission's conclusions, that the Albanian requests
were not met, on the grounds that they were
concerned with claims familia!;' to everyone. If,
however, the Commission of Investigation had
seen fit to take action on the definite proposal
submitted by the Albanian delegation, its summary of the facts and its conclusions would indubitably have included other important points,
which would have given the report and its conclusions a different form.

But the Commission did nOe wish to undertake such an investigation, although, when the
time came to discuss it, it was decided to undertake this investigation at an appropriate time.

~oqjI~~;;';?¥.Z~:C-;-:~'_1.:-.>t,.; ~.t; :i")'-: "f.,;_.Gt=;-f"w"<,;" ,._;, ;: ~, , ~,- """,r~"";," ~-r"""":'==;"':';:'"-",,·,:,,,""-r'·,~c-,r"-""'C-·,""Ar~"'i~'~_-;'-:" l":>-".~_"""'.-=-.c;,~.P;;~,=~,-~~~,,,,,~·=-~''''~',~1'"':''';';;',,,;;.;,,: ,.,'_"':""-.1J.=":.l\:r;;;,.~.n.,:',+,~~~~:,i(o_
.

..

...c'

.' -

1402
the Commission are neither accurate nor wellfounded but, on the contrary, constitute a provocation directed against our country.
The Security Council's decisions or recommendations should relate mainly to the true
causes of the internal situation in Greece and not
to Greece's northern neighbours, as they have
proved incontestably that they have nothing to
do with the disturbed internal situation in that
country.
Mr. PARODl (France) (translated from
French): I spoke just now in the hope that our
general debate would end on a slightly more
encouraging note than that introduced by the
reciprocal accusations we have been hearing for
so long. To a certain extent, I have obtained
this result and I should like to thank the representatives of Greece and Yugoslavia in particular.
I must admit that the statement recalled by
the representative of Greece was perfectly clear
and that I was wrong to use an inaccurate
phrase just now. I am glad that this statement,
which was made at the very beginning of our
discussion in so clear a form as not to .need repeating, again comes at the end of our debate
so that it is present in our minds.
I also thank the representative of Yugoslavia
and should like to remind you of a well-known
saying, now about 150 years old, vihich says that
"if things go without saying, they are sometimes
all the better for being expressed".
Thus, I am glad to observe the slightly more
encouraging tone of the three statements which
have just been made.
The PRESIDENT: As no one else wishes to
speak, I shall consider the discussion closed.
Two resolutions have been presented, one by
the representative of the United States1 and one
by the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. 2 I shall invite the members and
the representatives of the interested States to
make their comments on these resolutions at this
time.
The texts of these resolutions have been distributed. The resolution presented by the United
States is document S/391; the resolution presented by the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics is document S/404.
The Secretariat suggests that we use these official
documents rather than the original mimeographed sheets, because the former are mor.e
exact.

par la Grece, et sur lesquelIes la Commission a
fait porter son enquete, ne sont pas exactes,
qu'elIes ne sont pas fondees, mais constituent, au
contraire, une provocation dirigee contre nos
pays.
Les decisions ou les recommandations du
Conseil de securite doivent se rapporter principalement aux causes reelIes qui ont engendre
la situation interieure de la Grece, et non pas
aux voisins septentrionaux de la Grece, car
ceux-ci ont prouve d'une fa~on certaine qu'ils
n'ont rien a faire avec la situation interieure
troubIee de ce pays.
M. PARODl (France): Lorsque j'ai pris la
parole tout a l'heure, c'etait avec le souhait que
notre discussion generale se terminat sur quelque
chose d'un peu plus reconfortant que les accusations reciproques que nous avons entendues
pendant longtemps. I'ai, dans une certaine
mesure, obtenu ce resultat et je remercie en
particulier les representants de la Grece et de la
Yougoslavie.
J e dois reconnaltre que la declaration que
le representant de la Grece a rappelee etait
parfaitement nette et que j'ai eu tort d'employer
tout a l'heure une formule qui n'etait pas exacte.
J e suis heureux que ceUe formule, qui avait ete
presentee tout au debut de nos deliberations sous
une forme assez nette pour n'avoir pas a etre
renouvelee, se retrouve a la fin de nos debats et
que nous l'ayons presente a l'esprit.
Je remercie egalement le representant de la
Yougoslavie et je voudrais rappeler un Ipot
celebre qui a maintenant pres d'un siecle et demi
d'existence et qui dit que "si les choses vont sans
dire, elles vont quelquefois encore mieux quand
on les dit".
Je suis donc satisfait de retenir dans trois
des declarations qui viennent d'etre faites des
elements un peu plus reconfortants.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Aucun autre representant ne desirant parler, je
considererai la discussion comme terminee.
Deux resolutions nous ont ete soumises, l'une
par le representant des Etats-Unis\ l'autre, par
le representant de I'URSS 2 • I'invite les membr.es
du Conseil et les representants des Etats interesses a presenter maintenant les remal'ques que
leur inspirent ces resolutions.
Les textes de ces resolutions ont ete distribues.
La resolution des Etats-Unis est le document
S/391; la resolution de l'URSS est le document
S/404. Le Secretariat nous invite a utiliser ces
documents officiels de preference aux textes
roneotypes distribues auparavant, qui n'ont pas
le meme caractere d'authenticite.
\

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
In accordance with the rules of procedure of the
Security Council and its usual practice, I assume

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais) : Je suppose que, selon le
reglement interieur du Conseil de securite et sa

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 51, 147th meeting.
"Ibid., Second Year, No. 55, 153rd meeting.

1 Voir le! Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 51, 147eme seance.
I Ibid., Deuxieme Annee, No 55, 153eme seance. ._,~...........

-

1403
that it is the resolution presented by the United
States delegation which is now actually under
consideration, because that was the first resolution presented to the Council.

procedure habituelle, c'est la resolution presentee
par les Etats-Unis qui sera maintenant l'objet de
notre examen, puisqu'elle a ete soumise au
Conseil la premiere.

The PRESIDENT: According to the rules of
procedure of the Security Council, resolutions
are voted on in the order in which they have
been submitted. The first resolution submitted
was that of the United States; it will therefore
be voted on first. It might be desirable, then,
to have the members concentrate their discussion
first on that resolution.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit d~ l'anglais):
Conformement au reglement interieur du
Conseil de securite, les resolutions sont mises
aux voix selon l'ordre dans lequel elles ont ete
presentees. La resolution des Etats-Unis, ayant
ete presentee la premiere, sera mise auxvoix la
premiere. Il faudrait done que les membres du
Conseil consacrent d'abord leurs remarques
cette resolution.

Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): In accordance with
the provisions of rule 32, I should like to request
that the resolution should be voted on paragraph
by paragraph, unless the representative of the
United States objects.

M. L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
En vertu de I'article 32 du reglement interieur,
je voudrais demander le vote de cette resolution
paragraphe par paragraphe, a moins que le
representant des Etats-Unis ne s'y oppose.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
The United States delegation is glad to accede
to the request of the representative of Colombia.
It is understood, of course, that we reserve the
right to have our original resolution voted on as
a whole, after it has been discussed and voted on
paragraph by paragraph.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): La delegation des Etats-Unis
est heureuse d'acceder au desir formule par le
representant de la Colombie. Nous nous reservons, bien entendu, le droit de faire voter notre
resolution 'sous sa forme primitive et dans son
ensemble, tine fois qu'eIle aura ete discutee et
votee paragraphe par paragraphe.

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): It was stated yesterday that, after closing the general discussion,
we would begin a discussion of the proposals
which have been presented to us for the purpose
of finding a solution to the question under consideration. As the President has said, we should
now discuss, paragraph by paragraph, the resolution presented by the United States. During
the discussion of those paragraphs, we shall consider objections which may be raised and amendments which may be proposed in order that the
various paragraphs may be brought into conformity with the provisions of the Charter and
the competence of the Security Council.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Il avait ete entendu hier, qu'apres la cloture de
la discussion generale, nous aborderions la discussion des propositions dont nous sommes saisis,
en vue d'aboutir a une solution du probleme que
nous examinons. Comme vient de le declarer
le President, nous devons maintenant discuter,
paragraphe par paragraphe, la resolution presentee par les Etats-Unis. Au cours de la
discussion de ces paragraphes, nous aurons a
considerer les objections qu'ils pourront soulever
et les amendements eventueIlement proposes,
pour rendre les divers paragraphes conformes
aux stipulations de la Charte et compatibles avec
les attributions du Conseil de securite.
Nous examinons maintenant la question au
titre du Chapitre VI de la Charte, relatif au
reglement pacifique des differends. En discutant
les paragraphes de la proposition, nous devons
examiner si chacun d'eux repond aux dispositions du Chapitre VI et entre dans la competence
du Conseil de securite. Apres la discussion et
lorsque nous aurons abouti a un accord, soit sur
le texte original de chaque paragraphe, soit sur
les amendements qui y seront apportes, nous
voterons sur la resolution dans son ensemble.
Nous nous effor~ons de trouver une solution
a ce probleme. Il est particulierement souhaitable
que la resolution presentee soit acceptee par les
membres permanents du Conseil de securite, qui
sont nantis du pouvoir d'arreter la resolution et
d'en empecher la mise a execution. I1 serait
inutile de presenter des propositions qui ne
puissent etre acceptees a l'unanimite ou qui, du
moins, ne permettent pas aux membres du
Conseil de s'abstenir, s'ils ne souhaitent pas voter
en leur faveur. Je demande done que ces

We are now dealing with this matter under
Chapter VI of the Charter, which concerns the
pacific settlement of disputes. In discussing the
paragraphs of the proposal,· we must consider
whether each of them conforms with the provisions of Chapter VI and falls within the jurisdiction of the Security Council. After we discuss
those matters and reach agreement either on
the original text of each paragraph or on
amendments thereto, a general vote will be taken
on the entire resolution.
We are endeavouring to find some solution to
this problem. It is especially desirable that the
resolution which has been presented should be
accepted by the permanent members of the Security Council, who have it within their power
to obstruct the resolution and hinder its execution. It would be useless to present proposals
w!:).ich could not be accepted unanimously, or
which at least would not make it possible for
members to abstain if they did not wish to vote
affirmatively. I therefore suggest that great care

......

~ ....

a

1404
should be taken to frame these paragraphs in a
form which may be acceptable to all the permanent members of the Council, or which may,
at the very least, give them grounds for abstention, so that there will be no deadlock on this
matter.

paragraphes soient rediges avec grand soin sous
une forme que puissent accepter tous les
membres permanents du Conseil ou qui, tout
au moins, leur fournisse des motifs d'abstention,
pour eviter que nous n'en arrivions a une impasse.

The PRESIDENT:. I should like to endorse the
suggestion that we discuss the resolution paragraph by paragraph. There mayor may not be
observations to be made on the particular paragraphs.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Je vais adopter la suggestion qu'on nous a faite
de discuter la resolution paragraphe par paragraphe. I1 est possible que des observations soient
formuMes, a l'occasion de chaque paragraphe,
comme il est possible qu'aucune observation ne
soit presentee.
La resolution presentee par le representant des
Etats-Unis et dont nous sommes maintenant
saisis se compose d'un bref preambule et
de plusieurs paragraphes numerotes. J'aimerais
savoir tout d'abord si que1qu'un desire prendre
la parole sur le preambule ou sur le premier
paragraphe.

The resolution presented by the representative
of the United States, which is now before us for
discussion, consists of a brief preamble and several numbered paragraphs. I should like to know
first whether any member wishes to speak on the
preamble or the first paragraph.
Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): It might help to expedite our work if we were told definitely which
part of the proposal we are to discuss. The
President said that we should discuss the preamble and the first paragraph. How far does the
President consider that the first paragraph extends?

M. L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Si nous savions avec precision quelle est la partie
du texte que nous devons discuter, nos travaux
s'en trouveraient peut-etre acceleres. Le President
declare que nous devons discuter le preambule
et le premier paragraphe. Jusqu'ou le President
estime-t-il que ce premier p~Iagraphe s'etende?

The PRESIDENT: I mentioned the preamble
because I did not expect that there would be any
discussion upon it. By the first paragraph I
meant simply the sentence: "The Security Council adopts the proposals made by the majority
of the members.of the Commission." We should
then continue with the pail'agraphs numbered 2,
3, and so on.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais):
J'ai pade du preambule parce que je ne m'attendais a aucune discussion a ce sujet. Par
premier paragraphe, j'entends simplement la
phrase: "Le Conseil de securite adopte les
propositions faites par la majorite des membres
de la Commission." Nous continuerions alors par
les paragraphes numerotes 2, 3, etc.

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): I think it would be
preferable if the proposals referred to in paragraph 1 were inserted in this resolution, so that
it would not be necessary to refer to them in the
report. If they were inserted here, they could be
discussed and voted upon one by one, which
would be preferable. I think those proposals
ought to be published with the resolution.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
I1 serait preferable, a mon avis, d'inserer dans
le texte de la resolution les propositions dtees
au paragraphe 1, pour qu'il ne soit plus necessaire de se reporter au rapport. Si nous les
inserions ici, nous pourrions leg· disctlter et les
mettre aux voix une par une, ce qui serait
preferable. J e pense que ces propositions
devraient etre publiees avec la resolution.

The PRESIDENT: If representatives are going
to make suggestions like that of the representative of Syria, I think it would be desirable to
have them submitted in writing, not necessarily
now, but at a later stage.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Si d'autres representants ont l'intention de presenter des suggestions analogues a celle du
representant de la Syrie, il serait bon, je crois,
qu'ils les soumettent par ecrit, sinon maintenant,
du moins plus tard.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
I can say without further reflection that the suggestion just made by the representative of Syria
is entirely acceptable to the United States delegation. I indicated that in a short statement I
made two or three days ago. I understood, however, that before we discussed paragraph 2 we
were going to consider and vote upon paragraph 1, and then take the paragraphs in the order in which they appear here. Are we now going
on to have miscellaneous comments on each of
the paragraphs and then come back and vote on
them? I thought that we were going to discuss

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais) : A premiere vue, l'idee du
representant de la Syrie semble tout a fait acceptable a la delegation des Etats-Unis. Je l'ai deja
signalee dans une courte declaration que j'ai
faite il y a deux ou trois jours. I1 me semblait,
cependant, qu'avant de discuter le paragraphe 2,
nous allions examiner et mettre aux voix le
paragraphe 1, puis aborder les paragraphes selon
l'ordre dans lequel Us se presentent id. Alionsnous maintenant continuer a entendre des commentaires varies sur chacun des paragraphes
pour revenir en arriere ensuite et les mettre

the resolution paragraph by paragraph. I should
like to have a little more light on that point.

aux voix? Je croyalS que nous allions discuter
la resolution paragraphe par paragraphe. Je
desirerais avoir quelques edaircissements supplementaires sur ce point.

The PRESIDENT: I believe, though of course
I am ready tc submit to the members of the
Council, that it would be better to discuss the
paragraphs and vote upon them later, because
some representatives may wish to make amendments. That may require some time, and the
representatives may wish to leave them over until
the next meeting. If we vote upon the paragraphs now, we shall be making it more difficult
to make amendments. If there is no objection,
I should prefer that procedure.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Bien que je sois tout pret a satisfaire les membres
du Conseil, je crois cependant qu'il vaudrait
mieux disc:;uter les paragraphes d'abord et les
mettre aux voix ensuite, etant donne que certains representants peuvent desirer presenter des
amendements. La redaction des amendements
peut demander quelque temps et il se peut que
les representants souhaitent en ajourner la presentation jusqu'a la seance suivante. Si nous
votions sur les paragraphes maintenant, nous
rendrions plus difficile 1'introduction d'amendements. S'il n'y a pas d'objections, je prefererais
cette procedure.

Mr. L6PEZ (Columbia): It is not yet very
clear in my mind as to how we are to proceed
with this discussion. According to rule 31, "proposed resolutions,' amendments and substantive
motions shall normally be placed before the representative in writing". If; for instance, we discuss paragraph 1 and then an amendment is
presented, I should like to know whether we shall
proceed to discuss that amendment, or whether
we shall have an opportunity to see and consider
the amendment before we discuss the paragraph.

M. L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je ne vois pas encore tres bien comment nous
allons poursuivre cette discussion. Aux termes
de l'article 31 du reglement, "les projets de
r~solution, les amendements et les propositions
de fond sont en principe soumis aux representants par ecrit". Si, par exemple, nous discutions
le paragraphe premier et qu'UI? amendement
fUt alors presente, j'aimerais savoir si nous discuterions tout de suite l'amendement, ou si nous
aurons l'occasion de le voir et de l'examiner
avant de discuter le paragraphe.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I spoke yesterday on the United States resolution and I
therefore do not propose to revert to it today.
I have already expressed my views on this resolution.
I think we should follow the usual procedure
employed in such cases, i.e., start by discussing
the text of the resolution, which will enable representatives who have any amendments to propose to table thepl after the discussion is over.
If amendments are tabled, voting should be by
paragraphs, beginning with the first paragraph
and, similarly, with the amendments submitted
for any particular point. I think this is a simple
matter; there is nothing complicated about it.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques
socialistes soviHiques) (traduit du russe):
J'ai deja parle hier de la resolution des EtatsUnis; aussi ne vais-je pas y revenir aujourd'hui.
Mes vues sur cette resolution, je les ai deja
exposees.
Il me semble que nous devons suivre la
procedure habituelle, qui s'applique toujours
en pareil cas, c'est-a-dire commencer par la
discussion du texte de la resolution, ce qui permettra aux representants qui ont 1'intention de
presenter des amendements de soumettre ceux-ci
lorsque la discussion sera terminee. S'il y a des
amendements, nous devons mettre le texte aux
voix, paragraphe par paragraphe, en commen~ant par le paragraphe premier, et, a propos de
chaque point, discuter dans leur ordre les
amendements qui s'y rapportent. C'est la une
chose toute simple, il me semble, et je n'y VOL';
rien de complique.

The PRESIDENT: It will facilitate our work if
I now extend an invitation to all the members
who wish to present amendmen£s to do so in
writing between now and the next meeting. In
that way, we shall have a clearer picture before
u~. In the meantime, I invite the members to
discuss the resolution. Some members, such as
the representative of Syria, may indicate orally
the suggestions which they undoubtedly have,
and which they will probably formulate later as
amendments.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Notre tache se trouvera facilitee si j'invite
maintenant tous les membres du Conseil qui
desirent presenter des amendements a le faire
par ecrit avant notre prochaine reunion. Nous
aurons ainsi une idee plus exacte de la situation.
En attendant, j'invite les membres du Conseil a
discuter la resolution. Certains d'entre eux, tel
le representant de la Syrie, peuvent presenter
oralement les suggestions qu'ils ont sans aucun
doute a l'esprit, et qu'ils presenteront probablement par la suite sous forme d'amendements.
Il s'agit simplement de s'entendre pour savoir
si cette discussion se fera paragraphe par para-

It is merely a matter of convenience whether
this discussion is organized paragraph by para-

......

"

l'±UO

graph or whether' each member who speaks on graphe, ou si chacun des membres qui prendron
the resolution presents his views on the various la parole sur la resolution donnera son opinio
paragraphs. I think it may be slightly more con- sur les divers paragraphes. Je crois qu'il serai
'venient if we hear the views on th;..; paragraphs . sensiblement plus commode d'entendre exprime
separately. However, I do not think it makes les o~inions de chacun, paragraphe par paragraphe. Toutefois, je ne pense pas qu'il y ait
any great diff~rence.
une grande difference entre ces deux manieres
de proceder.
Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): It seems to me we
could gain time by going about it in a different
way. In following Mr. Gromyko's suggestion, if I
understand him correctly, we should be running
the risk of discuss~ng one thing and then voting
on another. We would be discussing the paragraph, then voting on it, and then we would
get the amendment and vote on it without discussing it.

M. L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit de I'anglais) :
11 me semble que nOU8 pourrions gagner du
temps en procedant d'une fa~on differente. En
adoptant la suggestion de M. Gromyko, si j'ai
bien compris son point de vue, nous risquerions
de discliter une chose et puis d'en voter une
autre. Nous discuterions le paragraphe, puis nous
le voterions; apres quoi, on nous presenterai.t un
amendement que nous mettrions aux voix sans
le discuter.

Today's meeting is about to close. These questions have been discussed at great length by the
different delegations. Such delegations as wish
to present amendments know quite' definitely
what they want to propose now. I think we
should gain time and have a more orderly discussion if we were to agree that for the next
meeting we should have in writing, as provided
for by the rules of procedure, the amendments
that are to be introduced by the different delegations. Then we could proceed to discuss these
proposals, in the light of the amendments suggested. That is the regular procedure.

La seance d'aujourd'hui va bientot se terminer. Les ~;~ ..ses delegations ont longuement
debattu ces questions. Les delegations qui
desirent presenter des amendements savent des
maintenant avec certitude ce qu'elles veulent
proposer. Nous gagnerions du temps, ce me
semble, et notre discussion s'organiserait mieux,
si nous decidions que, lors de la prochaine
seance, nous soient presentes par ecrit, comme
le prevoit le reglement interieur, les amendements qui doivent etre deposes par les diverses
delegations. Nous pourrions alors continuer la
discussion des propositions a la lumiere des
elements nouveaux apportes par ces amendements. C'est la procedure normale.

The PRESIDENT: I accept the proposal of the
representative of Colombia. The hour is late.
We have only some twenty minutes left for our
discussion today. I think it would be better to
adjourn now. I extend a general invitation to all
the representatives to present their amendments
in writing at the next meeting.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
J'accepte la suggestion du representant de la
Colombie. Il se fait tard. Il ne nous reste
qu'environ vingt minutes aujourd'hui. Je crois
qu'il vaudrait mieux lever la seance maintenant.
J'invite done tous les representants a deposer
leurs amendements par ecrit lors de la prochaine
seance.

As regards the schedule of meetings for next
week, I intend to put the Greek question on the
agenda of all the meetings until it is exhausted.
If it should be exhausted during the week, I
shall put the report of the Military Staff Committee on the agenda.

Quant au programme des seances pour la
semaine prochaine, j'ai l'intention d'inscrire la
question grecque, jusqu'a sonepuisement, a
l'ordre du jour de toutes les seances. Si nous enavons fini avec cette question au cours de la
semaine, j'inscrirai le rapport du Comite d'etatmajor a l'ordre du jour.

I propose to hold the next meetings of the
Security Council on Tuesday, both in the morning and in the afternoon. This will give the
members sufficient time to prepare their written
amendments. They- will have this afternoon,
Saturday and Monday in which to do so. We
shall hold one meeting on Wednesday afternoon
and two meetings on Thursday. That makes a
total of five meetings for next week. We do not
need to decide definitely now concerning the
latter part of the week. The essential point is
that there will be two meetings on Tuesday: one
at 10.30 a.m. and one at 3 p.m.

J e propose de tenir les prochaines seances du
Conseil de securite mardi, le matin et l'apresmidi. Cette date donnera aux representants
suffisamment de temps pour preparer leurs
amendements par ecrit. lIs auront cet apres-midi,
samedi et lundi pour le faire. Nous nous reunirons mercredi apres-midi -et a deux reprises jeudi.
Ce qui nous donne un total de cinq seances pour
la semaine prochaine. 11 est inutile quenous
fixions des maintenant le programme pour la fin
de la semaine. Le point essentie1 est que nous
tiendrons deux seances mardi, l'une a 10 h. 30
et l'autre a 15 heures.

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

La seance est levee a 12 h. 40.

-sAtES AGENTS OF UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONSEQ
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBUCATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Argentina-Argentine
Editorial Sudamericana

S. A.
AIsina 500
BUENOS AIREs

Australia-AustraUe
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.

Belgium-Belgique
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue du Persil
BRUXELLES

Bolivia-Bolivie
Librerla Cientifica y
Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 272

LA PAZ

Canada
The R yerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

ChiIe-Chili
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO
China~Chine

The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

Costa Rica-Costa-Rica
Trejos Hennanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE

Cuba
La Casa BeIga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA lIABANA

Czechoslovakia
T checoslovaquie
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

Denmark-Danemark
Einar Munskgaard
N6rregade 6
KJOBENHAVN

Dominican Republic
Republique Dominicaine
Libreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No~ 49
Apartado 656
CIUDAD TRUJILLO
Printed in the U.s.A.
7:-1;.:'0:,,":.[j

Ecuador-Equateur
Munoz Hennanos y Cia
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10-24
GUAYAQUIL

Egypt-Egypte
Librairie "La Renaissance
d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAIRO

Finland-Finlande
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

France
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue SoufHot
PARIS,

ve

Greece--Grece
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

Guatemala
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

Haiti-Haiti
Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale 111-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE

India-Inde
Oxford Book & Stationery
Co.
Scindia House
NEW DELHI

Iran
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

Iraq-Irak
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD

Lebanon-Liban
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH

Luxembourg
Librairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG

Netherlands-Pays-Bas
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
S'GRAVENHAGE
Price in the United States: 2a cents

New Zealand
N ouvetle-Zelande
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON

Norway-Norvege
Norsk Bokimport A/S
Edv. Stonns Gate 1
OSLO

Philippines
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN

Sweden-Suede
A.-B. C. E. Fritzes Kungl.
Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

Switzerland-Suisse
Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Ha:':1s Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I

Syria-Syrie
Librairie universelle
DAMAS

Turkey-Turquie
Librairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLw-IsTANBUL

Union of South Mrica
Union Sud-Africaine
Central News Agency Ltd.
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG, CAPETOWN~
DURBAN

United Kingdom
Royaume-Uni
H.M. Stationery Office
P.O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops at
LONDON, EDINBURGH,
MANCHESTER, CARDIFF,
BELFAST and BRISTOL

United States of America
Etats-Unis d'Ame·rique
International Documents
Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.

Yugoslavia-Yougoslavie
Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska Ul. 36
BEOGRAD
26 March 194t
