XIX
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITTEE
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES SANS RENVOI A UNE COMMISSION

183 (II). Utilization of the services of the
Secretariat

183 (II). Utilisation des services du
Secretariat

Paying a tribute to the impartiality and highmindedness shown by the Secretariat during the
first two years of its activities, and taking into consideration the interests of the strictest possible
budgetary economy,

Rendant hommage a l'impartialite et a l'elevation d'esprit dont a fait preuve le Secretariat au
cours des deux premicres annees de son activite,
et prenant en consideration d'autre part la neccssitc de realiser Jes economies budgetaires les
plus rigoureuses possible,

The General Assembly

/,' Assemblee generale

Draws the attention of the three Councils and
their Commissions, as well as of the Commissions
appointed by the Assembly itself, to the desirability of utilizing to the utmost the services of the
Secretariat, and
Recommends specifically to the respective organs of the United Nations to consider carefully,
before the creation of special commissions and
sub-committees, whether the task to be carried out
could not usefully be entrusted to the Secretariat.

Attire l'attention des trois Conseils et de leurs
Commissions, ainsi q ue des Commissions nommces par l' Assemblce elle-mcme, sur l'interet qu'il
y aurait a utiliser le plus possible Jes services du
Secretariat, et
Recommande tout particulierement aux divers
organes de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
d'examiner avec le plus grand soin, avant de creer
des commissions et des sous-commissions speciales,
si la tache a remplir ne pourrait etre utilement
confiee au Secretariat.

Ninety-seventh plenary meeting,
20 October 1947.

Quatre-vingt-dix-septieme seance pleniere,
le 20 octobre 1947.

184 (II). Place of meeting of the third
regular session of the General
Assembly
The General Assembly,

184 (II). Lieu de reunion de la troisieme
session ordinaire de I' Assemblee
generale
L'Assemblee generale,

Considering that, under the provisions of rule
5 of the provisional rules of procedure, the General Assembly may, in accordance with a decision
adopted at a previous session, or at the request of
the majority of the Members, be convened at a
place other than the United Nations Headquarters,

Considerant qu'aux termes de l'article 5 de son
reglement interieur provisoire, l' Assemblee generale peut, en vertu d'une decision prise au cours
d'une session anterieure OU a la demande de la
majorite des Membres de !'Organisation, etre convoquee en un autre lieu que celui du siege de l'Organisation,

Decides that the third regular session of the
General Assembly shall be held in Europe;

Decide que la troisicme session ordinaire de
I' Assemblee generale se tiendra en Europe;

Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with a committee of nine members designated by
the President of the General Assembly, to choose
the city where the third regular session of the
General Assembly shall be held.

Charge le Secretaire general, en consultation
avec un comite de neuf membres designes par le
President de I' Assemblee generale, de choisiJ la
ville OU se tiendra la troisieme scsmon ordinairc de
1' Assemblee generale.
Cent-quatorzieme seance pllniere,
le 15 novembre 1947.

Hundred and fourteenth plenary meeting,
15 November 1947.
At the hundred and fifteenth plenary meeting
of the General Assembly on 15 November 1947
the President announced the appointment of the
following nine Members to serve on the Committee to choose the eity where the third regular
session of the General Assembly was to be held:

Au cours de la cent-quinzieme seance pleniere
de l' Assemblee generale tenue le 15 novembre
1947, le President a annonce la nomination des
M embres suivants au Comite charge de choisir
la ville ou se tiendra la troisieme session ordinaire
de l' Assemblee generale:

AUSTRALIA, BYELORUSSIAN SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLIC, ETHIOPIA, INDIA, LEBAKON, Nr:TII-

AusTRALIE, REPUBLIQUE socIALISTE SOVIETIQUE DE BrELORUSSIE, ETIIIOPIE, INDE, LIBAN,

ERLANDS, NORWAY, PANAMA, AND URUGUAY.

, PAYS-BAs, NoRVEGE, PANAMA ET URUGUAY.

153
