Ill
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES SUR LES RAPPORTS DU BUREAU
104 (S-1 ). Audition de I'Agence iuive pour
la Palestine

104 (S-1 ). Hearing for the Jewish Agency
for Palestine

L'Assemblee generale

The General Assembly
Resolves:
1. That the First Committee grant a hearing
to the Jewish Agency for Palestine on the question before the Committee;
2. To send to that same Committee for its
decision those other communications of a similar
character from the Palestinian population which
have been received by the special session of the
General Assembly or may later be submitted
to it.
Seventy-fifth plenary meeting,
5 May 1947.

Decide:
1. Que la Premiere Commission entendra
l' Agence juive pour la Palestine sur la question
soumise a l' examen de la Commission;
2. De remettre a la decision de ladite Commission toutes autres communications de meme
nature emanant de la population de Palestine,
deja re~ues par l' ~mblee generale au cours
de la presente ses&on extraordinaire, ou qui
pourraient, par la suite, lui etre presentees.
Soixante-quin;:,ieme seance pleniere,
le 5 mai 1947.

105 (S-1>. Hearing for the Arab Higher
Committee
The General Assembly
Affirms:
That the decision of the First Committee to
grant a hearing to the Arab Higher Committee
gives a correct interpretation of the Assembly's
intention.
Seventy-sixth plenary meeting,
7 May 1947.

105 (S-1 ). Audition du Haut Comite arabe
L' Assemblee generale

Affirme:
Que la decision de la Premierc Commission
donnant au Haut Comite arabe !'occasion de sc
faire entendre interprete fidelement !'intention
de l' Assemblee.
Soixante-sei;:,ieme seance pleniere,
le 7 mai 1947.

IV
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES SUR LES RAPPORTS DE LA PREMIERE COMMISSION
106 (S-1 ). Special Committee on Palestine
Whereas the General Assembly of the United
Nations has been called into special session for
the purpose of constituting and instructing a
special committee to prepare for consideration
at the next regular session of the Assembly a
report on the question of Palestine,

The General Assembly
Resolves that:
1. A Special Committee be created for the
above-mentioned purpose consisting of the representatives of Australia, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Guatemala, India, Iran, Netherlands,
Peru, Sweden, Uruguay and Yugoslavia;

2. The Special Committee shall have the
widest powers to ascertain and record facts, fl.Ild
to investigate all questions and issues relevant to
the problem of Palestine;
3. The Special Committee shall determine its
own procedure;

106 (S-1>. Commission speciale pour la
Palestine
Considerant que l' Asscmblee generale des
Nations Unies a ete convoquee en session
extraordinaire afin de proceder a la constitution
et a la definition du mandat d'unc commission
speciale chargee de preparer et de soumettrc
a l'examen de la prochainc se~on ordinaire de
l' Assemblee generale un rapport sur la question
de la Palestine,
L' Assemblee generale
Decide ce qui suit:
1. Une Commission spcciale est creee a cct
effet; elle est composee des represcntants de
l' Australic, du Canada, de la Tchecoslovaquic,
du Guatemala, de l'Inde, de l'lran, des PaysBas, du Perou, de la Suede, de !'Uruguay et de
la Yougoslavie;
2. La Commission speciale disposera des pouvoirs les plus etendu§_ en vue de s'assurer des
faits et de les enregistrer, ainsi que d'cnqueter
sur toutes les questions et tous Jes problemcs
relatifs a la question palestinienne;
3. La Commi~ion speciale fix.era sa proprc
procedure;
6
