th

MEETING:

22 FEBRUARY

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.... , ,,. ,. ., ,., .. ..,... ... .. .. ... ... .

1

Adoption of the agenda , , , , . . . , , , , , . , , . , 4. . u. . . . . . . . . . . a. . . . . . . , . . , . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of
Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13801);
(b) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13802) . . . . . , . -. . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2199)

SIPV.2199

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofj%kd RPWIY~~ of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
c$ the Security Cowtcil.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

,

2199th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 22 February 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Nuseibeh
(Jordan) took a place at the Secwity Council table am/
Mr. Roa-Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Biutn (Israel), Mr. Eilali (Morocco),
Mr. Mansouri
(Syrian Arab Republic) rind Mr. Kornatina
(Yugoslavia) took the places reservd
fiw them at the side
of the Council chamber.

President:
Mr. Peter FLORIN
(German Democratic Republic).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretatiun frurn Russian):
I should also like to inform members of the Council
that I have received a letter from the Acting Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People dated 21 Februa,ry,
which reads as follows:

agenda (S/Agenda/2199)

I, Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 13801);
(b) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13802)

“I have the honour to request that, in connection
with the consideration of the item entitled ‘The
situation in the occupied Arab territories’, I be
invited to address the Council in my capacity as
Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
in accordance with the provisions of rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.”
3. On previous occasions, the Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other United Nations
bodies in connection with the consideration of matters
on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in this
matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation,
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to
the Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13801);
(b) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13302)

Ar rhe invitation of the President, Mr. Kane (Acting
Chairman
of the Cummittee
on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People) took the
place reserved for him ar the side of the Council
chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT (inrrrprsration
from Russian):
I have also received a letter dated 20 February [S/13813
and Corr.l]
from the representative of Tunisia, which
reads as follows:

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Cuba,
Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Morocco, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Yugoslavia in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
thoserepresentatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Provisional rules of procedure,

“I have the honour to request the Security Council to invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to participate in the consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in the
occupied Arab territories’, in accordance with the
Council’s usual practice.”
5. The proposal of the representative of Tunisia is
not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the pro1

visional rules of procedure, but, if approved by the
Council, the invitation to participate in the debate
would confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) the same rights of participation as those of a
Member State when invited to participate pursuant
to rule 37. Does any member of the Council wish to
speak on this proposal?

under the auspicesof the United Nations, on anequal
footing with other parties”.
The Philippines has since supported the participation
of the PLO in international conferences concerning
the Middle East held under the auspices of the United
Nations. We believe that the PLO, as the representative of the Palestinian people, should be allowed to
participate in the current deliberations in accordance
with previous decisions of the Council on this issue.

6. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): Once
again, the delegation of the United States wishes to
make clear that it has no objection to participation
by the Palestine Liberation Organization in the debate
in the Council on the situation in the occupied Arab
territories. However, we believe that the participation
of the PLO can be sustained only under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure and that, notwithstanding the recent past practice of the Council, there
is no basis for extending an invitation to the PLO as
if it were entitled to the rights of a Member State
participating in the work of the Council in accordance
with rule 37.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terzi (PitIestine Liberation
Organization)
took a place at rhc
Council table.

1I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russim):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 22 February [S//j8191
from the representative of Tunisia which reads as
follows:
“I have the honour to request the Security Council to invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud, permanent observer of the League of Arab States, to participate
in the consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories’, in accordance
with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure”.

7. For this reason, the United States requests that
the proposed invitation be put to a vote.
8. The PRESIDENT cinterpreralion from Russian):
If no other member of the Council wishes to speak at
this stage, I shall take it that the Council is ready to
vote on the proposal of Tunisia.

12. If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to that request.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

It was so decided.

In favour: Bangladesh, China, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Philippines,
Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia
Against:

13. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrorn
Russia?&
I should like also to inform the members of the Council
that I have received a letter dated 20 February [S/13824]
from the representative of Tunisia which reads as
follows:

United States of America

Absttrining:
France, Norway, Portugal, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The proposal
4 abstentions.

was adopted

“I have the honour to request the Security COURC~~
to invite Mr. Fahd Qawaswa, Mayor of Al-Khalil
(Hebron), to participate in the consideration of
the item entitled ‘The situation in the occupied Arab
territories’, in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.”

by 10 votes tu I, with

9. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines): Since this is the first
time that the Philippines has participated in a vote on
the issue before the Council, namely, whether or not
the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization should be allowed to participate in the debate
on a matter which we believe is relevant to the situation in the Middle East, my delegation has decided to
explain its vote,

14. If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to that request.
It was so decided.

10. The affirmative vote we have just cast is consistent with the position taken by the Philippines in
support of General Assembly resolutions 321O(XXIX),
3236 (XXIX), 3375 (XXX) and 33/28 A. In paragraph 3
of resolution 33/28 A, the Assembly, inter alia, invited
the PLO

15. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Rctssi~W:
The Council is meeting today in response to the request
made by the representative of Jordan in his letter
[,S//3801] dated 15 February to the President of the
Council and the request made on behalf of the members
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference in Ihe
letter [S/13802] dated 15February from the representative of Morocco in his capacity as Chairman of thP:
Islamic Group.

“to participate . . . in all efforts, deliberations and
conferences on the Middle East which are held

16. The members of the Council also have before
them the report of the Security Council Commission
3

established under resolution 446 (1979). That report is
contained in document S/13679. I should also like to
draw the attention of the members of the Council to
the following documents: document S/l381 1, which
contains the text of a letter dated 20 F&wary from the
Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to the
President of the Council; and document S/13815,which
contains the text of a letter dated 22 February from the
representative of Morocco to the President of the
Council.

23. A1tbough that did not prevent the Commission
from carrying out its task, it did make efforts-which
it had hoped would not be fruitless-to obtain this cooperation and thereby put an end to Israel’s selfinflicted isolation from the Commission’s work and,
which is even more serious, from the Council’s decisions. We made those efforts becauseit was our duty
to do so, despite the initial, and negative attitude
immediately adopted by Israel when the Commission
was establishedand throughout the initial stagesof its
activities.

17. The first speaker is the representative of Portugal,
in his capacity as Chairman of the Security Council
Commission established under resolution 446 (1979).

24. Convinced as we are of the benefits and the value
of dialogue and of working together and of the need
to try to reconcile differing points of view, in conformity with the purposesandprinciples ofthe Charter,
on which our work was based, we should have liked
to reproduce in the report the views, clarifications
and commentsprovided by the Government of Israel,
which would have enabled us to place them in the
context of the other information in our hands.

18. Mr. MATHIAS (Portugal) (interpretarion from
Frellch): As Chairman of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979), I have
the honour to present to the Council the Commission’s
second report [S/13679], prepared pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 452 (1979).

25. Imel’S failure to co-operatewith the Commission
and what that failure represents for the Council and,
more broadly speaking, for the general evolution of
the situation that we had to consider indicates how
g1oomy are the prospects for a rapid and peaceful
solution of the problem posed by the Israeli presence
in the occupied territories. We shall revert to that
later, but should now like to stress the degree of
Israel’s responsibility in the matter, responsibility
that we deeply deplore.

19, As the Commission stressesin its letter of transmittal, it is our hope that we have fulfilled our mandate
to the satisfaction of the Council, and we wish to
express our appreciation for the confidence shown by
the Council in designating our respective delegations
to be members of the Commission,
20. For its part, the Portuguese delegation agreed
to participate in the Commission because it desired
-and still does--to contribute to any efforts it might
be asked to make in the search for peaceful solutions
to conflicts, as our Organization conceives of and
carries out that search.

26. The restraint, senseof balance and constructive
spirit shown by the Commissionand reflected in resolution 452(1979),which was adopted in an encouraging
manner by 14 of the 15 members of the Council,
once again prevailed. But, once again, they met with
no positive responseon Israel’s part. That fact should
not be consideredin isolation. It was not a mereformal
position which had been adopted; it was not just a
determination not to co-operate with the Commission
and the Council, no matter how worthy of condemnation that might be. In the course of our work we noted
that, with regard to the substance of the problem,
the appealthat we madeto the Government of Israel to
cease establishing, building and planning settlements
in the territories it has occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem,
had been ignored-as was our concern
regarding the disastrousconsequencesof a contlnuation of that policy on any attempt to establish a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East.

21. We wish to express again today our gratitude to
the delegations of Bolivia and Zambia for their exemplary co-operation with us in the fulfilment of our
task. The experience and knowledge of the members
of those delegations were very valuable to us. I should
also thank the members of the Secretariat for their
work. They once again demonstrated their devotion
and their competence,
22. The second report which the Commission is submitting to the Council for its consideration was drawn
up, for the most part, along the same lines as the first
report [S/13450 and Add.1 of 12 July 19791. That is
to say that we have striven to present, with the greatest
possible objectivity and exactness, elements of information and judgement that could enable the Council
to take the appropriate decisions on the questions
raised by our mandate. Thus, the Commission once
again endeavoured to establish contact with all the
interested parties, its major concern being to collect
information reflecting all the points of view as fully
as possible. And SO we obtained the information
required for the drafting of our report from several
sources. But we were again confronted by Israel’s
refusal to co-operate with us in any way.

27. We have therefore been able to confirm in this
second report the information that we had already
placed before the Council and to stress the gravity of
this stubborn declared policy of establishing settlements, expanding those which already exist and
planning
further settlementsover the long term. That
policy
and the measuresto carry it out which the Israeli
Government constantly takesand which are mentioned
in our report, its influence on the local Arab and
3

bers of the Security Council our sincere thanks for the
opportunity that has been given.me to speak before
this body in my capacity as Chairman of the Islamic
Group.

Palestinian population, and the changes of all kinds
that it produces in the territories, including those
affecting natural resources, have all contributed to a
dangerous deterioration of a situation already charged
with tension and are, in the opinion of the Commission,
incompatible with a search for peace in the area.

33. I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February and
to wish you every success in carrying out your im
portant task. I am particularly gratified that the
presidency of the Council is now occupied by a
country with which Morocco has friendly relations.

28. As we describe this situation once again, we
cannot fail to recall, in addition to the eloquent facts
and figures given in our reports, a whole pattern of
hardship and despair which we encountered during our
mission in the Middle East, especially in the midst of
the populations-victims of exodus and forced exilk.
But we also recall other images: the determination
and will not to accept as permanent conditions that
were felt to be profoundly unjust. Time will not solve
the problem. The ever-present source of conflicts has
brought with it the hardships and grief that were to be
expected. That situation requires of the men and
peoples in the Middle East a courageous political vision
and a keen awareness of the urgent need to bring about
a just and peaceful solution of the great challenges
which are before them.

34. I should also like to express our appreciation for
the speed with which you acted on the letter that
I addressed to you on 15 February, in my capacity
as Chairman of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, requesting that a meeting of the Council be
convened.
35. We have just heard the representative of Portugal
introduce the second report of the Commission established under Security Council resolution 446 (1979)
to examine the situation relating to settlements in the
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem.

29. That is why, notwithstanding the difficulties and
obstacles which the Commission encountered in
carrying out its mandate and Israel’s failure to respond
to the appeals already made, we believe it is still not
too late to revert to the question in the same spirit; and
so, in this report, we make the same recommendations,
by and large, as those we made last year. We wish to
continue to believe that it is possible for reason and
common senseto prevail. That, in the ultimate analysis,
is the message which we bring to the Council.

36. We should like to pay a tribute to the Chairman
and the other members of that Commission, the representatives of Portugal, Bolivia and Zambia, for the
exemplary manner in which they have discharged the
mandate that was entrusted to them by the Council.
Its sense of responsibility and its sincere desire to
assist in enlightening the Council objectively about the
situation prompted the Commission to get in touch
with anyone who could help it in its mission. Unfortunately, once again, we have seen this determination
encounter a negative attitude on the part of Israel,
which has refused any kind of co-operation with the
Commission. This attitude does not surprise the international community, since it is that taken by Israel in
connection with any international commission
entrusted with inquiring into Israeli practices in the
occupied Arab territories. Nevertheless, it is an open
challenge to the Security Council and its essential task
of preserving international peace and security.

30. The report contains in an annex communications received by the Commission relating specifically
to the spiritual and cultural aspects of Jerusalem, a
centre for propagation of the faith of the three gretit
monotheistic world religions. Bearing in mind the need
to safeguard the pluralistic and religious nature of the
Holy City, the Commission tried to obtain the views of
the dignitaries of those religions. Freedom of access
to the Holy Places, to our way of thinking, goes hand
in hand with guarantees permitting the communities
of the faithful who live there fully to carry out their
spiritual and cultural activities. We have already
expressed the hope that the Holy City may have a
status that will guarantee fraternal dialogue among
men, peoples and religions. Once again we would
reiterate that hope.
3 1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation front Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Morocco,
who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as
Chairman of the Islamic Group at the United Nations,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

37. Section C of chapter I of the report shows clearly
that, since the presentation of the first report of the
Commission in July 1979,no change has been discerned
in Israel’s policy regarding the building and the
planning of settlements in the occupied Arab territories. Quite to the contrary, the Israeli occupation
authorities have pursued that policy obstinately and
relentlessly in utter contempt of all the decisions and
resolutions of the Security Council, particularly its
resolution 446 (1979), in paragraph 3, of which the
Security Council

32. Mr. FILALI (Morocco) (interpretation
from
On behalf of my delegation, I wish first of all
to extend to you, Mr. President, and the other mem-

“Calls once more upon Israel, as the occupying
Power, to abide scrupulously by the Geneva Convention, relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons

French):

4

in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ to rescind its
previous measures and to desist from taking any
action which would result in changing the legal
status and geographical nature and materially
affecting the demographic composition of the Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem,
and, in particular, not to transfer parts of its own
civilian population into the occupied Arab territories”.

Great Mosque of Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi in Al-Khalil
(Hebron).
43. My country, which had the honour to play host
to,the First Islamic Summit Conference in 1969and to
the Tenth Conference in 1979, is profoundly against
the Israeli policy of Judaization of the Holy Places of
Islam in the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories.
It strongly denounces the continual Israeli measures of
annexation and Judaization undertaken in the city of
Al-Quds (Jerusalem), as well as the repeated violations
against the Holy Mosques of Al-Aqsa and Al-Haram
Al-Ibrahimi and the other Holy Places in Palestine.
It should be recalled that the Islamic Conference,
speaking on behalf of the hundreds of millions of
Moslem believers, at its sixth session held in Fez
condemned these criminal acts and proclaimed the
year 1400 of the Hegira, which corresponds to 1980,
as the Year of Al-Quds (Jerusalem).

38. Further Arab private lands totalling 40,000
dunums have been confiscated in recent months in
order to allow for the expansion of the settlements
in the West Bank. In September and October 1979
decisionswere adopted by the Israeli Cabinet allowing
Israelis to acquire lands in the occupied areas of the
West Bank and Gaza and encouraging the expansion
of seven settlements situated on the West Bank. The
implementation of the plan established by the World
Zionist Organization, which is designed to establish
46 new settlements between 1979 and 1983, is under
way. The occupation authorities are proceeding to
divert four fifths of the total annual volume of water
available to the West Bank for the use of the Israeli
population and the settlements.

44. Furthermore, the entire international community
has continually expressed its indignation at these
violations of international rules. Both this universal
Organization-the United Nations-and regional intergovernmental organizations have condemned Israeli
practices in occupied Arab and Palestinian territories.
They have frequently reaffirmed that all the steps
taken by Israel to alter the physical nature, demographic composition, institutional organization or
status of the occupied Arab territories or any part
thereof, including Jerusalem, are null and void.

39, Those facts which have been reported by the
Commission and which are based on information from
Israeli sources or which have been broadly disseminated by the media confirm our conviction that
the policy of colonization, far from being that of small
groupsof fanatics, is definitely official policy for which
the Israeli Government is responsible.

45. Scarcely a week ago the Commission on Human
Rights, at present in session in Geneva, adopted a
resolution2 whereby it stated that the flagrant violations
by Israel of’the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949’
were war crimes and an insult to mankind.

40. The policy of settlements is but one of the pillars
on which Israeli strategy is based, that strategy whose
objective is the annexation of a large part of the
occupiedArab territories, particularly the West Bank
of the Jordan. That policy is accompanied by other
ill treatment meted out to the Arab and Palestinian
population in those territories. Arrests, expulsions,
deportations, displacements and transfers of that
population have unfortunately become almost daily
practice. The Israeli authorities have resorted to any
meansto force that population to leave the area and to
modify the juridical status, geographical nature and
demographic composition of the territories they
occupy.

46. The policy obstinately pursued by Israel despite
all the appeals and decisions of the Council can only
lead to a further deterioration of the situation in the
Arab and Palestinian territories. That policy is a
dangerous provocation of the Islamic community as a
whole.
47. The members of the Council will fully appreciate
the indignation which is daily felt by hundreds of
millions of Moslems at the attacks against their Holy
Places and the continued Israeli occupation. That is
why the Moslem world is appealing to the Council
speedily to put an end to this grave situation and to
take effective steps to prevent Israel from continuing
to violate the rules of international law and wounding
the dignity and the most noble sentiments of Moslems
throughout the world. The Islamic world remains
convinced that this policy is an obstacle to any serious
search for a just and lasting solution to the problem of
the Middle East and, more particularly, to the
Palestinian problem. The Moslem world reaffirms
once again its unshakable solidarity with the Palestinian
people in its heroic struggle under the leadership of
its sole legitimate representative, the Palestine Libera-

41. That policy of altering the nature of the occupied
Arab territories does not end with the destruction of
property; with the force of hatred, it also strikes at
the very roots of the identity of the Palestinian and
Arab population.
42. The world will never forget the acts of desecration which are being visited upon the Holy Places of
Islam in these territories. It will never forget the
major fire in 1969 in the Al-Aqsa Holy Mosque in AlQuds (Jerusalem), just as it will never forget the acts
of desecration which since the beginning of thib
month have occurred in that Moslem Holy Place, the
5

.

Organization. It remains convinced that the
solution to these problems is to be found in the withdrawal by Israel from all the occupied Arab territories
and the recovery by the Palestinian people of its inalienable national rights, including the right to establish
its own national and sovereign State.

expressing an a priori rejection of its findings. That
should hardly be surprising to anyone, as it comes
from an aggressor fearful of being caught red-handed
in his self-declared policy of devouring the occupied
lands, of obliterating the remnants of the Palestinian
people and of rebuffing any intercessor, whether
individual or collective, friend or adversary.

tion

48. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan, on
whom I now call.

53. Israel’s Ambassador-designate to Egypt and a
top confidant of Menachem Begin, a mere week ago
on 15 February, echoing his master’s voice, publicly
denounced the United States Government for its
appeals to Israel to curb Jewish settlements in the
occupied territories. “I deny any right to any foreign
Power to intervene in our policy of settlement”,
declared Ben Elissar at a news conference. That henchman of Begin called the right of settlement “a basic
inherent right that is denied only by those who want to
see us back to the lines of 1967”.

49. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): Mr. President, as this
is the first time I have had occasion to address the
Council this month, I have the distinct pleasure of
extending to you, Mr. Peter Florin, and to your
esteemed country, the German Democratic Republic, my most sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of February and of wishing you every success in your
high office. I am confident that your seasoned and
highly skilled diplomacy give every assurance of such
success.

54. That notorious expansionist has evidently never
heard of Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338(1973),
which mandate Israeli withdrawal from the occupied
territories and categorically reject the acquisition of
territory by force. As to what are in his opinion
irrelevancies such as international law, the elementary
dictates of justice and the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949 and the equally unequivocal prohibition of the
transfer of the civilian population of the occupier to
the occupied territories, the Israelis regard them as
applicable to all the other nations of the world but not
to themselves-for, God forbid that their rapacious
appetite for expansion should be subject to international review and rebuke by the international community’s laws, human or divine. But then, one wonders
why should they perjure themselves by acceding to
those conventions, decisions and norms in the first
place, only to renege on and defy them?

50. I should also wish to take this opportunity to
express deep appreciation to your distinguished
predecessor, Mr. Jacques Leprette of France, for his
exemplary presidency of the Council during the month
of January, which was fraught with crucial and delicate
issues, which he handled with his usual prudence and
wisdom.
51, It has been almost a year since my Government,
appalled by the colossal magnitude of Israeli colonization of the West Bank, including Jerusalem and other
Palestinian and Arab territories, presented an urgent
complaint to the Council. Profoundly alarmed by the
disastrous and well-nigh irretrievable consequences
of the Israeli occupiers’ heedless, relentless and
audaciously illegal policy of ongoing mutilation of the
occupied territories and their people for the very
survival of the Palestinian people in their homeland
and hence for the prospects of a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East, Jordan requested
that decisive and prompt measures be taken to stop
the haemorrhage. The Council adopted resolution 446
(1979), establishing a Commission on 22 March 1979,
whose mandate was “to examine the situation relating
to settlements in the Arab territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusafem”.

55. Pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 452 (1979),
the Commission submitted its second report to the
Council [S/13679]. The Council had requested the
Commission, in view of the magnitude of the problem
of settlements, to keep under close survey the implementation of the previous resolution and to report
back its findings on Israel’s compliance therewith.
Not only did Israel persist in refusing to extend any
co-operation to the Commission; far more ominously,
the Israeli occu@iersresponded by an unprecedented
and staggering acceleration of their colonization of the
occupied lands. There is not an area, location, region,
town or city that has been spared, It is in fulfilment
of the Begin Government’s atrocious decision that
all the lands of the occupied West Bank, including
Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights are
up for grabs by the Israeli aggressors. It is an assertion on the ground of Begin’s interpretation of the
categorically rejected and farcical self-rule plan that,
anathema as it is, it applies only to the existing and
substantially shrunken remnants of the inhabitants of
the occupied territories and does not recognize to
those Palestinians any rights of possession in those

52. In accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution 446 (1979), the Commission submitted its first
report on 12 July 1979, after an intensive study of the
situation in the area. The culpable party against which
the complaint had been made and whose criminal
aggression against the Palestinian and Arab peoples
posed a present, continuing and grave danger, not only
to international law and elementary justice but, in
equal measure, to international peace and security,
refused even to accord the Commission permission to
enter the occupied territories, let alone to concede to
the Council any jurisdiction in the matter, while
6

lands which the Israelis regard as their own and which
they are determined to keep as such. As for the existing
inhabitants whom they regard as stateless residents,
they can, subject to the whim and will of the occupiers,
live out the rest of their lives until the natural process
of mortal attrition runs its course,

reported for April 1979. The colonizers are housed in
87 illegal settlements, of which 18 are in or around
Jerusalem, 22 in the Jordan Valley, and the rest
entrenched in every corner and location throughout
the length and breadth of the occupied West Bank,
including cities, towns and villages.

56. I wish to rebut, in passing, the Israeli claim that
they will henceforth confiscate and colonize what they
call State domains, even though this claim has been
more conspicuous in its breach than in its observance.
To begin with, it is estimated that 90 per cent of the
lands already seized are privately owned. Second!y,
as I have stated on previous occasions, the term
“State domain” is a misnomer. The authentic name is
“public domain”, the land being the communal
possession of the inhabitants in each particular area
and was meticulously recognized and delineated as
such during the British Mandate. Furthermore,
Israel deliberately falsified the difference in legal
status between the “mid lands” and the “public
domain” lands.

60. Only a month ago the people of Jerusalem were
watching Israeli bulldozers opening 30-metre-wide
roads for a town that is being built at the last relatively
open entrance to Jerusalem from the east, adjacent
to and on considerable lands confiscated from the
villagers of El-Azariyeh overlooking Bethany and a
few kilometres from the centre of Arab Jerusalem.
The construction of this town, Ma’ale Adomin,
completes the closing of the ring around Arab
Jerusalem, already cut off from the rest of the world
by massive Israeli colonization in the north up to
Ramallah, from the south up to the town of
Bethlehem, and to the west by Israel’s usurpation of
the Palestinian two thirds of West Jerusalem in 1947
and 1948, cutting it off from the Mediterranean Sea,
and a long stretch of Israeli colonization along the
western mountain ranges all the way from Bethlehem
to Ramallah.

57. The miri lands have over the centuries been
individually owned by village and town dwellers,
but were treated differently in terms of tax rates. These
constitute 1.03 million dunums out of the total area
of the tiny West Bank, a mere 5,500,OOOdunums,
the equivalent of roughly 3,400 square miles. These
are usurped by the Israelis and begrudged to the close
to 4 million Palestinian people as a homeland-less
than 1 per cent of the area of Alaska, 40 per cent of
which-I believe 40 million acres-has recently been
declared an environmental recreational reserve, off
bounds to habitation. But assuming that the miri lands
are not miri lands and the public domains are State
domains because the land survey department has not
completed the apportionment of these communal
lands, under what private or international law does
the Israeli occupation claim any entitlement to them,
other than by conquest and the acquisition of territory
by force, which are both illegal, null, void and invalid ?

61, The construction of the new township is of course
hardly fresh news, Under the headline “The land that
money cannot buy”, on 17 September 1979 The
Christian Science Monitor published a report on what
was happening elsewhere in the vicinity of the approaches to East Jerusalem, the village of Anata.
Abdul Salam Salameh, the head man of the village,
stumbles over an Israeli military fence on what was
his land: “They could give me a million dollars,”
he snaps, “and I would throw it back in their faces.
I want my land back.”
62. I might here read to the Council a dispatch from
the correspondent of The Washington Post foreign
service of 13 August. He writes as follows:

58. It had been established by the Council that by
the spring of last year the Israeli occupation had confiscated 27.1 per cent of the occupied West Bank,
including Jerusalem. In the intervening year the floodgates have burst under pressure of a devastating and
uncontrollable avalanche of colonization. Subsequent
to resolutions 446 (1979) and 452 (1979), during the
period from April to October 1979 alone, Israel confiscated an additional 230,000 dunums of Arab lands,
thus increasing the total area seized to 1,730,OOO
dunums--a dunum is 1,000 square metres-which
accounts for about 31.4 per cent of the total area of
the West Bank. Thus, in a period of only six months,
the total area seized increased by 15 per cent.
59, Although no exact data exist for the total number
Of Israeli colonizers, in Israel’s ever-accelerating
expansion and usurpation the total number of settlers
has significantly increased beyond the 91,000 figure

“Jerusalem, going ochre in the sunlight, lies just
over the next hill, on the other side of Bethany, a
short drive away.
“Down the slope of this rocky mound in the
opposite direction is an Israeli army camp, part of
the military forces that have occupied the West
Bank since Israel conquered it in the 1967 Middle
East war.
“Here at the top are the first signs of construction
if a settlement” -actually it is a town--“dedicated
recently by Israeli Housing Minister David Levy.
It will be another link in a chain of Jewish settlements designed to surround Jerusalem and bind it
for ever to the State of Israel.
“Ma’ale Adomin looks barren, dry and worthless
to a visitor. But it has a special significance in that
chain-it will provide a strong Jewish presence on

7

No. 2, in the mountain city of Nablus. Mr. Sakhr
Abu Ayyash, speaking for the dispossessed
villagers of Beit Umar, declared: ‘At the time when
we have been demanding the removal of the earlier
settlement, Migdal Oz on our land, we find ourselves faced with the construction of yet another
one.’ ”

the last major approach to Jerusalem that still retains
a primarily Arab character, the road east to Jericho
and on toward Jordan.
“Perhaps for these reasons, the Israeli Government invited the public to attend the little ceremony
in which Levy laid the corner-stone. About
J,OOOpersons attended and heard him proclaim:
‘There will no longer be a line between what we
had before the Six-Day-War of 1967 and what we
have in these days of redemption.’

64. On 14 February of this year the occupation
authorities confiscated an additional 1,000dunums of
land belonging to the village of Abboud, to the north
east of Ramallah, in order to build a new settlement
to be named Levota. This is equidistant from the north
and the south to ensure that the inimical andubiquitous
colonization is fairly equally shared.

“Another Israeli Government official explained
further, ‘We are putting the settlements all around
Jerusalem so there will never be any question of
whether it is part of Israel.’

65. What I have mentioned is the typical achievement
of a week or two. I apologize for having given random
examples that have occurred during the past two
weeks, but I have done so because this is our daily
bread, these reports on colonization which arrive
regularly and they take time to tabulate in a total
picture, even though we have such tabulations from
March 1979 up to January 1980.

“To the north of Jerusalem, just south west of
Ramallah, the Givon settlement has been built and
plans have been drawn up for three nearby settlements in the same Givon bloc commanding the road
to Ramallah. Just north of Ramallah lie the four
settlements of the Beit El bloc commanding the road
north from Ramallah toward Nablus.
“To the south of Jerusalem, just south west of
Bethlehem at points commanding the road to
Hebron, the Israelis have built half a dozen settlements and have started preliminary work on another
at Efrat. The communities are part of the Etzion
settlement bloc scheduled to expand on both sides
of the road within five years.

66. The total picture we have is gruesome indeed,
the more so as it is part and parcel of an over-all
and inexorable process that is spelled out not only in
our reports but in a notorious official Israeli document
which has the approval of Begin and his racist regime.
Furthermore it is being systematically implemented
on the ground literally as laid down on paper. It is
known as the “Master plan for the development of
settlement in Judaea and Samaria” [see S/13582 of
22 October 19791 and was written by Matityahu
Drobles; it covers the period from 1979 to 1983. That
colonization plan was issued by the Department for
Rural Settlements of the World Zionist Organization
in a triangular arrangement that also includes the
Israeli entity and the Jewish Agency and over the life
span of the plan determines the establishment of
46 new settlements to be inhabited by 16,000 families.
The cost of the plan is 32 billion Israeli pounds-that
is, in excess of $2.5 billion. Furthermore, the plan
includes the thickening of 38 existing settlements as
well as those under construction, at a cost of another
22 billion Israeli pounds. Altogether, the plan calls for
an additional 27,000 families by the end of 1983, at a
cost of 54 billion Israeli pounds. The average cost of
settling a family is 2 million Israeli pounds. These
expenditures and settlements are designed as an initial
step in a much more massive colonization of the
densely populated highlands of the West Bank. They
are not part of the other 20-year plan that is at present
under implementation for the period from 1975 to 1995
in the Jordan Valley. Even though the Israeli occupation authorities have already seized 80 to 90 per cent
of the Jordan Valley, they have intensified a colonization plan to encircle the remnant still in Palestinian
hands, and particularly around the historic city of
Jericho, by six new colonies. They will be named
Ni’mah A; Ni’mah B, Ni’mah C-those racists seem

“To the West is Israeli territory within the pre1967 boundaries. And now, with Ma’ale Adomin
to the east, the encirclement is complete, putting
an Israeli imprint on land all around the Holy
City.”
63. Numerous other farmers and city dwellers face
the same ordeal on an almost daily basis. At the
expense of maintaining a chronological sequence of
colonization and just to give random examples, I shall
quote two reports of an Israeli colonization running
beserk. The first, which the Mission received in the
latest pouch, dated 11 February 1980, a mere 10 days
ago, reads:
“The Israeli occupation authorities have confiscated 2,500 dunums of land belonging to the two
Arab villages of Al-Khader and Beit Umar, to the
east of the Bethlehem road near Wadi Al-Bayyar.
Two days earlier, the occupation authorities celebrated the laying down of the corner-stone for a new
town to be named Efrat on the lands of the two
villages. The new town, located between occupied
Jerusalem and the Kfar Etzion complex, will consist
of 5,000 housing units. New Jewish citizens from
New York and South Africa will be settled in this
town.
“To the north of the West Bank, the corner-stone
will be laid for the construction of Qarney-Shomron
8

I
..--

be running out ofnames-and also A]-Meg
B, Beit
Ha’reh and Matzbeh Yerihu B-Arihah is Jericho’s
Arabic name. It is established that in January
1979
the Israeli aggressors had built a colony named Ni’mah
to the north of Jericho and the big Palestinian village
of Uoja.

security rather than the seizureof the lands of hapless
farmers, lands which,provide their sole means of livelihood.

to

71. Thirdly, the disposition of the proposed settlements would take the form of interrelated and
integrated blocs or community settlements and in
the course of time they would be turned into urban
centres.

67. This is the pattern of and motivation behind
the encirclement of every city, town and village cornPhx throughout the whole of the West Bank, as well
as their vivisection by the establishment of settlements between them, as we shall see from a brief
analysis of the Drobles master plan. It is regrettable
that the Commission did not include in its second
report
a verbatim reproduction of the Drobles report
and the attached list and map of new settlements to
be established or already established, for the plan is
the official plan of the Israeli Government, almost its
bible, and it would be highly enlightening to the
Council to know what is happening or what is in the
offing in Israel’s cannibalization of the remnants of
the Palestinian people in the remnants of their Palestinian homeland. The Jordanian Mission has therefore found it necessary to include copies of the master
plan in the files that we have placed at the disposal
of the members of the Council and, in view of its
extreme importance and gravity, I respectfully request
that it be circulated as an offtcial document of the
Council. Its publication would also spare the Council
the piecemeal surprises that are sprung upon us by the
enterprising dispatches from occupied Arab Jerusalem
and often published in the press. We are not competing
with the media, but it feels good to know what we
would eventually come to learn from our own sources
and guidelines.

72. Fourthly-and I wish to underline this pointthe plan statesthat the settlementsmust be established
not only around what it describesas the settlements
of the minorities-meaning the Palestinians-but also
in between them, this in accordance with the settlement policy adopted in Galilee. This has prompted an
outside observer’s comment that if this is the way
Israel looks at those who, according to law, are its
citizens,can anyonewonder at the manner in which the
military government is treating the population in the
occupied territories?
73. I should mention here that the Israeli usurpers
have confiscated since 1948at least 90 per cent of the
lands of the Palestinianswhom they regard as citizens
of Israel, and even that monumental feat has fallen
far short of the expectations of Koenig, the district
commissioner, who suggestedeven greater confiscations in order to impel the Palestiniansto leave. It has
also evoked a United Statescorrespondent’s comment
that even now, when the Palestinian Arabs are still
the overwhelming majority in the West Bank, the
Israeli plan describesthem as the minority.
74. In paragraph 50 of the Commission’s second
report there is a reference to a decision unanimously
adopted by the Israeli Cabinet on 16 September
allowing Israeli citizens to purchase land in the
occupied West Bank and Gaza, thus rescinding a
previous decision to the contrary. Quite apart from
that decision’s being in violation of international law
and conventions, the inhabitants are inexorably
opposed to any alienation of their lands, even if all the
gold of the world were offered for them.

68. It is pertinent to highlight a number of significant
components in the Israeli entity’s official policy Of
colonization as spelt out in the master plan.
69. First, the plan is regarded by the Israelis themselves as just one further step towards taking over the
whole of the occupied territories, including Jerusalem,
which has suffered most by the total encirclement and
massive colonization. Evidently, and as the Plan
clearly states, after the initial master plan and at the
centre of its examination stands a comprehensive and
systematic land survey that is still going on. “When
the survey is completed, the plan adds, it is probable
that we will be able to plan the disposition of settlements additional to those proposed” in the master
plan.

75. With regard to the close to 30,000 dunums
appropriated by the military authorities from ElAzariyeh village in 1975, and upon which the Israeli
occupiers are at present going aheadat full speed with
the building of the town of Ma’ale Adomin in order to
complete encirclement of Arab Jerusalem, Mr. Rashid
Hijazi, who had bought parts of that land in 1963
before the occupation, told the Washington Post
reporter:

70. Secondly, settlement throughout the land of
Israel-and this, according to the Zionist aggressorsy
includes the occupied territories-is for security Fnd
“I will not sell the land. I have been trying to get
by right. “‘A strip of settlements at strategic sttes
a permit to build on it, but they told us all building
enhances” ) the plan says, “both internal and eXted
permits for that area were closed off.”
security alike, as well as making concrete and realizing
our right to Eretz Ysrael,” One would have thought
that the stockpile and arsenal of the several dozen He only learnt of the expropriation when he saw
nuclear bombs would have given the Israelis adequate bulldozers scraping out the accessa few months ago.
9

processes of law. However, the Israeli occupiers
imposed a 23-hour curfew, for 11 days and nights on
end, on the inhabitants of a whole city-men, women
and children-subjecting them to grave hardships. The
Israelis went on a rampage. Large contingents of
Israeli troops subjected the inhabitants to ruthless,
systematic and abusive searches, including indiscriminate break-ins into the homes of hapless civilians, physical assaultsand the destruction of furniture
and other belongings. The city of Al-Khalil was
sealed off and barriers were erected on roads leading
into and out of the city, thus disrupting all communications and isolating Hebron from the rest of the world,
so that, with the population forbidden to visit the East
Bank, their perishable fruits and vegetables were left
to rot.

76. It is unnecessary to reiterate that, in addition to
their massive expropriation of lands, the Israelis have
seized five sixths of the water resources of the West
Bank for exploitation both in the Israeli settlements
and in the illegally expanded Israel of 1947-1948.As
the Commission reports, Israel is pumping away some
500 million cubic metres by means of artesian wells.
The file distributed to the members of the Commission
includes a study made by a qualified hydrologist which
describes the magnitude of Israel’s plundering of the
water resources of the West Bank, so as to choke the
inhabitants and to reduce their treasured lands to
waste, The farmers are currently resorting to watersaving techniques to remain afloat, if that is possible.
77. The difference between Israeli extremists and
moderates is that the former are bent on total annexation, while the latter prefer that sections of what would
remain of the West Bank, with its heavily concentrated
Arab populations, be excluded from Israel’s final
borders-not out of charity, but in order to, avoid
serious internal problems for the racist Jewish State.
They prefer to keep that population essentially stateless, as a source of underpaid labour, under Jordanian
or local civil administration and Israeli military control.
78. That is the crux of the Israeli vision of self-rule.
“How much longer is the world wiiling to endure such
wanton cruelty?“, asked a thinker known throughout
the world.

81. The Moslem inhabitants were prohibited from
performing their Friday prayers in the Holy Sanctuary
of the Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi mosque, one of the
holiest and oldest Islamic places of worship in occupied
Palestine. This is where I should mention that not
since the Middle Ages has a place of worship belonging
to one religious affiliation been converted into a place
of worship for another. For the Ibrahimi holy sanctuary, and especially the spacious main hall of the
mosque, has to all intents and purposes been converted
into a synagogue, in violation of its centuries-old
status. The mosque was built by the Palestinian Arabs
a thousand years ago.

79. The members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference held an emergency meeting a week ago to
discuss the ominous situation which had arisen in the
city of Al-Khalil (Hebron) on 31 January Iast. We
have just heard the Chairman of the Islamic Group
telling the Council of the ominous situation there.
An urgent meeting of the Council was requested to
deliberate on the dangerous situation which had
arisen in consequence of the brutal punitive measures
which the Israeli forces of occupation, in close collaboration with the racist, fanatical and illegal Israeli
colonizers in the vicinity of that city, and particularly
the armed colonizers of Kiryat Arba, infamous for
their blind hatred and crimes, had perpetrated for
years and continue to perpetrate against the unarmed
and hard-working SO,000inhabitants of that Palestinian
city. Their despicable behaviour has been in flagrant
violation of the most fundamental human rights and
the universally recognized principles of decent
behaviour.

82. Aggravating this provocative behaviour, the
Israelis encouraged the colonizers-notwithstanding
the curfew, because curfews apply only to the Palestinian inhabitants-to pray illegally at that Islamic
sanctuary. Those colonists engaged in widespread
stone-throwing at the homes of the confined inhabitants. One of the attackers fired a machine gun at the
population. Such collective punishment, though not
the first or the last, is reminiscent of the atrocious
practices associated with the Fascist occupiers of
Europe during the Second World War, of which the
Jews themselves were among the foremost victims.
The despicable behaviour of the Israeli occupation is
but a continuum of that dark era of racist, exclusivist
orientation. Even more ominous, as I have said, is the
taking over of the Ibrahimi holy sanctuary, which the
Moslems had built well over a thousand years ago,
leaving to the Moslems small crannies and cramped
spaces in which to perform their worship. The Israelis
have already named it a synagogue.

80. The facts of the situation are that ou 31 January,
an Israeli soldier was shot by an unknown assailant
and died of his wounds. That assailant was acting on
his own, in reaction to the unending and mounting
provocations and assaults by the Israeli colonizers of
Kiryat Arba, just overlooking the city. Such incidents
are daily occurrences in most countries of the world.
In such cases police forces investigate the incident
with a view to ascertaining the identity of the individual assailant in accordance with the normal

83. As usual, the Israelis utilized the occasion to
stretch further and step up their policy of colonization.
The Israeli Council of Ministers decided on 10 February to allow the Jews to settle in Al-Khalil (Hebron)
‘as well as, in their words, in other parts of the land of
Israel. The Israeli Minister of Education, Mr. Hamir,
urged that in addition to settling Jews in the heart of
the city, the construction of 1,000 additional housing
units be undertaken at Kiryat Arba, on lands recently
confiscated from Tel El-Jaabra and other lands adjacent
10

to Kiryat Arba. Other Ministers demanded the
resignation of Mayor Fahd Qawasma and immediate
settlement in 16 houses which had belonged to the
Jews in the past. The Mayor retorted that he did not
object to-indeed he welcomed-the 16Jewish families
living in Hebron, provided the over 2 million Palestinian owners of Jaffa, Haifa, Lydda, Ramleh and
Askalan and the inhabitants of other towns and
villages were allowed to go back to their homes in
accordance with natural justice, international law and
General Assembly resolution 194(III).

about only after a truce with oneself. The world
has bestowed charity upon me; it has given me flour
and clothes and many tents for me and my unborn
children, in return for my giving it my homeland and
security. And when I used to feel cold in exile, the
newspapers of world opinion would protect me from
cold and shivering. And when I used to feel hungry
a paragraph of three lines in the speech of the President of a civilized State would satisfy my appetite.
And when I used to feel homesickness, foreign
songs pouring fosth from the neighbours’ radio would
make a departure for me into a beautiful experience.

84. The Israeli newspaper Ha’&etZ quoted one of the
attendants of the Ibrahimi Sanctuary as having submitted a protest to the Military Governor in which
he narrated how unknown Israeli persons had desecrated the Ibrahimi Mosque by pouring sand and water
ou the Holy ‘Koran and trampling on it. It was preserved in the room of the Sheikh of the Ibrahimi
Mosque, Aatif Al-Hamawi. The complaint also
narrated how the attackers cut the electric wires to
immobilize the loudspeakers used by the muezzin in
calling the worshippers to prayer. They completed
their feat by stealing the loudspeaker apparatus itself.

“And thus the world goes to its bedroom and
forgets me. Do not wake the victim lest he scream.
“Who has wakened him; who is responsible?
Answer: A wind suddenly blows and resuscitates
the dead.
“From where does it blow? Answer: From all
directions-from the homeland,
“And who taught them this obsolete term?
Answer: Poets singing to a fiddle.

85. Such misdeeds and the resort to collective
punishment are in violation of the fourth Geneva Convention, and of article 50 of the Hague Convention3
Desecration of religious places is prohibited under
articles 49,53 and 56 of the fourth Geneva Convention.

“Kill them! Answer: We have killed them so they
have invented another term: freedom.
“Who tztight th-Ic l1 &is seditious term? Answer:
Fanatic rebels.

86, Most regrettably and sadly, a number of police
officers have been killed in New York during the past
week. Have the law-enforcement forces in New York
imposed a curfew upon any street or block-let alone
the whole city? If they have, none of us have known
about it or suffered from its hardships. The security
forces in the occupied territories might have some
novel advice to give to the law-enforcement departments in this city, in an intercultural exchange programme, to see how law-abiding citizens respond to
such across-the-board “collective punishment”.

“Kill them. Answer: We have killed them, so they
learned another word: justice.
“Who taught them this term? Answer: Injustice.
Shall we kill injustice.9 Answer: If you do away
with injustice, you do away with yourselves.
“We shall kill memory. Thus sleeps the world,
thus it wakes. It is armed to the teeth and I am
shackled to the teeth, The strong are civilized; the
weak, savage. They came armed to the teeth with
weapons and the Torah. They uprooted me from my
mountains and valleys and sent me rolling down from
civilization to the bottomless pit.

87. I have just made an absurd analogy, but it reminds
me of a discourse entitled “A Stranger to the World”
by a well-known Palestinian poet in exile. I should
like to read out the following excerpts:

“Was Israel established by any method other than
murder and terrorism? Thus always it is with the
world: rapturous about mass murder, censorious
about individual murder. States are entitled to kill
their own and other peoples, but an individclal or a
people has no right to fight for its freedom. If our
behaviour is subject to the demands of ‘world public
opinion’ as expressed by manipulated information
systems, then the time has come for us to declare
that we are tired of our servitude and our state of
loss and that we are searching for means of survival,

“Thus it is that the world understands me; thus
it wants me to be. Our struggle has come to an end
SO long as I have left Palestine and there is no longer
a guardian for the fire. The equation of the world’s
peace is perfected, and international security has
become conditional on my being absent from Palestine and from humanity.
“I have bidden farewell to no one, to nothing.
A rifle butt sent me rolling down from Carmel to the
harbour, while I clung to God’s waist, screaming
until I lost voice and consciousness. Yet the world
haspromised me some charity in return for signing a
truce with myself, for a truce with a murderer comes

“When we abstain from suicide, they say we are
cowards; and when we commit suicide, they say we
are savages. When we preach peace they say we
11

Bethlehem and Hebron. The tenth..i+:the Efrat settlement or town, on confiscated la@ belonging to the
village of Al-Khader (St. George), to the west of
Bethlehem. And the eleventh is Jiffa Hadasha, on
confiscated lands belonging to the village of AI-Jeeb,
in the Ramallah district.

are hypocritical liars, and when we preach struggle
they say we are barbarians. And are we murderers?
Who killed whom? Have they asked this question?”
88. I have read the poet’s discourse because in it the
centrality of the Palestinian dilemma is pinpointed by
one of its 1947-1948 victims. His exodus was then
brought about by the Israeli rifle butts, Israeli strategy
of today is to achieve an identical objective and an
identical crime against humanity, using as its primary
tool the bulldozer instead of the tank, even though the
tank and other lethal weapons of coercion are the
back-up of the bulldozer, The population of Jerusalem
and the West Bank has dwindled by 32 per cent since
1967, Over the past 13 years of occupation, it is a
stagnant 600,000 to 700,000. If there had been no
prolonged occupation, the return of the displaced,
those working abroad but whose home is in the West
Bank, and their off-spring, and the natural increase and
economic and social development, would have raised
the population to at least 1.5 million. And yet the ratio
of the displaced, the exiles, the so-called absentees is
increasing alarmingly as days, months and years go by.

,,

:

‘.

:

91. Five settlements have been augmented, namely:
first, Ariel Haris in Kufr-Haris-Salfit in the Nablus
area; secondly, Jiboan on the village lands of Al-Jeeb,
in the Ramallah district; thirdly, Al-Kharja, in the
area of Abu Qarnein village; fourthly , Beit Huron,
on lands of Al-Petra village, in the Ramallah district;
and, fifthly, the settlement of Afra on lands confiscated
from Hawd Al-Marja, to the north of Ramallah.
92. During the past six months, the Israeli occupation
authorities have confiscated 196,767 dunums. They
are located in the Khan El-Ahmar-Dead Sea area,
Jenin, Nablus, Hebron, Tulkarm, Bethlehem and
Ramallah. I might add the confiscations in and around
Jerusalem, as well as the confiscation over the years
of upwards of 80,000 dunums belonging to the village
of Taubass between Nablus and the Jordan Valley
in the north.

89. I have two reports in Arabic which detail the
Israeli settlement activities. The first covers the Ijeriod
between 1 April and 30 October 1979. The second
covers the period from March 1979, when the Commission was established by the Council, to January
1980. The reports are included in the dossiers which
we have placed at the disposal of the members of
the Council. I would be taking too much of the Security
Council’s precious time were I to enumerate those
widespread activities in detail, and I respectfully
request that the reports be circulated as official
documents of the Council.

93. I should not confuse the wood and the trees by
narrating compilations any further. I shall therefore
conclude my remarks by expressing the Jordan
Government’s deep appreciation to Mr. Leonardo
Mathias of Portugal-whose country has always
supported our just cause-as Chairman of the Commission, and to the other members of the Commission,
the representatives of Bolivia and Zambia. They are
to be highly commended for their painstaking efforts,
dedication and concern.

90. The second report indicates that 11 new settlements have been established. The first is Sal’it, on
lands confiscated from the village of Kufr Sur, to the
north of Qalqilya. The second is the Elon-Moreh
settlement, five kilometers from Nablus. As a result
of a court ruling, a substitute settlement on one of the
adjacent hills belonging to the village of Dair AlHattab is being constructed. This represents a shift of
a new kilometres. The thijd is Qarney-Shomron, on
the main road between Nablus and Tulkarm, three
kilometres from the earlier-established settlement,
Qarney-Shomron A. These are in the third belt, which
we referred to at previous Council meetings as
advancing from the Armistice Line of 1967 from the
west to the east. The fourth is Neveh-Zuf, located
between the two Arab villa.ges of Dair Ballout and
Aaboud, to the north of Ramallah, in the centre of the
West Bank. The fifth is Qarney-Shomron D, to the
south of the e&lier Qarney-Shomron A. The sixth is
Dotan, to the south of the City of Jenin, near the
town of Ya’bud. The seventh is Reihan, near the
Armistice Line in the Jenin district, The eighth is
Qarney-Shomron C, eight kilometres from QarneyShomfon A. The ninth is Elazar settlement in the
Kfar Etzion complex, on the main road between

94. I should like to draw this Council’s attention to
the recommendations of the Commission which warn
of the disastrous consequences that the settlement
policy is bound to have on any attempt to reach a
peaceful solution in the Middle East. I should also
reiterate the Commission’s recommendation that the
Council adopt effective measures, as a matter of
urgency, to prevail upon Israel to cease the establishment of settlements in the occupied territories and to
dismantle the existing ones.
95. It is my delegation’s conviction that, unless and
until the Council in its wisdom decides to apply the
punitive measures which it is authorized to apply
under Chapter VII of the Charter, the Israelis will no
doubt persist in their aggressive and defiant attitude,
which poses the greatest threat not only to the very
survival of the Palestinian people in their homeland
and in exile but also to the peace and stability of the
entire region, and hence to world peace.
96. The situation in the occupied territories is indeed
a unique one in every sense. It is not simply a 13-yearold occupation, for occupations come and go, although
they leave a deep sore. The Israeli occupation and
12

colonization are endemic and the occupiers are
engaged in altering the geographic, demographic and
historical legacy of a whole people. The struggle of
the Palestinianpeople for their inalienable rights, with
the support of the Arab world, the Islamic world, the
non-aligned world and all peoples that believe in
humanity and justice, will continue unabated.
97. As I said last year, the situation is like that of a
sinking ship signalling an SOS before it descends to
the darkness of a fathomless sea. A conflict of decades will inevitably turn into a struggle of generations, u :h consequences too gruesome to foretell.
It is our earnest hope that the Council will reverse this
most dangerous drift and shoulder its responsibilities
in the interests of justice and peace.
98. The PRESIDENT (interprerationfiom
Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Israel.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to makehis statement.
99. Mr. BLUM (Israel): At the outset, let me present
my compliments to you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I should
also like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to Mr. Leprette of France on his able
conduct of the Council’s delicate work last month.
100. These are momentous days in the quest for
peace between Israel and its neighbours. Three weeks
ago Israel and Egypt established diplomatic relations,
and this week embassieswere opened in our two countries, Early next week the ambassadors will present
their credentials, Within the coming days and weeks
the process of normalizing the relations between
our two countries will be carried forward. The signing
of various accords and agreements is envisaged in the
spheresof trade, communications, travel, tourism and
culture. Simultaneously, the talks aimed at achieving
full autonomy for the Arab residents of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District are proceeding and making
deliberate progress,

opening of the autonomy talks. At that time too, the
Council was mobilized in an attempt to frustrate the
peace process. And that is precisely what is happening
now.
103. When one looks around the world and sees the
real crises threatening international peace and security
which the Council is, for one reason or another, unable
to tackle, let alone resolve, the absurdity and total
lack of proportion in the present exercise is patently
and painfully obvious. A fortnight ago the Government
of Israel re-enunciated its position of principle that
Jews have the right to live in any part of the land of
Israel and that Jews are not foreigners in any part of
the land of Israel. That mere reiteration of a position
of principle has been turned into a flimsy and dubious
excuse for calling for an urgent meeting of the Council
based on an exclusivist-I dare say racist-proposition. That proposition asserts that, since the ancient
Jewish community of Hebron was liquidated through
the brutal massacre of 1929, the city is to be kept
forever Judenrein. For the beneftt of those who may
not be familiar with the term, let me explain that it
means “cleared or emptied of 3ews”, in accordance
with the racist tenets of an ignoble era in the first
half of this century. All of us know that the struggle
against those racist tenets was one of the main objectives of the nations which brought our Organization
into being. And now, 35 years later, the Council is
being called upun to sanction and perpetuate a racist
crime. This racist approach is carried to preposterous
extremes and to a point where attempts are being
made to erase even the name of the city of Hebron
by which it has been known over the millennia simply
because the name “Hebron” attests to the historical
association of the Jewish people with that city. It is not
by accident that, of the four cities in the land of
Israel held holy by the Jewish people, the first, chronologically, was Hebron, the City of the Hebrew
Patriarchs.
104. In the light of recent events in the Middle East,
there is a distinct convergence of interests between
the initiators of the present debateand those who would
try to divert attention away from Afghanistan, where
the real threat to international peace and security in
the region has surfaced unmistakably in recent months.
We all recall that the Soviet aggression against that
country was condemned by over two thirds of the
membership of the United Nations meeting. in an
emergency special session only last month.

101, And what is happening in the Security Council?
As on many previous occasions, it is being mobilized
again by the opponents of peace in the Middle East.
The evidence is overwhelming, because in the last
year a certain pattern has emerged. It shows that
whenever there is tangible progress in the ongoing
peace process or whenever the negotiations reach a
significant stage, Jordan and its allies rush to the Council in an attempt to extract from it support for their
own diversionary and belligerent purposes.

105. It was no coincidence that, on 27 January this
year, the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union rushed
to Damascus and that his visit was followed in short
order by Syrian moves calculated further to destabilize
the situation in Lebanon. As long as Soviet expansionism and subversion persist, we must expect
attempts, however lacking in subtlety, to distract
attention from Afghanistan and elsewhere by one
subterfuge or another, The great defect . . .

102, That is precisely what happened a year ago, as
we have been reminded by Ambassador Nuseibeh
before. The President of the United States went to
Cairoand Jerusalem last March to negotiate personally
the last delicate stages of the Israel-Egypt peace
treaty. Jordan reacted by staging a debate here. That
is precisely what happened last summer with the
13

has not freed Israel from the threats to its security
and existence from other quarters. The heightened
belligerency of other Arab States, the increasing
incitement and terrorism by their agents-all make
security considerations assume greater importance
than before.

106. The PRESIDENT (interpretdon from Russian): I call on the representative of the Soviet Union
on a point of order.
107. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation front Russian): I do not
want to continue listening to the idiocies that I have
just heard. We are discussing a specific issue. What
the representative of Israel is repeating to us is simply
fiction. He can do that at some other meeting outside
the Council. There is a specific issue before us: “The
situation in the occupied Arab territories”.

114. If certain members of the Council are capable
of ignoring these harsh facts, the Government of
Israel is not. Nor could any other responsible, independent and self-respecting Government do so in
similar circumstances.
115. The Council is again confronted with its perennial dilemma. As the organ of the United Nations
entrusted with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,will
it choose to be supportive of the only practical peace
process which has emerged after three decadesof the
Arab-Israel conflict, or will it opt once again for a
blinkered, partial approach which will only play into
the hands of and give encouragement to the enemies
of peace?

108. I shall reply to the representative of Israel in
due course. I do not intend to do so now, but I would
request him to observe the rules and discuss the
question now before the Council.
109. The PRESIDENT (interpretafion fvoln Russian): I call on the representative of Israel.
110. Mr. BLUM (Israel): We all know who is trying
to divert attention away from the real threats to international peace and security. We have just had evidence
to that effect again.
111. The great defect of all the Council’s debates on
the Arab-Israel conflict in recent years is that they
have been detached-consciously detached-from
the over-all geopolitical and strategic developments
in the Middle East. Deliberate attempts have been
made to fragment the Arab-Israel conflict and to focus
exclusively on one or other of its secondary aspects,
out of its general context, and certainly in a total
disregard of broader considerations-security considerations and others-which from Israel’s point of
view are crucial.
112. Thus in its recent deliberations the Council has
persistently ignored the consolidation of the warmongering of the so-called rejectionist Arab States over
the last 18 months and the establishment of a socalled “eastern front” combining the armed forces
of Syria to the north of Israel, Iraq and Jordan to the
east and Saudi Arabia to the south, not to mention
military inputs from other Arab groups and quarters.
Similarly, the Council has ignored the fact that several
of the Arab States and groups in question are being
supplied and assisted by the Soviet Union-both
directly and through the latter’s proxies-to the point
where the combined military strength of the Arab
rejectionist States now exceeds that of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization. And against whom, one
may ask, is all that military might being aimed?

116. As usually happens on occasions such as this,
there will be States, both in the Council and beyond
it, which, while recognizing full well the diversionary
nature of the present debate, will nonethelessfind it
difficult to resist the temptation to try to gain some
political advantage or to prove their credentials by
participating in this debate. Such tactics are no doubt
part of the game of politics, but they can scarcely
be regarded as helpful or contributing to the quest for
peace which, as we all know, is being conducted
in more serious negotiations elsewhere.
117. Since this debate is patently calculated to be
diversionary, the quest for peace would, to our minds,
be best served by non-participation in these proceedings by all those States which genuinely have the
cause of peace at heart.
118. However, as this is perhaps too muchto expect,
we reserve our right to speak again in the course of
this debate. We shall then have the opportunity to
expose and refute the many falsehoods that have
already been altered and the deliberate distortions
that have been made in this debate and that will no
doubt be supplemented by those speakers who have
been mobilized because of their well-known expertise
in fabrication and fantasy. In particular, we shall then
address ourselves to the statement of Mr. Nuseibeh,
whose low, very low, credibility rating is common
knowledge and has already been establishedon many
previous occasions.

113. Beyond that, the Council has chosen to ignore
the fact that the Arab States concerned and their allies
regard Judaea and Samaria-and, for that matter, the
Gaza District-as extensions of the “eastern front”,
as a bridgehead, a forward base for acts of hostility,
terror, sabotage and subversion against Israel and
its civilian population. The peace treaty with Egypt

119. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fro!?? Rrtssian): The next speaker is the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I now call.
120. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Between the people of Palestine and the people of the
14

German Democratic tiepublic there is an affinity. We
both have suffered the ravages of war; we both have
high stakesin peace; we both endeavour to provide a
bright future for our children. In your country,
Mr. President, your people has already achieved a
great deal and plans to achieve a lot more in order to
accomplish its aims. The Palestinian people still
struggles to guarantee its mere survival. We still
struggle by all means to regain our paradise, our
homeland, our Palestine, to regain our inalienable
rights, rights that are universally recognized. But like
your people, Sir, and other peace-loving peoples, we
shall not abandon our struggle for peace. Under your
prudent guidance we are certain that the current debate
will produce constructive and positive results.

125. In the opinion of the Commission, the concern
was about the vital importance of water resources for
the prosperity-and I underline the word :‘prosperity”--of the occupied territories, In our opinion,
the concern is about the survival of the people and the
animal and plant life in that area, How do the annexationist Zionists view the vital importance of the
water resources in the occupied Palestinian territories’?
In its issue of 6-12 May 1979, The Jerusalem POSY
carried a full-page article under the title, “The Water
Threat”. It states:
“One third of the water reaching Israeli kitchens
and farms originates in the West Bank. But once
the autonomous Arab administration takes over,
there may not be anyone to guarantee this flow .”

121. I should like to thank the representatives who
cast their affirmative vote and joined in inviting the
Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in this
debate on an equal footing,

The reporter’s name is Mr. Joshua Brilliant. I shall
quote only a few excerpts from that article:
“The Arabs could play havoc with the Israeli
economy if they drilled a few dozen wells into
Samaria’s western slopes.”

122. We have studied the reports submitted by the
Commission established under resolution 446 (1979).
We cannot but praise the diligence and the objectivity
of the members of the Commission. In our opinion, the
concern and keen interest in the fate and future of the
Palestinian and Arab peoples and territories under
Israeli occupation also reflect the concern and keen
interest of the friendly Governments and peoples of
Bolivia, Portugal and Zambia,

Here one wonders if this is not an attempt to create
a justification for a pre-emptive move or strike by the
Zionists-and they have been known as masters of
creating conditions for aggression under the cover of
pre-emption. The Brilliant writer cites the Chairman
of the Board of Directors of the Tahal Water Planning
Corporation, who says: “Whatever the Arabs take
would mean that mtich less for Israel . . . every
additional denum they irrigate means a dunum less for
us”-that is, for Israel. This would make it clear that
Israel must prevent, by all possible means, .any
/advancement by the Palestinian Arabs in the field of
agriculture.

123. On a previous occasion, on 9 March 1979
f2123rd meeting], I had the honour to appear before
the Council and to participate in the debate on the
item entitled, “The situation in the occupied Arab
territories”. It will be recalled that a map was produced
and we showed the water resources which had been
expropriated by the for;ces of illegal occupation, We
drew the attention of the Council to the “process of
strangulatiob”-of
elirinating the Palestinians by
thirst. We ‘indicated how the Zionists resorted to
sophisticated and advanced methods to dig deep
wells, deeper than the ’ indigenous Palestinian Arabs
could reach. This advanced method resulted in the
drying up of Palestinian Arab wells and their salinI
ization.

126. Potable sweet water in Palestine-at the moment
i completely under foreign military occupationAomes
‘from a reservoir that does not recognize any partition
lines, not even the 1949 armistice lines. This reservoir
reaches down some 700 metres below sea level and
contains about 20 billion cubic metres of water. The
reservoir is replenished mainly by rainfall that is
absorbed by the western slopes of the Nablus and
Hebron region, all of which lie in the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967.

124. That was in March 1979. The Commission
established by the Council recommended in its report
of 4 December 1979, which is now under discussion,
the following:

127, According to Israel’s Water Commissioner,
Meir Ben Meir, one third of the water reaching Israeli
kitchens and farms originates in the West Bank. The
writer Joshua Brilliant then arrives at his first
conclusion:

“In view of the vital importance of water resources for the prosperity of the occupied Arab
territories, and of the reported serious depletion of
those resources as a result of intensive exploitation
by the Israeli authorities, mainly for the benefit of
the Israeli settlements, the Security Council might
wish to consider measures aiming at investigating
the matter further, with a view to ensuring the protection of those important natural resources of the
territories under occupation.” [S/23679, yara. 55.1

“That is why Israel opposes transferring control
of West Bank water sources to the proposed Arab
autonomous administration to be set up according to
the Camp David agreements.”

Do we really need further evidence and proof that
Zionist leaders are determined to deny the Palestinian
15

its inalienable right to self-determination and
national independence?

people

128. If they are opposed to a shady, undefined socalled autonomy, then we can understand how much
more opposed they are to self-determination and
national independence. The writer proceeds to say:
‘I , , . but it would be difficult to defend action
against the Arab self-governing authority trying to
tap more water for local use. Public opinion would
not tolerate it. . . . The military Government protected Israel’s interests by restricting drilling on
the western slopes of the hills-but once the autonomous Arab administration takesover, there may not
be anyone to protect Israel’s interests and guarantee
this flow. The new administration will have to
provide food and drink for thousands of Palestinian
refugees expected to return to the West Bank.”

The Jerusalem Post published an article
Judging by the three-columns-wide title
the gravity and seriousness of the situati
be really alarmed. The title of the article!
cites recent wave of vandalism. Clergy n
tional backing for Christian rights
i
Christians from all over Palestine, fro,
ranean Sea to the River Jordan, sign,,
Grave events prompted the issuance of
organized vandalism against Christian
appeal Christians in Palestine saJc ti
are motivated by
“an exclusivist view of the characte:
Jerusalem and it is therefore opport
that the Christian community, in all it
is present in Jerusalem as of right ~ aI
footing with the other two great non<
“The impression is persistent and g:
the Christian community that the (;
have so far failed to exhaust alI I
open to them to curb such manif&
is not infrequently felt and said with
community that the perpetrators af
a relative impunity”.

129. One can here immediately deduce that consequently the Palestinians should not be permitted to
return. And that is a denial of the inalienable right to
return. According to writer Brilliant, the return of
only 100,000Palestinians-what he describes as those
who fled during the Six-Day War-will pose a serious
threat, Council resolution 237(1967) notwithstanding.
Or are we expected to pay the high price of return and
learn how to survive without water and without food?

133. As was to be expected, the Zili
group of zealots. We cannot but rc=c;~
exercise of religious rights has alrtsad;
on with the ratification of Israeli Law
penalizes those endeavouring to COI
their religion. We Christians consider i
of our religion and our religious right
endeavour to convert to Christianity.
concept of Christianity, as preached b
modern political racist Zionism, Ther;
provide the answer. Herzl referred
1
the Messiah, our Redeemer, as the b41
from Nazareth who sowed hatred irk
we really have to believe it when ‘I:
vandalism against Christian shrines is
group of zealots? The Israeli police
they will continue to do their best to :
vandalism but “find it extremely dif~
those specifically responsible”.

130. In the same article it is further stated that the
water-supply problem cannot be solved on the scientific level and a solution will have to be sought on the
political level. Apparently some Israelis suggested a
joint authority to control water, But Water Cornmissioner Meir Ben Meir thinks that Israel must retain
sole control over water resources. And this Meir is
supported in the Knesset by a number of members
from all parties. They maintain that joint control would
be worthless if West Bankers-that is our new name;
I think that we Palestinians are classified as West’
Bankers-still needed water for drinking and growing
food.
131. I am certain that the members of the Commission have very good reasonsfor concern, which in fact
prompted their recommendation aimed at the protection of important natural resources, and my delegation
hopes that the Council will heed it. We trust that the
Commission will also be requested to consider
measures aimed at investigating the matter of water
resources with a view to ensuring the protection of
those important natural resources of the territories
under occupation. We believe that the most effective
protection, if not the only effective protection, is the
withdrawal of the forces of occupation and the termination of the illegal occupation, which is a prerequisite
for the free exercise of the inalienable rights of the
liberated Palestinian people and a prerequisite for
peace.

134. The particular concern of
t
related in paragraph 9 of its report is V t8
The annex is of particular significa
consensus among the Christian 01
churches that
“the question of Jerusalem is fIC
of protection of the Holy Places;
linked with living faiths and comm
in the Holy City”.
Holiness is not only in the shrines
it is in the worshippers.

132. The report of the Commission takes special care
to deal with the question of Jerusalem. On 1 February
I

135, The fate of the Islamic shrine3
a matter of fact, it is much wQ~S*
16

1~~3the Mission of Jordan addressed to the SecretaryGeneral a letter [S/J37321 expressing the deep concern
of the Government of Jordan over
“the Israeli continuous measures to demolish
historical Islamic places and evacuate Arab inhabitants, owing to extensive excavations inside the
walls of the Old City of Jerusalem”.
I wish to add that, as a result of the collapse of
buildings adjacent to Al-Haram Al-Sharif, Al-Aqsa
Mosque, 3,000 Palestinian Arabs living in that area of
Jerusalem will be forced out of their homes. you see,
the construction in the Old City of Jerusalem has a
domino pattern; one house depends on the next house
8s a buttress, so, if one house is demolished, it stands
to reason that the other houses will fohow suit, And
that is why we believe that the collapse of the AlMu’aqit building cannot be considered in isolation.
136, The Zionist plan to eliminate Moslem shrines
that is being talked about is, we know, the implementation
of the sick and twisted desire of the founder of
Zionism, Herzl. In his memoirs, Herzl writes:
“If we were to own Jerusalem, one day, before
my death, and if I am able to do anything, then
I shall remove from it everything which is not sacred
to the Jews, and shall burn antiquities which have
been there for centuries.”

Arabs, both Moslemsand Christians, from Jerusalem
and to demolish the historic buildings in the Old City
is under way. Excavations started in 1968 alongside
the western wall of Al-Haram Al-Sharif constitute a
real threat to the sacred shrine, a threat whose first
symptoms appear in the fate of the Al-Mu’aqit building.
The Security Council and the General Assembly have
on several occasionscondemnedIsraeli violations and
destruction of heritage, but Israel still pursues its
contempt and implementsits designsin more than one
way, thanks to the financial and moral support it gets
from the Government of the United States.
140. The report also refers to settlements.It is clear
that even the United States Administration, press
and public opinion could no longer maintain a blackout on events in the occupied Palestinian territories,
and that the truth had to be divulged, albeit in part.
According to The N~,Y York Tinres of 13 February,
Hodding Carter, the State Department spokesman,
said on 12 February: “The implications of this decision are serious and far-reaching and the United States
is seriously concerned about them”. He was commenting on the Israeli Cabinet’s decision to support in
principle settlementby Jewsin the Arab city ofHebronor Al-Khalil. He further said:
“Any steps such as the moving of Israeli settlers
into the city of Hebron would be a step backwards
in the peace process and could well have serious
consequencesfor the autonomy negotiations,

That is the premise on which Zionism stands.
137. Herzl died without seeing his dream and desire
realized, but his fohowers have not failed him. This is
exactly what they are doing, and here I wish to calI
on those who of late have expressed their deep concern
about the future of Islam and the Moslems to be
conscious of this reality: Zionism is the enemy of all
religions, including Judaism. This is one aspect of the
Zionist philosophy, here, in particular with regard to
Christianity and Islam; and the Zionists have been
implementing their anti-Christian and anti-Moslem
plans in a very concrete way.

“An influx of Jews into Hebron would damage
the confidence of the parties, particularly the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, in the peace
process becauseit raisesa basicquestion of Israel’s
commitment to full autonomy.”
141. Well, I am glad to note here that the State
Department is really concerned over the feelings of
the Palestinians, but I am not really that glad that
they are concerned only about Palestinians under
occupation, They should be concerned about Palestinians everywhere.
142. In his statement the State Department spokesmanjust missedsayingsomethingthat would have been
more relevant. If I may express an opinion, he should
have said, “Israel’s violations and contempt constrtute
a serious threat to international peace and security”
and that “Zionist Israel cannot coexist with peace”.

138. Let US have a look at what they have done in
Jerusalem. Since 1I June 1967-that is, immediately
after the occupation of Jerusalem-the Zionists started
to demolish the Maghrabi Quarter adjacent to AlHaram Al-Sharif-that is, on the south west side of’
it-and the Maghrabi Quarter was the property oftbe
Moslem pilgrims who came from north-west Africa.
We usually refer to it as the Jewish Quarter, but
property-wise it belonged to those good Moslem
pilgrims who came from north-west Africa and needed
a refuge near Al-Haram Al-Sharif. BY April l968p
almost 5,000 Moslems had been evicted from their
homes and the Moslem UlaqfpropertY was confiscated,
exactly 595 buildings.

143. The Washington Post is definitely more informed
and better versed in the Zionist modus operandi. On
12 February,

The Washington

Post

commented:

“Some Israelis still try to treat Jewish settlement
in the West Bank as an issue with two sides: so
let’s argue it out, but meanwhile let’s not allow it to
get in the way of more important questions. But you
have to be pretty stupid to swallow that line. There
is no more important question. Jewtsh settlements

139. There is sufficient evidence to Prove tha! the
Zionist plan to force the evacuation of the Palestinian
17

are regarded everywhere, and most of all by the
settlers themselves, as Israel’s way to establish its
permanent control, leading eventually to outright
annexation.”

-preceded by accords, ambiguous to some, accords
labelled the Camp David framework for peace, And
now, a new offensive-Jerusalem, Kafr Qaddum,
Hebron-or Al-Khalil-and let us not forget that all
these acts received the blessing of the United States
Government, despite verbal denouncements. So it was
not at all accidental that the Commission reached the
following conclusions. I refer to paragraphs 45 to 47
of its report:

144. This is exactly what the Palestinians, the Arabs
and the rest of the world have been calling attention
to for a long time. This is creeping annexation, annexation which prompts one to ask: Will the insatiable
greed of the Zionists ever be satisfied? The Washington Post admits that this pattern of creeping
annexation was not exactly a “first” under the Begin
Government. It was the Labour Government that
began the settlements in the territories occupied since
1%7, but again it was the Zionist movement that began
the process of colonization in Palestine almost 60 years
ago. Then it was not labelled “return to the promised
land”; it was not labelled “the right of Jews to settle
in the land”; it was soundly and clearly labelled
“colonization”.

“In the period since it submitted its first report to
the Security Council, the Commission has detected
no evidence of any basic positive change in Israel’s
policy with regard to the construction and planning
of settlements in the Arab territories under occupation, particularly in the West Bank of Jordan. On
the contrary, the Commission is of the view that
that policy has largely contributed to a deterioration
of the situation in the occupied territories and
that it is incompatible with the pursuit of peacein
the area.

145. The New York Times, better describing this
creeping expansion and annexation, carried the title
“Israel takes another West Bank bite”. For those of
us who know the Bible, it was that bite that drove Adam
and Eve out of Paradise. Its editorial of 13 February
exposed this pattern. I quote:

“In complete disregard of United Nations resolutions and Security Council decisions, Israel is still
pursuing its systematic and relentless process of
colonization of the occupied territories. This is
evidenced by the stated policy of constructing
additional settlements in the most viable parts of
the West Bank and by the expansion of others
already in existence, as well as the long-term
planning of still more settlements.

“Under cover of the Camp David accords and
East-West tensions, Israel continues to change the
legal and demographic conditions in the West
Bank. By one ruse after another, Jews are
encroaching upon the region’s Arabs, adding to the
‘archeological’ and ‘army’ camps with newly
requisitioned or purchased rural lands and now
with claims to ancestral homes inside hostile Arab
cities”.

“The methods used by the occupation authorities
to seize the lands needed for the construction or
expansion of settlements are those already referred
to by the Commission in its first report.”
When the Commission made its report, it had factual
evidence and it could not have been more objective in
reaching its conclusions. But let us consider the
mandate of the Commission.

It is something to note here that even The New York
Times admits that Israel is making the best use of the
so-called Camp David accords; it is just a vehicle
for Israel to attain its ends, call it the Camp David
accords or anything you want. But sincerity is not
there; peace is not there. The New York Times editorial
exposes the Zionist modus operandi:

147. On 22 March 1979 the Council adopted resolution 446 (1979) which established a commission to
examine the situation relating to settlements in the
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem. In the same resolution, ‘the Council
determined that the policy of Israel in establishing
settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967 had no legal validity and
constituted a serious obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The Council, furthermore, called once more upon
Israel, as the occupying Power, to abide scrupulously
by the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, to rescind
its previous measures and to desist from taking any
action which would result in changing the legal status
and geographical nature and materially affecting the
demographic composition of the Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and, in
particular, not to transfer parts of its own civilian
population into the occupied Arab territories.

“As in the latest move into urban Hebron, the
Israelis are careful never to create a clear focus for
objection. New policies are adopted, but not
immediately acted upon; new rules are labelled
tentative, then kept indefinitely; laws are observed,
but then bent out of shape.”
146. Does not this pattern ring a bell: the annexation
of the Sudeten land, the Anschluss, the Munich pact,
the aggression against Poland and its occupation? This
is the Zionist movement which started with claims
supported by Balfour’s Government: a home, a
national home, a State in all Palestine, aggression
and occupation “blessed” by the Washington pact
of March 1979. Did I say the Washington pact or the
Munich pact? It does not matter; it is all the same
18

--_______

148. But what did Israel do? It just reviewed its
position and authorized in principle what has been
described as Jewish settlement in Hebron and other
territories. My delegation is convinced that the Commission had precisely those plans in mind when it
submitted its reports, But despite the Council resolution, the Cabinet of Zionist Israel announced that
decision supporting what is described as the right of
Jews to live in the occupied Palestinian town of
Al-Khalil (Hebron). According to Y itzhak Zamir,
Israel’s Attorney-General,
that was basically a political
decision. A good friend, Ezer Weizman-he is not my
friend, but somebody’s friend-declared: “We have
not returned to the city of the Patriarchs in order to
displace the Arab inhabitants. We have returned to
it and we shall remain there, because we were there in
most periods of the past and because it is our right to
live in this area, a right which is rooted in our religious
and national heritage,”
149. But the facts prove the contrary. Some Palestinian inhabitants in Hebron were forced out of their
homes. A collective punishment, reminiscent of Nazi
Germany’s methods and brutality against occupied
cities and towns, was imposed on the city, including a
very long curfew, for 11 days. What is really ironic is
the justification
for imposing the curfew. The
Jerusalem
Post reported that a spokesman for the
military Government told the press that &‘the curfew
applied only to Arabs in order to protect them from
attacks by Jews”. How pious! How considerate! Sixty
thousand Palestinian Arabs are caged in for 11 days,
the economy of the town is paralysed and, instead of
the atrocities of the invaders and aggressors being
prevented, the victim is caged in. That is again the work
of a twisted and sick mind. But after all, I did say
the atrocity was reminiscent of Nazi acts.

hundreds of years. They lived peaceably with their
Arab neighbours. But nobody ever wondered why
there was a massacrein 1929.It was becausethen the
Zionists used the Jews in order to establish their
sovereignty in the country and to throw out the
indigenous population. It was not something inherent
in the heart of the Arab that he wanted to kill his
Jewishneighbour. The Arab had to do it in self-defence
because he realized that the Zionist plan was to
eliminate him. And the Zionist plan has not been
changed since.
153. The Mayor of Hebron-I am grateful to the
Council for inviting him-according to The Jerusaleln
Post said, concerning the return of Jews, that if they
wanted to return, we would not oppose it, But we ask
to be allowed to return to our housesand live there, in
Jaffa, Ramleh and Jerusalem. I think that one cannot
really be selective. Someonethinks he has the right to
return, and we too all have the right to return. That
is a basic right. We all have the right to return. I do
not see why we should discriminate in the implementation of that right.
154. We are grateful to the Secretary-General,who
expressed concern at the implications of the Israeli
decision, which he felt was likely to exacerbate an
already tense situation.
155. Palestinians under occupation were organizing
a massive rally to protest against the latest in the series
of atrocities. The rally was scheduled to be held on
19 February, but it had to be called off as a result of
an announcement that the Israeli military occupation
forces would bar the Arab mayors and other political
figures from entering Jerusalem. The rally was to be
held in Al-Haram Al-Sharif, in Jerusalem. But at the
same time Jewish settlers went ahead with plans to
install their families in Hebron immediately. It hasbeen
reported that one of the buildings marked by the
settlers serves now as a girls’ school-I think that,
consequently, the girls will have to go on the streetsand another building is leased to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for PalestineRefugeesin the
Near East. I amcertain the Secretary-Generalwill give
special and immediate attention to this particular Case,
in which the Agency is thrown out of a building in
order that some aggressive zealots may be settled
there.

150. Why all these acts? Why the curfew? A mercenary soldier of occupation was killed by the people
under alien domination. In all other countries, that
would have been considered an act of legitimate
resistance, All the people who have been liberated
or who were in a war know that a soldier of foreign
occupation is a target and that they have the legitimate
right to eliminate him. But that cost the city of Hebron
so much.
1.5I, And even the Carter Administration condemned
Israel for its decision to support settlement in Hebron.
I say “even”
there. That reaction by the United
States did not please Israel’s Ambassador-designate
to Egypt, Ambassador Elihu Ben-Elissar denounced
the Carter Administration and declared, “I deny any
right to any foreign Power to intervene in our Policy
of settlement”. He described that as a basic, inherent
right. I really do not know whether this is the road
to peace. Even the would-be Ambassador has condemned the third party in the pact, the Mmih---I
mm
the Washington-pact.

156. Are these atrocities perpetrated only in AlKhalil (Hebron)? Not really. The Commission reports
serious developments in all the Palestinian temtones
occupied since 1967.It says in paragraph 41 @) of its
report that “Israel is in the process of implementing
a plan prepared by the World Zionist OrganiZatiOn”.
157. Gn 13 February the Finance Committee of the
Rnesset appropriated $1.3 million for the purchase of
land in the occupied territories from private Arab
owners. It was reported that during 1979only 75 acres
were purchased. But the Commission informs us that

152. But concerning the Jewish presence in Hebron,
we all know that the Jews have lived in Hebron for

19

,,-.

an invitation from the Security Council.
told that we are on the road to peace!

40,000 dunums of Arab land have been confiscated,

mostly in the Nablus, Bethlehem, Beit Shahour and
Jerusalem areas, In addition, 1,125 acres of land have
been confiscated as a’result of a decision of the Israeli
cabinet, Let them not insult our intelligence. Seventyfive acres are purchased, but thousands of acres are
arbitrarily confiscated. And Council resolutions-446
(1979) and others-notwithstanding,
this theft and
robbery is given legal status. This is exactly a case of
crime being institutionalized.

And we are

161. The PRESIDENT
(infcrprafafion
finnr ~1~~.
sia,z): The next speaker is the representative of Egypt,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
162. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Mr. President,
allow me at the outset to join previous speakers in
extending to you the warmest congratulations of my
delegation on your assumption of the presidency ofthe
Council for the month of February.

158. Article 25 of the Charter reads-I really do not
have to repeat this, but sometimes some purpose is
served by doing so:

163, The Council is now considering the report of the
Commission established under resolution 446 (1979)
My delegation would like, at this point, to express its
appreciation to the Chairman of the Commission,
Ambassador Mathias of Portugal, and its members, The
report is factual, comprehensive
and, above all,
objective and impartial.

“The Members of the United Nations agree to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the present Charter,”
Yet with impunity Israel announces that it has rejected
resolution 446 (1979) in its entirety. I am sure the
Charter prescribes some remedial action to be taken
in such a case, Such remedial action was suggested
by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which denounced
the Zionist and racist policy pursued by Israel and
considered that that policy constituted a challenge
to world opinion and a flagrant violation of the principles of the United Nations and its resolutions and of
the UniversaI Declaration of Human Rights. The
Conference invited the Security Council to meet its
responsibilities by imposing on Israel the sanctions
provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter.

164. The intensification of Israel’s policy of establishing settlements in the occupied territories is of
great concern for the maintenance of international
peace and security in our region. The lucid and welldocumented report submitted by the Commission has
confirmed
the concern which Egypt has been
expressing for a number of years now, Suffice it to cite
the following conclusion, which appears in par-a-$
graph 46 of the report:
“In complete disregard of United Nations resolutions and Security Council decisions, Israel is still
pursuing its systematic and relentless process of
colonization
of the occupied territories. This is
evidenced by the stated policy of constructing
additional settlements in the most viable parts of
the West Bank and by the expansion of others
already in existence, as well as the long-terra
planning of still more settlements.”

159. We sincerely hope that the CounciI will not
stop at condemning the atrocities perpetrated and
calling for the rescinding of legislation in violation of
conventions,
Charter principles
and resolutions,
but that at this crucial moment the Council will
designate a time-limit after which the Council will
convene to consider the application of the provisions
of the Charter. Again, it is possible that the future of
the United Nations is at stake, but the Palestinian
people is faced with a plan aiming at its annihilation
-and we will fight that.

165. The Israeli policy has been, as representatives
are well aware, the subject of thorough examination
and profound study by the Council. It will be recalled
that Egypt, in May 1976 and again in October of
the same year, requested the convening of the Cou*
cil to consider this matter. The Council subsequently reached a consensus on 11 November 1976
[1969rh meeting],
in which it expressed its grave
concern over the serious situation in the occupied Arab
territories as a result of continued Israeli occupation,
and deplored the failure of Israel to show any regard
for the resolutions adopted by the Council and the
General Assembly in this connection.

160. Before I conclude, I should like to say that
I have just been shown a cablegram from Reuters and
Agence France Presse, Jerusalem, which reads as
follows:
“The Israeli military authorities said today they
have refused permission to Mayor Qawasma of the
West Bank town of Hebron to attend today’s
Security Council debate on the situation in his town.
The Council is due to discuss complaints by Jordan
and Morocco over recent Israeli measures in
Hebron, where last week the Israeli Government
announced there was no impediment
to Jewish
settlers moving into the town.”

166. When Israel persisted with its policy, notwithstanding the unanimous decision of the Council,
Egypt requested the inclusion of an item on the agenda
of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly,
The item was entitled “Recent illegal Israeli measures
in the occupied Arab territories designed to change

That is democracy; that is freedom of speech; an
elected mayor of a town is denied permission to accept
20

,.

the legal status, geographical nature and demographic
composition of those territories in contravention of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
of.. I the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and of
United Nations resolutions . . .“. Under that item
the General Assembly adopted resolution 32/5, which
has been reiterated by the Assembly at every session
since then.

170. Egypt has carefully studied the report. We supPort the conclusions and endorse the recommendations therein. I wish to emphasize in particular
paragraphs 54 and 56, on the measuresto be adopted
by the Council with regard to the establishment of
settlements
and with respect to the status of the Holy
City of Jerusalem.
171. Egypt is committed to striving for the achievement Of a comprehensive, just and durable peace
in the Middle East and for the realization of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. We therefore hope that Israel’s policy will be consistentwith the
efforts to achieve peace.

167. In all those resolutions, the Assembly determined that all such measures and actions in the Palestinian and other territories occupied since 1967had
no legal validity and called upon Israel to comply
strictly with its international obligations. We note with
regret that Israel has not heeded the injunctions contained in the relevant United Nations resolutions. The
number of Israeli settlements has consistently
increased, The universal condemnation of those
measures has had no effect whatsoever on Israel’s
policy. The necessity to terminate such illegal practices is often heard from within Israeli society itself,
but regrettably to no avail.
168. It was therefore a welcome development when
the Council adopted its resolution 446 (1979). The
original mandate of the Commission “to examine the
situation relating to settlements in the Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem” was carefully drafted by the Council to encompass all the
relevant dimensions of the situation in the occupied
territories. It was our earnest hope that Israel would
reconsider and extend its co-operation to the Commission and allow its members to discharge their
mandate and visit the occupied territories, including
the Holy City of Jerusalem.

172. The latest decision of the Israeli Government
allow
its citizens to settle in the surroundings of
the Arab City of Al-Khalil has created a serious
obstacle. My Government views that decision with the
utmost concern. We underline the gravity of such
measures and consider Israel’s latest decision a
noticeable escalation in its settlement policy in
occupied Palestinian territories. This illegal policy
clearly violates the principle of the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by war, as provided in
resolution 242 (1967), which Israel is under a legal
obligation to implement. It contravenes also the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949.My Government’s position on this latest Israeli decision was stated in the
letter that I addressed to the Secretary-General on
14 February [S//3795]. In that letter it was stated,
inter a&z, that the Prime Minister andForeign Minister
of Egypt, Mr. Mostafa Khalil, had stressed that
Israel’s policy:
“Increases tension in the area and posesa threat
to its security;
“,..
“Conflicts with the Camp David agreements in
letter and spirit and affects the prospects of a
successfulconclusion of current efforts to establish
full autonomy in the West Bank and Gaza towards
a just solution of the Palestinian question;“.
t0

169. The Commission contacted my Government,
among other concerned parties, to determine its views
and collect information about the Israeli settlements
in the occupied Arab territories. Egypt promised to
spare no effort to facilitate the fulfilment of its mandate. The visit of the Commission to Egypt was useful
and constructive. Besides meeting government
officials, the Commission interviewed public figures
and witnesses, including Palestinians. Furthermore,
my Government provided the Commission with a
detailed report and a precise map containing all
available information on the Israeli settlements in the
Golan Heights, the West Bank, Gaza and the Sinai.
The results of that visit are contained in the first
report of the Commission, in which it was stated that
Egypt condemned the Israeli settlement policy and
insisted that all settlements should be removed.
The Egyptian Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
informed the Commission that that had been achieved
in the case of the settlements established in the Sinai
and that, for its part, Egypt would endeavour to have
them removed from all the Arab territories, including
Arab Jerusalem which is an integral part of the West
Bank. It was reiterated again by the Minister of Sate
to the Chairman of the Commission at their meeting
during the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly.

173. In conclusion, I should like to state that it is the
firm conviction of my Government that the Council
should act in conformity with the Commission’s
recommendations and that the Council’s decisions
should be promptly and fully implemented.
174. Mr. ESSAAFI (Tunisia) (interpretUtiO/f from
ark,&): My delegation is seriously concerned at the
fact that the Mayor of Al-Khalil has been refused
permission to come here to participate in the discussionson the item entitled “The situation in the occupied
Arab territories”. In view of the invitation extended
to him to be present at our discussions, I hope that
a request will be sent to the local authorities askmg
them to allow the Mayor to visit the United Nations
in New York to take part in the Council’s debate.
That request could be sent either by YOU, Mr. President, or the Secretary-General.
21

NOTES

175. The PRESIDENT
(hlerpretatiort
fro/l? Russian): If there is no objection, it is my intention, in
consultation
with the Secretary-General,
and in
accordance with existing practice, to take certain
steps.

1 United

3 Carnegie

ppll~iorrs
University

The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.

~‘Ixw/~ SCT~C’S. ~01. 75. p. 287.
Rccwtls
of l/w ECO~l WlIiC rWt/ Soda/
No. 3, chap. XXVI.
sect: A, resolution

Nations,

3 ~fficicrl
SI~~~/CIIICIII

Endowment

cm/ Declrrrcrtio~rs
Press,

Co/tjrci/, /go,
I (XXY&),
for InternatIonal Peace, T/w H~gl,~~ co,+
of 1899 NM/ 1907 (New York, Oxford

1915).

1
,

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

ou400

83.61462-~ugusl

~86-2,4?5
