S/PV.7510

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7510th meeting

Friday, 21 August 2015, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Casimiro
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Stehelin
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Ms. Darlow
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Meek
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2015/579)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-26138 (E)
*1526138*

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2015/579)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Zarif,
who is joining today’s meeting via video teleconference
from Pristina.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hashim
Thaçi to participate in this meeting.
The Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/579, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: The report before the Council details the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) during the latest quarterly
reporting period from 16 April to 15 July. Beyond
simply presenting the report, I will also reflect briefly
on the wider range of important achievements, as well
as challenges, facing Kosovo at this time.
I would like to begin by commending the critically
important step taken by the Kosovo institutions on
the third of this month, when the Assembly of Kosovo

2/30

21/08/2015

passed the requisite constitutional amendment and the
laws on the establishment of the specialist court and
specialist prosecutor’s office. These legislative acts
fully accord with the exchange of letters between
Kosovo and the European Union (EU) on the matter,
which were endorsed by the Assembly in April 2014.
As reflected in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2015/579), delays in finalizing the required
framework had been the subject of serious concern from
various quarters. However, the passage of necessary
formative acts and their promulgation yesterday by
President Jahjaga stand as a sign of Kosovo’s increasing
determination to meet its fundamental obligations and
commitments, which imply full respect for the rule of
law and impartial justice, as well as accountability and
equality before the law.
The full establishment of the rule of law is facing
other important challenges, which merit mention today.
One of them is the legal protection of cultural and
religious heritage sites. In June, the Appellate Panel
of the Special Chamber of the Kosovo Supreme Court
issued decisions that, in effect, set aside a landmark
decision by the Trial Panel of the Special Chamber
in December 2012. That decision concerned property
within the special protective zone of the Visoki Dečani
Orthodox Monastery. The 2012 decision rejected
claims of ownership by two socially owned enterprises
against the Visoki Dečani Monastery. The resolution of
this outstanding dispute had been accepted by the two
parties to the dispute and hailed by the international
community. In contrast, the Appellate Panel’s decision
applied highly questionable legal reasoning in order
to return the issue to a local court, which assuredly
will reopen the dispute and potentially lead to serious
new tensions surrounding that precious cultural and
religious heritage site.
Respect for and the protection and preservation
of the Serbian Orthodox cultural heritage in Kosovo
are fundamental duties and represent tests of the
responsibility of Kosovo’s governing institutions.
Should those fail, many other important functions and
responsibilities may equally fall into question. It is
therefore a matter of utmost importance that the legal
framework of protection enshrined in the Constitution
of Kosovo be adhered to with conscientious rigour. That
includes but is not limited to the Assembly of Kosovo’s
future consideration of a comprehensive law on cultural
heritage. I commend the firm assurances given to me
by Prime Minister Isa Mustafa that a revised version

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

of the draft law will not be approved by the Cabinet
and submitted to the Assembly unless it fully conforms
with the relevant provisions of the Constitution.
The enormous strides already taken both by Pristina
and Belgrade through the EU-facilitated dialogue
demand continuing commitment on the part of the
parties, and no less from the international community.
On 25 August, the top leaders from each side will
meet once again, seeking accord on issues where
differences — while narrowed — still remain. Among
those issues, setting forth a detailed framework for the
establishment of the future association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities is of paramount
importance. Several other matters are now equally
ripe for conclusion. Already, the implementation of
the arrangements on mutual recognition of vehicular
insurance, which began just this past week, is
providing evidence of the benefits accruing from the
normalization of relations.
It is important not to underestimate the potential
of this historic process, begun under the tenure of EU
High Representative Ashton and now in the capable
hands of her successor, Federica Mogherini. Reaching
equitable compromises that overcome legacies from the
conflict and produce tangible benefit to both sides is
not limited only to the terms of the First Agreement
reached on 19 April 2013. During the coming days, it
is my hope that dialogue will expand to include other
difficult issues that continue to burden relations.
Among those, I would highlight renewed effort to
determine the fate of missing persons and to provide
a scheme for compensating their families; to revitalize
transportation and commercial links; to address the
many complex issues surrounding property; to deal
with issues of the return and settlement of refugees and
internally displaced persons; and to discuss the status
of the Orthodox Church.
As Council membes are already aware, this will
be my last briefing to the Council in my capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Kosovo. I therefore hope that they will permit me a
few brief reflections on the trends and processes I have
witnessed. When I arrived in Kosovo soon after the
events of July 2011, tension was extremely high on the
ground. Road barricades had been erected throughout
the north, and the international security presences had
been forced into a strong preventive posture. Public
political discourse among the communities in Kosovo, as
well as between Belgrade and Priština, was adversarial

S/PV.7510

and confrontational. Few, if any, conciliatory messages
could be heard from any side.
Four years later, the situation differs dramatically.
Kosovo Serb mayors — elected for the first time under
a unified legal framework — now govern in all 10
Kosovo Serb-majority municipalities, including the four
municipalities in the north. Kosovo Serb Ministers and
Parliamentarians now serve actively in key positions
of the central institutions, promoting the vital interests
not only of their own community, but increasingly of
the electorate as a whole. Police structures are fully
integrated, and thereby more responsive. Significant
progress has been made towards the integration of all
components of the justice system. Through a process
of committed dialogue and political compromise, the
concrete needs and aspirations of people — perhaps for
the first time since the conflict itself — register more
loudly in the public discourse than do insinuations
about the past.
No progress is irreversible, of course. I do not
wish to suggest that the efforts made to date are yet
sufficient to guarantee headway. I do, however, firmly
believe that there is objective justification for cautious
optimism that this process will continue and produce
more tangible results in the interest of all.
It has been my privilege to serve during these past
four years, and I will depart the Mission with strong
confidence in the leadership I have observed on each
side, as well as from the people. Their future is being
built around a shared stake in creating the conditions
for long term peace and prosperity.
I conclude my remarks today by expressing my deep
gratitude to you, Madam President, and to all members
of the Council for their support to the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and me. Much has been achieved, and I am confident
that the positive progress will only accelerate in the
time ahead. The next period will bring not only further
challenges but also, I am confident and certain, further
progress, not least due to the Council’s continuing
support and engagement. UNMIK, my successor and
the entire United Nations presence in Kosovo will
remain committed to contributing to that end.
The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English
text provided by the delegation): I am honoured

15-261383/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

on this occasion to address the Security Council,
convened to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/579) on the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
from 16 April to 15 July 2015. I take this opportunity
to thank the members of the Security Council for
the attention they continue to accord the question of
Kosovo and Metohija, which is of priority importance
to the Republic of Serbia.
Through
its
proactive
engagement
and
compromise-seeking approach, the Republic of
Serbia has made every effort to contribute to the
lasting peace, stability and prosperity of the Western
Balkans. It is evident that substantive progress has
been made in the region in the fields of peacebuilding
and democratization. Exceptional results have been
achieved in strengthening regional cooperation and
in the process of European integration, to which the
Republic of Serbia has made an important contribution.
Yet, it is necessary for all countries of the region, as
well as relevant international actors, to invest additional
efforts in maintaining and promoting stability, all the
more as it remains brittle and in view of the challenges
that we continue to face.
An exceptionally important role in this context is
played by the United Nations Mission in Kosovo and
Metohija, and I shall repeat also on this occasion that
a status-neutral and undiminished presence of UNMIK
is of paramount importance to stability and the creation
of conditions leading to a lasting and sustainable
solution for the question of Kosovo and Metohija on
the basis of resolution 1244 (1999). I therefore reiterate
our strong opposition to any downsizing of the Mission
and reduction of its activities. Serbia highly appreciates
UNMIK’s engagement towards creating the basic
preconditions for the peaceful coexistence of the ethnic
communities in the province, security and respect for
the basic human and civil rights of all its inhabitants.
Accordingly, we expect UNMIK to continue to
implement its mandate under resolution 1244 (1999),
particularly in the areas that are important to the
survival and normal and dignified life of the Serbs and
other non-Albanian communities.
We appreciate the contribution of other international
organizations whose missions, carried out under the
auspices of the United Nations, are constituent parts of
international civil and military presences in the Serbian
southern province, including as the Kosovo Force,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo

4/30

21/08/2015

and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Mission in Kosovo. Bearing in mind that this
is his last participation in a meeting of the Security
Council on the work of UNMIK in his capacity of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of UNMIK, I express my special gratitude to
Mr. Farid Zarif for his efforts to implement the UNMIK
mandate and to coordinate the international presences,
notwithstanding the persistent challenges. I take this
opportunity to wish him, on behalf of the Government
of the Republic of Serbia and in my own name, much
success in his new mission.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia has
confirmed in practical terms its full commitment
to the dialogue conducted with the facilitation of
the European Union. We expect its continuation to
solidify the basis for the implementation of agreements
already achieved. Serbia consistently meets all its
obligations under the agreements reached thus far in
the framework of the First Agreement on Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations, initialled
in Brussels in April 2013. I am pleased to note that
the formation of the association/community of Serb
majority municipalities has been singled out among the
key issues in the context of the implementation of the
Brussels Agreement and that, equally historic, the visit
of Serbian Prime Minister Aleksander Vučić to Albania
has been recognized as another clear indication of our
commitment to and active engagement in the promotion
of the stability and European integration of the region
as a whole.
The continuation of the dialogue at a high political
level provides the necessary political momentum to the
quest for mutually acceptable responses to issues that
burden the life of the people of the province and prevent
the exercise of their basic rights. Serbia has approached
the dialogue with Pristina with a genuine desire to
find solutions that will allow all the inhabitants of the
province to normalize their lives within the broader
process of the integration of the region into the European
Union. It is in this context that the participation of
the Serbs in the political life of Kosovo and Metohija
is also being evolved. Going forward, in addition
to the aforementioned formation of the association/
community of Serb majority municipalities, the key
issues for Serbia in the dialogue with Pristina remain
those of internally displaced persons and the position
of the Serbian Orthodox Church, as well as property
issues.

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

As I point out regularly at Security Council
meetings on the work of UNMIK, the Republic of Serbia
comports itself with full respect and appreciation for
resolution 1244 (1999). I have repeatedly stressed the
constructiveness of the Government of the Republic
of Serbia vis-à-vis the participation of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo and Metohija
in the work of regional forums without prejudging their
status. Yet, we continue to be met with Pristina’s efforts
and requests to be included in the work of international
organizations outside the context of the agreement on
regional representation and cooperation, which are
unacceptable to the Republic of Serbia. The latest such
examples are Kosovo’s attempts to become a member of
UNESCO and INTERPOL.
As a territory administered by the United Nations
under the valid and mandatory resolution 1244 (1999),
Kosovo is not and cannot be considered a State
subject to international law and cannot, ipso facto,
qualify for admission to organizations such as those
to which I have referred. In that sense, each and every
different attitude to the consideration of the question
of Kosovo’s membership in these organizations would
be tantamount to ignoring — that is, violating — the
legal rules created under the auspices of the United
Nations for the purpose of maintaining international
peace and security. When and if such a time comes,
these questions should become the subjects of dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia attaches
special importance to the quest for a solution to the
problem of internally displaced persons from Kosovo
and Metohija. Creating conditions for their sustainable
return is one of the key elements of the process of
reconciliation. It is with regret that I have also to note
on this occasion that, even 16 years after the end of the
conflict and notwithstanding the years-long presence
of the international community, no conditions exist in
Kosovo and Metohija for the unhindered and sustainable
return of internally displaced persons, as is also noted
in regular reports of the Secretary-General on the work
of UNMIK and in reports of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
To correctly illustrate my contention and to help
explain the magnitude of the obstacles that still hinder
the return of displaced persons to Kosovo and Metohija,
let me remind the Council of the data according to which
an average of 25 per cent of refugees and displaced
persons in the world return home upon the end of

S/PV.7510

conflicts. According to the statistics, the minimum is
12 per cent, while the maximum can amount even to
more than 50 per cent. Out of the more than 220,000
persons who left Kosovo and Metohija since 1999, only
1.9 per cent achieved sustainable return in the past
16 years, while about 204,000 persons continue to be
displaced in Serbia. Accordingly, the percentage of
sustainable returns in this concrete case is below all
world standards and averages. The most recent report
on UNMIK bears out the continuity of the descending
trend of returns, while Serbia continues to top the list
of European countries by the number of internally
displaced in protracted displacement. I simply wanted
to familiarize the Security Council with that data, as
the Council has jurisdiction over such issues. How can
it be acceptable for any country that 1.9 per cent of
displaced persons have been able to return? The Council
meets daily to discuss various regions. It cannot remain
silent in the face of the fact that only 1.9 per cent of
the displaced have returned to Kosovo over the past
16 years. Perhaps it is the case that, when it comes to
Serbia and Serbs, everything is accepted and allowed.
The necessary conditions for return include
appropriate security guarantees as well such conditions
as the freedom of movement, an effective mechanism
for the restitution of property and other appurtenant
rights, protection against discrimination, guaranteed
access to institutions of the system, documents and
justice and support to returnees to regain economic
independence. What is also necessary is to prevent the
obstruction of returns, along with full respect for the
principle of the responsibility of international and local
actors engaged in the process.
I therefore call on the United Nations and other
representatives of the international Administration in
Kosovo to help overcome problems that make the return
of internally displaced persons even more difficult and
aggravate their already distressing situation, which
is replete with constant security incidents, including
personal attacks and attacks on property. The situation
is further exacerbated by the climate of impunity for
crimes committed against Serbs — a reflection of
the fact that no legally valid sentence has yet been
pronounced against a single perpetrator of any of the
more than 1,000 killings of Serbs committed since
1999.
The majority of attacks in the reporting period
were aimed at the property of returnees and at
returnees themselves in the localities of Klina, Peć

15-261385/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

and Goraždevac, as well as at religious sites. Also,
an explosive device was discovered in the vicinity
of the Holy Trinity Monastery at Mušutište, in the
municipality of Suva Reka. The incident occurred
immediately before a visit of about 100 internally
displaced Serbs who intended to mark a religious feast
on the ruins of the Monastery.
Proper records on ethnically motivated incidents
are still non-existent, just as is proper intervention by
the competent authorities of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government. That is yet another indication of
how much effort and will still need to be invested in
beginning serious and genuine work on reconciliation
and in ensuring a proper approach to the problem. In that
regard, promises do not suffice; what is needed instead
are concrete results so that a clear message is sent to
those who obstruct the survival and return of Serbs to
Kosovo and Metohija that such activities, harmful to
the process of reconciliation, will not be tolerated, and
to Serbs and other non-Albanians that they may return
and exercise their human rights and freedoms freely
and without apprehension. If that is not possible, then
the Security Council should send a message to all the
Serbs expelled from Kosovo that it has not been able
to ensure their safe return. I think that is only fair and
just to the Serbian people, given that many countries
represented in the Security Council have demonstrated
their willingness to participate in the reconciliation
process in the region. Perhaps by such an example the
Council could show whether or not it has the will to
guarantee and safeguard Serb returns. Again, I would
reiterate that 200,000 Serbs were expelled and nothing
has been done. I believe Serbs deserve a response, even
if it is negative.

21/08/2015

the best proof of this. Since June 1999, 236 churches,
monasteries and other sites owned by the Serbian
Orthodox Church, as well as cultural-historical
monuments, have been targets of attacks. As many
as 61 of them have the status of cultural monuments,
while 18 are of exceptional importance for Serbia. And
four of them have World Heritage Site status and are
under the protection of UNESCO. Let me mention just
a few: the Church of the Virgin Hodegetria, from 1315;
the Church of Saint Nicholas, from 1331; the Church
of Saint Saviour, from 1348; and the Monastery and
Hermitage of Saint Peter Koriski, from the beginning
of the thirteenth century. One hundred and seventy-four
religious sites and 33 cultural-historical monuments
have been pillaged or destroyed in Kosovo and Metohija,
while more than 10,000 icons and other ecclesiastical
artistic and liturgical items have been stolen. Five
thousand two hundred and sixty-one tombstones on
256 Serbian Orthodox graveyards have been destroyed
or damaged, and not a single intact tombstone stands
on more than 50 of the graveyards. Therefore, it is not
only live Serbs who are the targets of attacks, but also
the dead.
That was testified to by former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, who said in a statement at the scene of
one such attack that the deliberate targeting of religious
sites, such as churches, cemeteries and monasteries,
was shameful and inexcusable. The attacks on Serbian
heritage are in that sense tantamount to attacks on the
identity of the Serbs, and affect directly their feeling
of acceptance in local communities. As part and parcel
of attempts to alter historical facts, they are aimed at
marginalizing and eliminating the presence of Serbs
and Serbia in the history of Kosovo and Metohija.

As I did in my last statement to this body (see
S/PV.7448), it is with concern that I again warn that
the desecration of Serbian monasteries is continuing.
That is a way of intimidating the remaining Orthodox
population in the province. The latest example was the
attack on the Orthodox Church of Saint Petka in the
returnee village of Drsnik.

That is evinced also by the draft law on cultural
heritage that is in the process of being adopted in
the Kosovo Parliament and that denies the private
ownership of churches and monasteries to the Serbian
Orthodox Church and provides that they, as well as all
other heritage in the territory of Kosovo and Metohija,
are the cultural heritage owned by the “State of Kosovo”.

One of the characteristics of the Serbian heritage
in Kosovo and Metohija is its connection to living
history. Its existence testifies to the ages-long presence
of the Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija. On
this occasion, I would also like to point to the drastic
discrepancy between the verbal pronouncements and
real attitude of Pristina to the question of the protection
of Serbian cultural heritage. Practical examples are

Members will agree with me that those who aspire
to UNESCO membership should confirm, not only
in words, but also in deeds, the commitment to the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Constitution
of UNESCO, the provisions of which are poles apart
from the deliberate, systematic vandalizing of cultural
and historic monuments of their fellow citizens aimed
at removing the traces of the ages-long existence of a

6/30

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

people in a territory, as well as the failure to punish
the perpetrators of these acts of vandalism unworthy of
the twenty-first century. Attached to my statement are
images of the destruction and a map of Serbian cultural
heritage and monuments in Kosovo. Unfortunately, the
majority of them have been devastated and destroyed.
The images show those monasteries and churches before
their demolition and the way they look today. There
are also television broadcasts and videos that show the
devastation of Serbian monasteries. The membership
of UNESCO cannot condemn the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) for ruining and demolishing
its cultural heritage while simultaneously rewarding
those who are doing the same thing elsewhere. There
is a monastery in Dečani that is under the protection
of UNESCO. The pictures I have provided show what
has been written on the walls of that monastery, which
is also under the protection of international forces,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the International Security Force in
Kosovo (KFOR). Written in Arabic, under the name of
ISIL, it says that the caliphate is on its way.
We condemn each and every act of desecration
of the religious sites of any and all faiths. However,
while ISIL’s desecration and destruction of the cultural
and religious heritage in the Middle East is met with
a worldwide outcry and condemned as terrorism, the
candidate for UNESCO membership who desecrates
and destroys Serbia’s cultural heritage in Kosovo
and Metohija receives a pat on the shoulders as their
reward. That is absolutely unacceptable to the Republic
of Serbia. After all, resolution 1244 (1999) remains the
only valid legal framework regulating the question of
Kosovo and Metohija. If that were not the case, why
would we be convening today’s meeting? If resolution
1244 (1999) is no longer valid, why are we meeting? If
displaced Serbs cannot freely and safely visit religious
sites and celebrate religious holidays in a dignified
manner, then the calls and encouragement of the
Kosovo institutions to displaced Serbs to return are
highly dubious, as is their ability to provide safety and
security to all in Kosovo, particularly at the local level.
I recall that we have been discussing those issues
in Brussels, but what kind of discussion is possible
when there is no mention of the fact that Kosovo is
seeking membership in UNESCO and INTERPOL?
The property of the Orthodox Serbian Church is on
the agenda in Brussels, but behind our backs they are
trying to bypass the Security Council and resolution

S/PV.7510

1244 (1999) and to request such membership. Those
who granted those sites World Heritage status are the
same countries represented here today that are also
members of UNESCO.
I believe that the creation of conditions for the
Serbian and other non-Albanian populations to enjoy
basic human rights without discrimination would
contribute to the improvement of the overall atmosphere
for the return of internally displaced persons.
Furthermore, we take this opportunity to express our
regret at the closure, without consultation with the
Republic of Serbia, of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Pristina,
which was headed by the representative of a friendly
country, Jordan. Taken allegedly for financial reasons,
that decision was far from justified by the human rights
situation in Kosovo and Metohija. How is it possible
to justify such a decision at a time when those tasked
with addressing human rights in Belgrade are being
offered extended resources while the same capacities in
Pristina are simultaneously downsized? I urge members
and Jordan to ask the High Commissioner for Human
Rights how that can be justified.
As a sponsor of resolution 2178 (2014), the Republic
of Serbia has taken all possible measures to suppress
the financing and organizing of terrorism and the
ever more widespread phenomenon of recruitment of
foreign fighters who join armed terrorist organizations
in the Middle East, such as the Islamic State. We expect
the international missions in Kosovo and everyone else,
as well as the local Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment (PISG), to contribute, to the best of their
abilities, to that important global struggle.
In the context of the priority that the Government of
the Republic of Serbia attaches to the solution of property
issues in Kosovo and Metohija, I would like to draw
attention to the privatization processes being conducted
by the Privatization Agency of Kosovo. UNMIK also
determined that the process contravenes resolution
1244 (1999), since that Agency was not established
under the laws in force in Kosovo and Metohija under
the resolution. In that regard, it is evident that public
and socially owned companies are being privatized in
Serb-majority communities, leading us to conclude
that the basic motivation of such privatizations, whose
ethnic connotation is all too transparent, is precisely
the destruction of economic resources in Serbian
communities, which is incompatible with democratic
achievements and European standards.

15-261387/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

21/08/2015

We all are well aware of the importance of respect
for ownership rights, whether of private or public
property. The cancellation of the sale and the liquidation
of companies that are essential to the economic
development of Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija affect the
key criteria for creating the conditions for a sustainable
return. In that sense, it is necessary to ensure that
all activities related to privatization in Kosovo and
Metohija be restored to the valid legal frameworks.

efficiency of judges and prosecutors and the overall
performance of the rule of law sector. The resolution
goes on to say that the implementation of legislation
on the protection of ethnic minorities and their cultural
rights remains a challenge in Kosovo and underscores
the ongoing need for serious efforts with regard to
adopting legislation in order to include provisions on
the right of ethnic minorities with a view to preventing
their direct and indirect discrimination.

We are deeply concerned that the draft law on the
Kosovo Property Comparison and Verification Agency
under consideration by the Parliament of Kosovo
directly contravenes the 2011 technical agreement
on cadastre records. The draft law would establish
conditions for the legalization of property unlawfully
expropriated from Serbs, which would do enormous
and irreparable damage to the Serbian community in
the province. With precisely that in mind, we have
requested that the procedure for the adoption of the
draft law be halted and that implementation begin on
the technical agreement on cadastre records, which
provides for the establishment of a body consisting of
representatives of Belgrade, Pristina and the European
Union that would conduct a comparison of cadastral
records.

I share the concern expressed in the report before
us about the capacity of the Kosovo judiciary to handle
socially sensitive issues. Highly illustrative in that
context is the case related to the ownership rights to
land within and outside the Visoki Dečani monastery,
as mentioned in the report. At the same time, it provides
telling evidence of the attitude of the P1SG in Kosovo
towards the Serbian cultural and Christian heritage,
which on countless occasions has been the target of
orchestrated vandal attacks of destruction, pillage,
burning and desecration. None of the perpetrators
of those heinous acts, unbefitting the Europe of the
twenty-first century, has been properly tried in court.
What we are faced with now are somewhat different but
more perfidious methods. The goal, though, remains the
same: to erase the traces of the centuries-long existence
of the Serbs and Serbia in Kosovo and Metohija.

The current situation in the province bears out
our assessment that conditions have not been met
for the transfer of competencies in the rule of law
sector to the provincial PISG. The fact that those
competencies have been entrusted to EULEX does not
diminish the authority and responsibility of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. I expect
that, within its powers, EULEX will continue to fulfil
its executive competencies in the rule of law sector,
bearing in mind a realistic appraisal of the situation in
Kosovo in that area.
Serbia has stressed on a number of occasions the
need for continual monitoring and for ensuring objective
criteria for appraising the work of the provincial
institutions by the relevant missions deployed in
Kosovo and Metohija under the auspices of the United
Nations. In its Kosovo 2014 Progress Report, the
European Commission notes that much remains to be
done with regard to the functioning and accountability
of the judiciary in Kosovo and Metohija. Likewise,
strong concerns are also expressed in the European
Parliament’s March 2015 resolution 2015/413 on the
European integration process of Kosovo with respect
to the independence, accountability, impartiality and

8/30

The new methodology is evidenced by the case
of the property of the Dečani monastery, a jewel of
not only the Serbian but also the European and world
cultural heritage, which, alongside with Gracanica, the
Church of Our Lady of Ljeviš and the Patriarchate of
Peć, has been included on the UNESCO List of World
Heritage in Danger.
The decision of the Appellate Panel of the
Special Chamber of the Kosovo Supreme Court
that — notwithstanding the dissent of two international
judges on the Panel — set aside the judgement rendered
in 2012 in favour of the Dečani monastery by a mixed
Trial Panel presided over by a EULEX judge, is an
attack on the Dečani monastic fraternity, given that
agricultural land is of key importance to the monastery’s
ability to be self-sustaining and that its security is at
stake.
Bearing all of this in mind, it was with concern that
we received information that EULEX was preparing to
transfer the cases and the accompanying documentation
processed by EULEX prosecutors and judges to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, that

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

is, the local judiciary. About 500 cases are involved,
about 300 of them related to war crimes, of which 270
have been taken over from UNMIK. The Government
of the Republic of Serbia expresses its concern at the
intention to transfer the cases related to war crimes in
the territory of Kosovo to the local judiciary, since all
of them fall under the exclusive competence of EULEX,
even after the amendment of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government regulations on the mandate of the
EU Mission relating to the rule of law in the province.
In fact, it is provided that EULEX prosecutors
should continue to process the cases in respect of
which they decided to launch an investigation prior
to 15 April 2014, as well as the cases allocated to
EULEX prosecutors before this date, which include
cases of war crimes that EULEX took over from the
UNMIK judiciary. If EULEX does proceed to transfer
the cases to the institutions in Pristina, in particular
the sensitive cases relating to the investigation of the
war crimes committed in the territory of Kosovo, the
consequences of the processing of the war crimes
committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA)
against Serbs, non-Albanians and Albanians, labelled
“Serbian collaborators” during the armed conflicts of
1998 and 1999, would be unforeseeable.
Let me point out that, since it is expected that a
specialist court will soon be established to adjudicate
the war crimes committed by the KLA in the territory
of Kosovo and Metohija, and since that court is
being established precisely because of the incapacity
of the local Kosovo judiciary to investigate and try
the perpetrators of war crimes from the ranks of the
KLA, the transfer of war crimes cases to the local
judiciary by EULEX runs counter to the activities of
the international community aimed at establishing the
specialist court.
There is reason to believe that, if said cases were
to be transferred to the local judiciary, much of the
material evidence would disappear and many witnesses
would be intimidated, which would make the work of
the future specialist court for war crimes much more
difficult.
Politically motivated arrests and lengthy trials,
as well as the different metrics of the local judiciary,
should not be disregarded either. One example I cited
at previous meetings of the Security Council is the case
of Oliver Ivanović, the leader of the Citizens’ Initiative
Serbia, Democracy, Justice, who was detained at the

S/PV.7510

end of January 2014 and remains in detention despite
the guarantees and the calls made by the Government
of Serbia that he be granted bail. In an effort to be
accorded this right, Oliver Ivanović has been on a
hunger strike for days now.
Serbia is committed to the process of reconciliation.
In that context, it is crucially important to ascertain the
fate of missing persons. To that end, Serbian experts
and expert teams are cooperating with UNMIK and
EULEX and with the competent agencies in Kosovo.
The process of mutual reconciliation cannot be
completed without trying in court the former members
of the KLA suspected of committing war crimes and
crimes against humanity, including the persecution
of Serbs, Roma and other non-Albanians, as well as
their political adversaries among Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians.
We attach special importance to trying the cases that
are based on the findings of the Special Investigative
Task Force of the European Union, set up to conduct an
investigation of the inhumane treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo.
In conclusion, let me reiterate my conviction that
a lasting and sustainable solution to the question of
Kosovo and Metohija can be reached only through
dialogue, with full respect for the legitimate interests
of the entire population of Kosovo and Metohija, on the
basis of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), in the
context of which we are working with dedication and
commitment. In our efforts to achieve such a solution,
it is necessary to bring about mutual reconciliation.
This will certainly be helped by the adoption by our
region of European standards and values on its path
to the European Union. We expect the European
Union to continue to facilitate our dialogue with
Pristina. There is no doubt that the Government of the
Republic of Serbia will continue its active engagement
in the implementation of the Brussels agreements,
in the interest of peace, stability and the economic
development of the region.
I call on all actors to address this issue without
any double standards. We cannot expect Serbia, which
holds the chairmanship of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and is making every effort
in that respect, to guard the territorial integrity of
Ukraine but not to use the same zeal when protecting
the territorial integrity of its own country. I believe
that this world still functions on the basis of principles,

15-261389/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

not according to who is closer or on better terms with
whom. I am for dialogue, but we are against unilateral
moves and actions. We have seen examples of this firsthand, not in cases relating to Serbia but in others where
double standards have been applied.
As the Council is aware, I was born in Kosovo and
Metohija 49 years ago, in the city of Prizren, which in
the fourteenth century was the capital of Serbia proper.
Today only 22 Serbs live in Prizren. That is a historical
reality and fact. Today in Kosovo the majority of the
population — 60 per cent — is Albanian. Hashim Thaçi,
in earlier statements before the Council, has said that
everyone supports this except for the Serbian Orthodox
population. This is the first step in admitting to ethnic
cleansing, because how can one say that with only 4 per
cent of the population of Kosovo being Serbs, there has
been no ethnic cleansing?
I would ask the members of the Security Council,
leading figures in the United Nations, not to apply any
double standards in the case of Serbia but to bring to
bear the same zeal and the same principles that they
have applied to other countries and peoples, and to take
into consideration the historical and cultural heritage of
the Serbs in this region. Serbs have extended the hand
of reconciliation, which remains outstretched. But we
did not raise both hands as a sign of surrender. We will
fight for our interests through political and diplomatic
means. What members see as being in the best interests
of their countries is what they should ask of Serbia;
we request that they please not ask us to apply double
standards. We will see what the result of the voting
in UNESCO is; we will probably see very different
attitudes and positions with regard to the admittance
of Kosovo to UNESCO. I think that we should stop
working under the table and be open. We should be very
frank as to whether resolution 1244 (1999) is still valid
or whether Pristina believes that UNMIK should leave
Kosovo.
If that is simply a waste of time, then we should
put an end to it. We cannot participate in such matters
if there are hidden attempts to find a back door for the
admittance of Kosovo to UNESCO and other United
Nations bodies and specialized agencies. That should
be a topic of frank and transparent talks. If the Council
determines that resolution 1244 (1999) is no longer in
effect, it should kindly clarify that intention.
The President: I thank Mr. Dačić for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Thaçi.

10/30

21/08/2015

Mr. Thaçi (spoke in Albanian; English text provided
by the delegation): I am very pleased to report today on
the latest progress achieved in Kosovo, a new country
now recognized by a majority of Member States.
At the outset, allow me to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zarif, for
his work in Kosovo. He represented the United Nations
in the course of the new situation in Kosovo following
the declaration of independence of the Republic of
Kosovo, the International Court of Justice opinion on
the declaration’s legality and on General Assembly
resolution 64/298 of September 2010, which definitively
closed the issue of the status of Kosovo by starting
European Union-facilitated talks on the normalization
of relations between the State of Kosovo and Serbia. As
the same time, I would also like to welcome Mr Zahir
Tanin of Afghanistan to his leadership of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
Afghanistan was one of the first countries in the world
to recognize the independence of Kosovo.
In recent months, Kosovo has faced some of the
most difficult challenges of the past few years. However,
as the Council is aware, those challenges have also
provided Kosovo with opportunities to demonstrate its
transformation from an importer of security resources
to an exporter of stability and peace initiatives in the
region. I wish to inform the Council that the Parliament
of the Republic of Kosovo has now voted to amend the
country’s Constitution to create a specialist court that
will adjudicate the alleged crimes cited in the report of
the Council of Europe. The vote in our Parliament was
overwhelmingly positive and consensual. As Deputy
Prime Minister and the President of Parliament’s
largest party, I worked with my colleagues to convince
fellow members and the greater public to establish this
unusual legal instrument so that trials can be conducted
in a credible, independent and internationally managed
fashion.
It has been 17 years since the war in Kosovo began
in 1998. Our resistance was a true case of David versus
Goliath. I reaffirm that no Kosovar, myself included,
will stand idly by and allow our specialist court to
equate the genocidal acts of Slobodan Milošević and
the State of Serbia with the later acts of desperate
individuals from the community of the oppressed,
committed during or after the war. Serbia’s war against
Kosovo was conducted with the involvement of the
army, police and paramilitary units, and backed by
Serbian intellectuals. It was a war of fascism, pure and

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

simple. We in Kosovo will not allow our history to be
rewritten to blur the differences between hunter and
prey. We will protect the legacy of our war — Kosovo’s
freedom and independence. Kosovo has now established
an instrument that is far more credible than those used
in trials of the courts in other Balkan countries.
We wish to thank those individual Member States
that have noted and welcomed Kosovo’s initiative, and
I hope that the Security Council will also recognize
the mature efforts of the Kosovo Government to deal
with all crimes committed in the years of conflict. I
also wish to invite European Union member countries
to sign, without delay or prevarication, the Stabilization
and Association Agreement in September. Any political
delay in the signing of the Agreement or that on visa
liberalization will be a strong setback to the dialogue
process in Brussels.
As recently featured in the media, several Kosovar
and international artists organized an event, the Thinking
of You art exhibition and installation, to pay homage to
the women raped by Serbian forces during the 19981999 war in Kosovo. The World Health Organization
has concluded that 20,000 women — I repeat, 20,000
Albanian women — were raped and assaulted by the
forces of the Serbian State during the war in Kosovo in
1998 and 1999. Fifteen years after the war, sadly, the
tragedy of the rape of these women as a war crime in
Kosovo has not been addressed by the mechanisms of
international justice — neither by the United Nations
nor by the Council of Europe.
The time has now come for international justice for
the Kosovar women who were victims of a genocidal
crime committed directly by the Serbian State. I
therefore call on all members of the Security Council
to support the petition signed by more than 150,000
citizens of Kosovo — all the people of Kosovo — seeking
international justice for the Kosovar women raped by
Serbians during the war. International humanitarian
law, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination Against Women and United Nations
resolutions on that matter clearly state that issues of
sexual violence in conflict cannot remain unrecognized
and unpunished. Kosovo calls for justice.
Last winter, a huge number of Kosovars left Kosovo
to seek asylum in European Union member countries.
I am happy to report that we took strong measures
to significantly lower the numbers of emigrating
Kosovars. While the number of Kosovars claiming
asylum in Germany reached 11,147 in March, by June

S/PV.7510

the number had fallen to 1,373 and in July the number
was in the hundreds and no longer in the thousands.
Similarly, while the number of Kosovar asylum seekers
in Hungary reached 14,000 in March, in June the
number was below 300.
Our efforts to inform the Kosovo people were aided
by European police forces that started monitoring the
Serbian border with Hungary, where the illegal flow
of immigrants was most rampant. Kosovo may have
stemmed our numbers, but we are concerned about the
fate of tens of thousands of Syrians who have left their
country in the most tragic of circumstances. Kosovo
is a country in which almost half of the population
has experience as a refugee, and we sympathize with
the plight of those who are seeking freedom and now
filling the roads of our countries in search of it.
Part of our success to curtail the flow of asylumseekers leaving Kosovo was due to some good news on
the economic front. A French consortium won the bid to
build a €400-million ski resort in Brezovica, which will
greatly aid the resident Serbian community and bring
fresh investments to Kosovo as a whole. We have also
agreed to investments in our energy system, and with
the help of the World Bank and the United States Agency
for International Development, we are completing a
transaction for over €1 billion in new power generation
that will create employment and exports from Kosovo.
That project was started many years ago, but as complex
negotiations draw to a close it will become a pillar of a
new stage of economic development.
Today, Kosovo is the country with the highest
average economic growth in the Western Balkans
in the past seven years, and with the lowest debt-togross domestic product ratio in all of Eastern Europe.
Yet while continuing to face enormous challenges, we
are bravely seeking to translate our political freedom
into greater economic opportunity for all the people of
Kosovo.
Allow me to highlight the other key development that
the Council has heard about today. Kosovo has applied
for membership of UNESCO. We initially requested
that New York transfer our application to UNESCO as
the UNESCO secretariat had initially advised, but we
understand that the United Nations does not want to
play a role in exchanging correspondence and has left it
to the UNESCO States members to decide the merits of
Kosovo’s membership. We have heard several questions
posed here today. Allow me to answer a few of them.

15-2613811/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

Is Kosovo eligible to become a UNESCO member
before becoming a United Nations Member? The answer
is a resounding yes — Kosovo is eligible to become a
UNESCO member before becoming a United Nations
Member State, provided that it exerts its maximum
effort to secure a two-thirds majority of the votes in the
General Conference. The voting takes place upon the
recommendation of the Executive Board. We will learn
of the final outcome of the vote in November. Many
countries, from Austria to Viet Nam, became members
of UNESCO long before they joined the United Nations.
The second question is: Would Kosovo’s
membership of UNESCO endanger the ongoing dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia on the normalization of
relations? Kosovo is already a member of two United
Nations specialized agencies: the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund. UNESCO would
therefore not be the first agency or organization that
Kosovo has joined since the initiation of the technical
dialogue with Serbia in March 2011. Despite Serbia’s
claims, Kosovo’s membership of international bodies
will only advance stability and strengthen the dialogue
for normalization. The continued isolation of Kosovo
will certainly not promote normalization between
Kosovo and Serbia. Beyond that, Serbia’s attempt to
block Kosovo’s membership is completely at odds with
the agreement signed in Brussels in April by Kosovo
and Serbia, as represented by Mr. Dačić and myself.
Thirdly, I must answer the question about the
safety of the UNESCO World Heritage sites in
Kosovo. I can confirm in all conviction that they are
safe — indeed, safer than they have been at any time
in the past 1,000 years. They are protected by a very
consolidated and modern legal framework approved
by United Nations Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari,
endorsed by the Secretary-General and adopted by the
Kosovo Parliament. Our local police authorities protect
95 per cent of the sites of the Serbian Orthodox Church.
NATO forces have entrusted us and are satisfied with
the safety of the sites. Thousands of tourists, from
Japan to Rwanda, are visiting the sites today and they
provide good income for the people of Kosovo. I invite
Council members to visit Kosovo as soon as possible to
witness, themselves, the positive and safe situation. Our
Government has also engaged in interfaith dialogue,
which the Secretary-General has characterized in
several of his reports as a positive contribution to
reconciliation.

12/30

21/08/2015

I address the issues related to our UNESCO bid at
length because we are gravely concerned over Serbia’s
methods as it seeks to deny our membership and keep
us isolated from opportunities in education, science
and culture. Serbia’s ambassador to UNESCO, Darko
Tanasković, was recently interviewed by a Russian
radio station, where he called for a “wider Christian
front” against Kosovo’s membership. That language
completely inappropriately calls for clashes between
faiths and has clear racist undertones. The Kosovo
war was not a religious conflict. It was a genocide
committed by the State of Serbia against the people of
Kosovo. It destroyed lives in three countries and led
to three different armed conflicts, as well as to the
genocides in Croatia, Srebrenica and Kosovo that were
directly committed by the State of Serbia.
We expect to have a clash of arguments with
Serbia on the merits of our membership, but we refuse
to engage in a lowly and unacceptable discourse that
promotes discord between religions and increases
religious intolerance. We call on all members of the
Security Council to support Kosovo’s bid to UNESCO
membership. Council members can do so even without
having yet recognized Kosovo. We will also seek
and are working intensively towards and deserve
membership of INTERPOL and the Council of Europe,
two vital tools to promote and protect human rights and
human lives.
I have heard some harsh words on the part of
Minister Dačić today. I understand that he is taking
part in an election campaign in his country and may
therefore need to use nationalist language, but the
dialogue with Serbia has continued and is continuing to
ensure the normalization of relations in the context of
the European integration process.
Next week, Kosovo and Serbia will again meet in
Brussels and I hope that we will agree to conclude a
package of important agreements. The first agreement,
regarding telecommunications, will ensure that Kosovo
obtains an independent international dialing code,
which will save millions of euros as we currently use
Monegasque, Serbian and Slovenian codes. The second
agreement, on energy, is meant to definitively stop the
parallel distribution system in northern Kosovo that
was set up by Serbia. Kosovo law will now prevail in
creating a competitive distribution market in the entire
territory of Kosovo and taxes to Kosovar authorities
will be finally paid. The third deal will ensure that a
barricade constructed in the north, which is called a

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

“peace park”, will no longer hamper the freedom of
movement. The fourth deal is expected to establish the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
envisaged in the Ahtisaari plan. I assure the Council
that the association will not have executive powers.
We have a highly decentralized municipal
Government that will form the basis of our civic
democracy. We hope to sign those deals next week so
that the leaders of the Western Balkans can meet in
Vienna for the next summit of our nations in the context
of the Berlin Process. All leaders of the Western Balkans
will meet and discuss practical forms of cooperation,
either through joint infrastructure investments, youthto-youth exchanges or the demarcation of borders.
Kosovo will continue to play a role in several key
processes, including the promotion, with Serbia, of a
new highway that will link Serbia with the Albanian
and Montenegrin coast via Kosovo highways. The socalled Pristina-Nis project will connect important parts
of the Balkans. In the coming days, Kosovo will also
sign a border demarcation agreement with Montenegro,
which will soon become a NATO member. Kosovo
will thereby complete demarcation of three quarters
of its borders, the most of any country of the former
Yugoslavia. No other republic has managed to resolve
such painful challenges with its neighbours, as we have
done.
The decision of the Russian Federation to allow
Kosovar sportsmen to use Kosovar passports when
travelling to Russia will also help improve the
movement of Kosovars. Brazil also recently allowed
all Kosovars to use their passports when travelling to
Brazil. As Kosovo recently became an Olympic nation,
that is a welcomed move in the lead-up to the Games in
Rio de Janeiro. We hope our world judo champion, the
Kosovar athlete Majlinda Kelmendi, will win our first
gold medal there.
In conclusion, allow me to call on you, Mr. President,
and members of the Council to recognize the progress
achieved. Are there still problems in Kosovo? Yes, there
are, as there are in each of the former Yugoslav republics
in our region. But is Kosovo safe today? Yes, according
to INTERPOL statistics, it is safer than 80 per cent of
other European capitals. We are combating extremism,
and we are a champion in the region in that regard. We
are cooperating with the international community. We
are part of an anti-corruption coalition. We are trying
to build a prosperous democracy.

S/PV.7510

I know that still more needs to be done, but as
someone who witnessed war for himself, members
of the Council should be proud of themselves for the
success in Kosovo. That is why the mandate of the
next Special Representative of the Secretary-General
should include serious discussions on how the Council
can transfer the resources spent in calm Kosovo to the
people in the Middle East and elsewhere, who today are
facing the direst existential threats.
Kosovo is working on its aspirations to be a member
of the European Union, NATO and the United Nations
very soon.
Before I conclude my remarks, please allow me
to respond to several issues that Mr. Dačić mentioned
here. I would like an opportunity to reply to them before
this organ.
Mr. Dačić began his election campaign today
from the floor of the Security Council. I would like to
remind him, however, that according to Kosovo itself
and according to our relations, the issue of Kosovo is
the eighth or ninth most important issue to the people
of Kosovo. The most important issues for the people
of Kosovo are terrorism, corruption, non-respect of
minorities, the creation of a legal State and others.
Mr. Dačić mentioned that he was born in Kosovo.
That is true. Kosovo, with its constitution that is in
accordance with Martti Ahtisaari’s document, offers
dual citizenship, and I have offered dual citizenship to
Mr. Dačić. He is welcome to take up that offer. He was
born in Kosovo, but his family actually came to Kosovo
as colonizers between the two World Wars.
I would also like to refer to the propagandistic
brochure that was disseminated here in the Security
Council. That is a desperate and unfortunate act. The
crimes that were sponsored and committed by the State
of Serbia happened in the global spotlight.
Not enough words suffice to express the crimes and
genocide that Serbia committed throughout Kosovo,
again citing the genocides in Croatia, Srebrenica and
Kosovo. What Mr. Dačić is attempting to do today
is again unfortunate and desperate. The images that
he has brought here does not change the fact that
Kosovo will continue to be a champion in the war on
extremism and fundamentalism. He knows that his own
intelligence services created the graffiti that he referred
to. The intelligence services were installed as parallel

15-2613813/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

institutions in Kosovo and have been working against
Kosovo using the old ways.
In Kosovo alone, the political and military
machines of the State of Serbia have destroyed over 300
religious sites. Serbia burned half of Kosovo from 1998
to 1999. Serbia removed more than a million citizens
of Kosovo from the country. Serbia committed ethnic
cleansing and killed 15,000 people as the State of
Serbia. Serbia has committed genocide. And more than
that, it has destroyed lives. Serbia has killed women, the
elderly, destroyed people’s lives, raped women. Serbia
committed genocide in Kosovo and it will be taken to
suit for that issue. Once and for all, I must say Kosovo
will not obtain Serbia’s permission on any issue. It is
now a sovereign country.
Albanians were always the majority in Kosovo.
History cannot be rewritten by political and propagandist
brochures and materials. The citizens of Kosovo can
live in their homes and communities irrespective of
their ethnicity — the Serbs, the Montenegrins all the
other communities. I am one of the leaders who has
continually worked in that direction. I have visited
minority families and I have worked with minority
Government officials for the past 16 years. Mr. Dačić
must understand one thing: the Serbian army and police
and the Serbian Administration will never return. His
dream has ended once and for all. Serbia can continue
the war. That is its practice. It is used to that. But Serbia
will lose again.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Meek (United Kingdom): At the outset, I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zarif for his final briefing. I am sure others
will join me in paying tribute to all his hard work on
Kosovo and his determination to improve the lives of
all of Kosovo’s citizens. We wish him every success
in his new role. I also want to welcome Deputy Prime
Ministers Dačić and Thaçi back to the Security Council
again.
Let me start by reiterating our well-known position
on the frequency of these meetings. We strongly
believe the frequency should be reduced. Although
many challenges remain, Kosovo’s progress and its
trajectory are undeniable. The reality, as described
clearly in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/579),
does not justify this level of the Council’s attention.
We also believe strongly that this meeting should not

14/30

21/08/2015

provide a platform to revisit nationalist positions that
are unhelpful and not in keeping with the spirit of a
dialogue. The report, although it shows that Kosovo
faces significant challenges, also presents clear evidence
of continuing steady progress. That is a welcome
trend. The security situation remains generally stable,
illegal migration is falling and we continue to see good
practical cooperation at the local level, most notably in
northern Kosovo.
The most important development since the Council
last met to discuss Kosovo (see S/PV.7448) took place
after the release of the Secretary-General’s latest report:
the positive vote on the specialist court. Although the
delay on that issue was disappointing, we welcome
that important step forward. Dealing with the past, no
matter how difficult, controversial or painful, is vital if
Kosovo is to tackle impunity and build respect for the
rule of law. The vote in favour of the specialist court
was also an important demonstration of Kosovo leaders’
commitment to implement international agreements.
That was a difficult decision that equired political
courage, and we recognize the positive actions taken
by Deputy Prime Minister Thaçi and Kosovo’s Prime
Minister and Speaker of Parliament to ensure that it
passed. But more hard work will be needed before the
court is established and operational. Sustained effort
will be required to ensure accountability in the wake
of the allegations in the Marty report. Comprehensive,
robust witness-protection programmes must be a key
part of that process if the court is to be effective. As a
matter of urgency, we hope Kosovo’s leaders will take
the necessary steps and work with all partners to ensure
that the court is established as soon as possible.
The Secretary-General’s report also highlights
some wider concerns about the rule of law. In
particular, the Government of Kosovo must address
the weaknesses of the Kosovo judiciary and improve
its ability to handle sensitive cases. The report also
makes clear the valuable role the Kosovo police plays
in maintaining order and protecting all communities
from violence. That is welcome, and we hope that the
cooperation shown by the police and the Kosovo Serb
community in Klina can be replicated elsewhere. The
arrests of five people in connection with suspicious
activity at Badovac reservoir highlights the need for
continued vigilance, particularly regarding the threat
posed by terrorism and returning foreign fighters.
Turning to the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union, we welcome the continued engagement of both

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

sides. The dialogue process remains the most effective
means of normalizing relations in the Western Balkans.
It is vital to the future stability and prosperity of the
region, and the surest way to preventing any return to
the violence of the past. Both sides must demonstrate
and deliver the benefits of the dialogue for all their
citizens. The pace of the implementation of dialogue
agreements should be increased, and it is vital that new
agreements be reached, including on the association
of Serb municipalities, at the next meeting later this
month.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
remark on the very clear and welcome leadership shown
by the President of Kosovo in addressing the legacy
of sexual violence in conflict. It is important to bring
the perpetrators of those despicable crimes to justice,
whoever they are and wherever they live. My Prime
Minister’s special representative on the issue, Baroness
Anelay, saw that first-hand during her visit to Kosovo
in July, when she pledged further United Kingdom
support for rehabilitation programmes for survivors.
Taking action on sexual volence is another example
of the willingness of Kosovo’s leaders to confront the
difficult issues of the past and secure a better future
for all their citizens. I hope they will continue that
approach in the coming months and in doing so take the
necessary steps to also ensure progress on the specialist
court and the dialogue.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his briefing
on the latest quarterly report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/579) on the implementation of the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), as well as to join my colleagues in
taking this opportunity to express our gratitude to him
for all his efforts over the past few years as Head of
UNMIK, and to wish him all the best with his duties
in future. I would also like to thank the First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and Mr. Hashim Thaçi for their
statements.
During the previous debate on this subject, in
May (see S/PV.7448), Spain expressed its support
for a specialist court and called for its establishment
as soon as possible. We would therefore like to
congratulate those involved on passing the necessary
legal amendments so that the court can be set up and
undertake its functions. Now that that is in place, it is

S/PV.7510

vital that the Kosovo authorities demonstrate that their
commitment to the principles of accountability, the
rule of law, reconciliation and peaceful coexistence for
every community in Kosovo is a reality.
In that previous debate my delegation also expressed
our concern about the violent events we had witnessed
that same month, just before our meeting, and the
possible negative effects they might have in Kosovo.
In that regard, we noted with concern the details in the
report at the time (S/2015/303) about the involvement of
people with public responsibilities and representatives
of political parties in ways that at the least supported the
actions of others in those violent events. The authorities
and political parties in Pristina must demonstrate by
their actions that they have the political will to support
peaceful coexistence between communities and an
ongoing commitment to reconciliation and stability in
the region.
We have noted with satisfaction the continuing
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina facilitated by
the High Representative of the European Union, and
the progress that has been made in recent months.
However, it is essential that we continue to make
further and more robust headway in implementing the
agreements that have now been reached. In that regard,
the Security Council has made specific and repeated
calls for the effective establishment and launch of an
association of Serb municipalities. That is critical, and
Spain once again reiterates its call for that to be done.
Fulfilling that commitment is the cornerstone for
assessing the seriousness and political will of the various
stakeholders and the progress that has been made, all of
which has an unquestionable reflection on the current
security and stability situation in Kosovo. We welcome
the information in the Secretary-General’s most recent
report on the fact that the situation is generally stable
across the board. However, we are concerned about the
fact that this claim contrasts with citations of a number
of situations that make it clear that this stability is still
fragile. In that context, we take a very positive view
of the significant role that UNMIK still has to play,
particularly through the concrete steps it has taken
to promote peaceful coexistence and reconciliation in
Kosovo. Spain therefore urges all the political actors
involved to continue to collaborate and cooperate with
UNMIK in that role.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that Spain
will continue its constructive support without prejudice

15-2613815/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

to its position of principle, and we hope that Kosovo’s
regional and international stakeholders will do so too.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his briefing and to recognize his efforts in carrying
out his important responsibilities in the past few years.
We congratulate Mr. Zahir Tanin on his appointment
to replace Mr. Zarif and wish him every success in
his new role. We also welcome the fact that at this
meeting we are hearing directly from the First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and from
Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would
like to emphasize once again that the resolution 1244
(1999) is still the international judicial basis in force for
achieving a solution within the context of the political
negotiations on the future of Kosovo, conducted with
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Serbia. We reiterate our
support for the implementation of the 19 April 2013 First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations between Belgrade and Pristina. We
have always stressed the importance of the Brussels
dialogue between Serbia and the local and provincial
authorities in Kosovo in which both parties are
working to arrive at a mutually agreed-on settlement.
The results include the integration of the judiciary
and civilian protection personnel, the creation of new
administrative boundary line crossing points and the
harmonization of vehicle insurance policies. Other key
issues are the establishment of an association of Serb
municipalities, the Interministerial Commission for
Return and implementation of the strategic objectives
outlined by the Minister for Communities and Return.
In that regard, the return of Serb Kosovan citizens
should be facilitated by ensuring an atmosphere of
security, ethnic and religious tolerance and respect for
their economic and property rights, as well as for their
freedom of movement.
Promoting and respecting human rights in Kosovo
requires the full implementation of the relevant
international norms to prevent discrimination of
minorities and displaced persons. Although the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/579) refers
to a slight decrease in incidents related to religious

16/30

21/08/2015

sites as compared the report of the previous quarter
(S/2015/303), parties must work with determination to
avoid situations of this kind, which have an impact on
reconciliation among the different communities living
in Kosovo.
Cooperation among local leaders, especially
between the mayors of North and South Mitrovica, is
a positive element in strengthening relations among
the various communities. That serves to illustrate
once again that citizens constitute a key element in
generating trust, and we therefore welcome initiatives
in the regard. The reconciliatiaon process also requires
the continues work of the Working Group on Missing
Persons, with a view to clarifying the fate of the
thousands who went missing during the conflict.
We welcome the fact that the necessary measures
have been adopted to set up the specialist court
responsible for investigating accusations of war crimes
and crimes against humanity that were said to have
been committed during the armed conflict in Kosovo.
We hope that that court can be begin its work without
any further delay. There can be no impunity for such
crimes, and delivering justice is a positive step in
achieving peace and reconciliation.
We note with satisfaction the efforts made with the
support of the European Union as part of the second
Rule of Law Compact, in order to resolve problems of
accountability, corruption, crimes committed against
ethnic groups, organized crime, gender discrimination,
discrimination based on the grounds of ethnicity,
developing a sytem for the protection of witnesses and
pending claims regarding property.
The United Nations has played a fundamental role
in Kosovo, especially through UNMIK by promoting
security, stability and respect for human rights. That
work has been complemented through the cooperation
mechanism of the international security force in
Kosovo and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo. We believe that each of those missions — based
on their respective mandates — should continue to
play a proactive, complementary role with a view
to finding a sustainable, just, lasting and mutually
acceptable solution to the question of Kosovo. For, as
we have pointed out, direct dialogue among the parties
is essential.
We believe that there must be support for the
process of voluntary returns of Serbs displaced from
their homes in Kosovo, with strict adherence to the

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

Brussels agreement of 2013. It is noteworthy that the
report indicates that the rate of returns has continued
to decrease — a trend we hope will be reversed. We
welcome the establishment of the Interministerial
Commission for Return and the implementation of the
strategic objectives as established by the Ministry for
Communities and Return.
In line with our established position, our country
condemns and categorically rejects terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We note with concern the
growing radicalization of young people and the increase
in extremism, which has led to the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters in countries of the Middle East
and Africa. We therefore urge the systematic, concrete
continuation of the efforts begun in Kosovo to combat
this scourge, while also addressing the root causes.
In conclusion, we once again call on all parties
to redouble their efforts in the search for a peaceful,
just and lasting political solution within the framework
of international law, including full observance of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Brussels agreements of
2013.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Head of United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. My
delegation welcomes His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaçi, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and thanks them both for
their statements.
Malaysia takes note of the overall stable security
situation in Kosovo during the reporting period. We
welcome the positive developments in Kosovo, as
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/579)
and by Mr. Zarif. In particular, we commend the
adoption of the constitutional amendment and
legislation by the Kosovo Assembly to establish a
specialist court to try cases arising from the findings
of the European Union (EU) Special Investigative Task
Force. We view that development as an important step
for Kosovo in ensuring accountability and promoting
reconciliation and closure among the communities in
Kosovo. We are also pleased with the progress made
towards EU integration with the recent approval by
the European Commission of a Stabilization and
Association Agreement with Kosovo. We believe that
will pave the way for social and economic development

S/PV.7510

and reforms as well as the rule of law — all of which are
vital for the long-term stability of Kosovo.
Other positive developments have also been
made by Belgrade and Priština in implementing the
2013 Brussels agreement during the reporting period,
including on the integration of the judiciary and
civil protection personnel and the establishment of
association of Serb-majority municipalities.
We hope the parties will remain steadfast in their
commitment to implement the Brussels agreement
and intensify their high-level engagement in the EUfacilitated dialogue. We believe today’s exchanges
could have been much more productive if they had
not revisited nationalistic narratives. In the spirit of
reconciliation, we urge both sides to move forward to
ensure stability for the region and a common space for
both communities.
Malaysia strongly supports efforts to counter
violent terrorism. In that regard, we commend the
commitment shown by Kosovo to combat radicalization
and extremism, as illustrated by its hosting of
International Interfaith Conference in Priština in June
and by its high-level participation in the first regional
summit on countering violent extremism in Tirana last
May. Such efforts could build on the climate of trust,
confidence and harmony among the various ethnicities
and religions. Malaysia encourages further steps to
build bridges within the various communities and will
remain committed in supporting Kosovo to to that end.
In conclusion, I join my other colleagues in
reaffirming support for UNMIK, which continues
to play a key role in promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo. We also commend
the role of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in the continued strengthening of the Kosovo’s
rule-olaw and judicial institutions. In view of his new
portfolio, my delegation would like to convey our
utmost appreciation to Mr. Zarif for his dedication
and contribution as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNMIK for the past
four years. Malaysia welcomes his newly appointed
successor, Ambassador Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan,
and looks forward to working closely with him to
support the work of UNMIK.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I
would like to first thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Head
of United Nations Interim Administration Mission in

15-2613817/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

Kosovo (UNMIK). We commend him on his devotion
and commitment during his leadership of UNMIK, and
we wish him our best in his future endeavours. I would
like to welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaçi, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and thank them
both for their statements.
Chad notes with satisfaction recent progress made
in Kosovo in the political and legislative spheres as
well as in terms of regional cooperation. We encourage
the follow-up of high-level technical and political
negotiations between Belgrade and Priština — under
the auspices of the European Union — on issues
concerning telecommunications, energy and the
establishment of the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities, with the aim of forging longlasting ties between the two parties.
The signing of the second Compact on Rule of Law
in Kosovo will allow us to make progress on issues of
responsibility, corruption, inter-ethnic crime, organized
crime, gender issues, ethnic inclusion, strengthening
the witness-protection system and pending land issues.
That is an important step in institution-building. We
welcome the effective cooperation between local
leaders in northern Kosovo, especially between the
majors of North and South Mitrovica on issues relating
to budget and the payment of salaries to health care
and education workers. We also welcome the verdicts
handed down in the Drenica I and II war crimes cases.
Given the transnational challenges, particularly
those related to the radicalization of young people
and violent extremism, Chad encourages the Kosovo
authorities in their struggle against socioeconomic
factors that could lead to recruitment by radical
groups. We believe that as Kosovo experienced one of
the most devastating wars in Europe, work on justice
towards reconciliation and confidence-building within
communities and societies of the region remains a priority.
To that end, we welcome the adoption on 3 August by
the Assembly of Kosovo of constitutional amendments
for the establishment of a specialist court to try cases
referred by the European Union Special Investigative
Task Force in the context of war crimes and organized
crime allegations contained in the report of January
2011 presented by Dick Marty.
With regard to the issue of returns, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
recorded only 132 individual voluntary returns in
18/30

21/08/2015

the reporting period. The proposals and initiatives to
build homes in return areas and to validate diplomas
so as to allow people from non-majority groups to
find employment in public institutions could certainly
facilitate local returns. With respect to the 1,654 persons
still missing, Chad calls on the Kosovo authorities to
redouble their efforts to foster conditions conducive
to ongoing investigations and provide follow-up to the
victims’ families.
With respect to regional cooperation, important
steps have been taken in the context of security and
promoting reconciliation. However, we regret and
condemn acts of violence, particularly the clashes that
took place on 9 and 10 May in Kumanovo, in the the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, leading to
the deaths of 8 police officers and the wounding of 37
others. We welcome the cooperation of the Kosovo police
in facilitating the conduct of an open investigation into
these incidents with a view to bringing the perpetrators
to justice. We also welcome the State visit of the Serbian
Prime Minister to Albania, which allowed discussions
to be launched on joint infrastructure, socioeconomic
development and security projects. We believe that
the adoption by the Assembly of a resolution on the
geographic delineation of the border with Montenegro
will also help to improve the climate of regional
understanding.
In conclusion, Chad is convinced that all these
productive and constructive initiatives will help to
improve the daily lives of citizens in Kosovo and reduce
tensions for the benefit of all communities there. That
progress has been achieved thanks to the readiness of
the parties and the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of UNMIK,
Mr. Zarif, and his entire team. Chad commends and
encourages UNMIK to continue to support initiatives
for dialogue between the communities, in particular
through capacity-building projects. We also commend
the United Nations entities and the system’s partners
on the ground — particularly the Kosovo Force, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the European Union — for their cooperation and
contributions to reconciliation and stabilization in
Kosovo.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs Hashim Thaçi of

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

Kosovo for their statements. I also thank Mr. Farid
Zarif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for his briefing. Let me
express our appreciation for his dedicated service at
the helm of UNMIK and wish him every success in his
new appointment as Special Representative for Liberia.
I also wish our colleague Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan
every success in his new job as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Kosovo.
We reiterate our support for the continued
efforts of the European Union (EU) in facilitating
the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. Some concrete steps
have already been taken in implementing the 19 April
2013 First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations, including on the integration
of judiciary and civil protection personnel. Issues of
energy, telecoms, the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo,
freedom of movement and the Mitrovica bridge continue
to be the focus of the discussions in the framework of
the dialogue.
We welcome the progress achieved on the texts
on the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities and on the implementation
arrangements in the field of telecoms, and encourage
the parties to demonstrate political will and engage
constructively in reaching final political agreement
on these and on other remaining matters, so necessary
for the normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina. Such normalization would first and
foremost benefit the peoples of Kosovo and Serbia,
with the mutual recognition of diplomas, the insurance
of vehicles and freedom of movement being just a few
of the concrete advantages that this would bring. We
welcome the the memorandum of understanding on the
mutual recognition of vehicle insurance policies, signed
on the margins of the most recent EU-facilitated highlevel meeting. The practical cooperation between the
mayors of Mitrovicaon steps taken to facilitate returns
is yet another sign of progress.
Like other delegations today, we welcome the
adoption by the Assembly of Kosovo and signature by
the President of the constitutional amendments and the
law on the specialist court and the specialist prosecutor’s
office to try cases arising from the findings of the
Special Investigative Task Force. We encourage the
establishment of the specialist court with a mechanism

S/PV.7510

for witness protection and hope to ensure that it will
become operational at the earliest possibility.
We reiterate our support for the European integration
efforts of both Kosovo and Serbia. The path of integration
requires the constant and dedicated implementation of
reforms. The EU’s long-standing engagement is a clear
demonstration of its firm commitment to the countries
of the region. We expect a swift signature of the EU
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Kosovo.
It would strengthen EU-Kosovo relations and continue
to provide a solid framework for the necessary social
and economic reforms. We welcome the measures
taken by the Kosovar authorities to address the issue
of violent extremism and note that these efforts could
be reinforced through strengthened cooperation among
the countries of the region. While the security situation
has remained calm, we note the continued role played
by the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo in ensuring security and
consolidating the rule of law.
Finally,
acknowledging
progress
in
the
normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina and the stability in Kosovo, like our colleague
from the United Kingdom, we reiterate our view that
such progress should lead to reducing the frequency of
UNMIK debates in the Council, also given the large
and growing number of truly critical peace and security
situations the Council has to tackle every day.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I too wish
to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his in-depth briefing and for all
his efforts over the past few years. We wish him every
success in his future endeavours.
I welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kosovo, and thank them both for their statements.
Jordan attaches great importance to the significant
progress that has been made by the Government of
Kosovo to honour its commitment to delivering stability
and advancing towards regional integration. We would
like to express our satisfaction with the progress being
made on more than one front, in particular with regard
to the amendments adopted by the Kosovo Assembly to
pave the way for the establishment for a specialist court
on war crimes — an issue towards which the European
Union Task Force has been working in order to establish

15-2613819/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

accountability. We welcome that step to ensure the rule
of law in the nation.
We call for all steps to be taken to protect religious
minorities in Kosovo, including their property and
goods, as well as steps to preserve the cultural heritage
and religious sites in Kosovo. We call upon the Kosovo
authorities to bring to justice all those who have
perpetrated abuses against minorities or threatened
the cultural heritage. It is essential to deliver on that in
order to ensure that perpetrators do not enjoy impunity.
Meeting internal and security and political
challenges in Kosovo will require the support of the
international community, which must guarantee peace
and stability in the country as well as in the countries
of the region. We therefore express our support for
the ongoing efforts to ensure that there is further
agreement and better relations among all ethnic and
other minorities in Kosovo. We must continue the
economic and political reform programme, as well as
to deliver on the development programme. We would
like to emphasize the need to resolve issues relating
to cadastres, border demarcation and missing persons,
including also facilitating the return of the displaced.
Such returns have dropped off considerably over the
past few months. We must ensure that it increases and
that those who do return can fully reintegrate into
society.
We welcome the progress achieved by both Kosovo
and Serbia as they seek to continue dialogue at all levels.
We call upon them to redouble their efforts to ensure that
relations between both countries can be strengthened
and to expand the space for political consulation and
dialogue between the two countries so that progress can
be made on points of common interest. The goal should
be to ensure that relations between Kosovo and Serbia
can be normalized. We also call on both sides to ensure
that the bilateral agreements reached thus far can be
fully implemented.
We also believe that the support of the countries of
the broader Balkan region is essential in order to ensure
better peace and security in the region and a whole.
All countries of the region have a common political
interest in ensuring peace and stability while building
on historical ties. We are aware that there have been
obstacles in the way that have prevented such friendly
ties at the broader regional level. However, making
progress in that regard is the only way to break the cycle
of violence and conflict. There is therefore a need for

20/30

21/08/2015

support to Kosovo and Serbia from their neighbours
in order to open a new chapter in their history, one that
paves the way towards development and prosperity in
future.
It is essential that we establish a development and
security partnership for the Balkan region in order to
guarantee integration and peace. That can be achieved
only with the support of the international community
and of the broader region. Europe in particular has
a special role, as it has the necessary capacity and
diplomatic tools required to ensure that an agreement is
reached between the various officials and countries in
the Balkans. Given the well-known history of conflict
in the region, perhaps the parties can learn from the
model of the broader continent, where differences have
been put aside.
We welcome the signing of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement between the European Union
and Serbia, which is a key step towards stability, as
well as for the stability of Kosovo — should such an
agreement be signed with that country as well, setting
on a pather towards joining the European Union.
Jordan, which has recognized Kosovo as
an independent, sovereign State, calls upon the
international community to follow in our steps and
do likewise. We also call upon the international
community to allow Kosovo to join all international
organizations and all agencies of the United Nations as
an independent, sovereign country. That would allow
the country to build a brighter future and pursue the
path of political maturity, economic growht and social
development, and put it in a better position to achieve
lasting peace.
In conclusion, we would like to express our gratitude
to UNMIK and all its staff for their considerable and
commendable efforts and positive contributions to
ensuring peace and security. We also commend the
Head of Mission and his team for their professional
attitude and dedication to achieve UNMIK’s goals.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zarif for his briefing. I welcome the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, to
attend today’s meeting. China also listened carefully to
the statement made by Mr. Thaçi.

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands the legitimate
concerns of Serbia on the question of Kosovo. China
believes that the best way to solve the question of Kosovo
is to work out an appropriate solution acceptable to all
the parties concerned through dialogue and negotiation,
on the basis of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and in the framework of
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
The current situation in Kosovo by and large
continues to be stable, but still faces complex issues.
China appreciates the vigorous efforts made by the
Serbian Government to find a political solution to the
Kosovo issue, and welcomes the fact that Belgrade and
Pristina have recently continued to hold high-level talks.
China supports the efforts by both parties to continue
to pursue pragmatic and constructive dialogue in order
to implement the existing agreements and to effectively
protect the rights and interests of different ethnicities
in Kosovo. The parties must continue their efforts to
resolve their differences through dialogue and avoid
any actions that may lead to further complicating or
escalating the situation. Doing that would be conducive
to the maintenance of peace and security in the Balkans
and throughout Europe.
China commends the work being done by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) over the past four years under the leadership
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zarif and supports UNMIK’s continuing efforts to
implement the Council’s mandate under the leadership
of the new Special Representative, Ambassador Tanin.
We hope that UNMIK, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission and the Kosovo Force will carry out the
tasks assigned under their respective mandates and
strengthen their coordination and cooperation in order
to play a constructive role in finding an appropriate
settlement of the question of Kosovo.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his briefing on the current situation in Kosovo. We
also thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim
Thaçi for their statements.
Although the security situation in the region has
been said to be stable, we are seeing with concern violent

S/PV.7510

incidents such as those that took place in Kumanovo,
which could have destabilizing effects on reconciliation
and regional cooperation. It is imperative to safeguard
and expand elements for coexistence and to avoid acts
that may endanger people’s lives and relations between
the different communities. We welcome the role played
by the European Union in facilitating technical and
high-level negotiations between Pristina and Belgrade,
which are contributing to fomenting trust between the
parties.
By way of our own long and painful experience, we
have learned that for the sake of society, but especially
for victims and their families, reconciliation genuinely
requires justice and reparations. The establishment of
a specialist court tasked with adjudicating the crimes
committed during the conflict represents a step in
that direction that will make it possible to apply the
fundamental principles of justice and accountability.
Likewise, knowing the whereabouts of persons who
disappeared during the conflict is necessary to making
progress towards justice and the truth. Moreover, it
is the right of the families and must be addressed by
the respective authorities. The designation of a new
Chair of the Working Group on Missing Persons will
be critical when the time comes to begin search efforts
and identify reparation measures
As we have done in the Council on other occasions,
we stress the central role that UNMIK continues to play
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights — a priority matter for moving forward in the
process of reconciliation among the communities. Only
in a context of respect for, and protection of, basic
human rights is it possible to aspire to reconciliation
and to a peaceful future.
With regard to the complaints of human rights
violations allegedly committed by UNMIK between
June 1999 and February 2008, the investigation
undertaken by the UNMIK Human Rights Advisory
Panel contributed to clarifying the facts. However,
paragraph 59 of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2015/579) makes clear that UNMIK did not act in
accordance with the European Convention on Human
Rights. It is vital to compensate the victims of those
violations for the moral damage they incurred.
With regard to the implementation of resolution
1325 (1999), we stress the actions that have been
taken to promote and protect the rights of women and
gender equality. However, we believe it is necessary

15-2613821/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

to continue to work on activities that will enhance
women’s participation, on an equal footing with men,
with respect to access to property and education, among
other things. It is equally important to continue to adopt
measures to integrate young people by addressing
the socioeconomic factors that lead to an increase in
recruitment activities by extremist groups.
I would like to underscore that resolution 1244
(1999) remains in full force as the internationally
accepted legal basis for resolving the situation in
Kosovo, including strict respect for the principle of
territorial integrity.
Finally, we would like to express our gratitude for
the work of Mr. Zarif as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNMIK, including his
efforts to promote peace and stability in Kosovo and
the region throughout his tenure. We wish him every
success in his future endeavours.
Mr. Stehelein (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for presenting the report
(S/2015/579). I also thank the Foreign Ministers
of Serbia and Kosovo, Mr. Dačić and Mr. Thaçi,
respectively, for their statements. I would also like to
express our deepest gratitude to Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, whom we
heard today for the last time in his current functions,
for the work he accomplished during his term. Finally,
on behalf of France, I would like to express our best
wishes to his successor, Ambassador Tanin.
This year got off to a rocky start for Kosovo, but the
new Government rose to the challenge. We welcome the
adoption by the Parliament of Kosovo of constitutional
amendments allowing for the establishment of a
specialist court that will shed light on the allegations
of war crimes set out in the Marty report that was
presented to the Council of Europe in 2011 and that
have been pursued by the Special Investigation Task
Force. It is essential for that courageous decision by the
Kosovo Parliament be followed up in all its dimensions.
The resolution of this matter is crucial in order to
demonstrate Kosovo’s commitment to the fight against
impunity and constitutes an essential milestone in the
process of normalizing its relations with Serbia, which
is particularly vital in the context of its rapprochement
with Europe.
Another symbolic matter on which significant
progress is awaited concerns the establish of an

22/30

21/08/2015

association of Serb municipalities in Kosovo, which
is essential for the future of the Serb population of
Kosovo. The statutory unity of Kosovo will in no way
be called into question by the setting up of such a
structure. Such a measure must not be subject to further
delay, given that two years have already elapsed since
the agreement was signed on 19 April 2013. We expect
the authorities in Pristina to redouble their efforts to
bring about that essential element of reconciliation with
Belgrade. Those two processes are inseparable in order
to strengthen the trust of the entire population in the
institutional framework of Kosovo.
Political dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia,
initiated under the auspices of the European Union,
regularly takes place at the highest level. We
congratulate both parties for their unrelenting pursuit
of dialogue, which confirms the hopes of their own
peoples as well as of the international community. The
progress so far has been slow but real. We would like
in that regard to call on both parties to continue their
exchange with a view to the future. It is not merely a
question of working towards a formal normalization
of relations, but also of building authentic long-term,
mutually profitable relations as good neighbours.
In that regard, Kosovo’s future also requires the
consolidation of the rule of law. We would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate our unwavering support for
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), which works on a daily basis to support the
rule of law and security in Kosovo. We call on Serbia
to fully engage in the mechanism of mutual legal
assistance established by EULEX, in a spirit of active
cooperation. We also call on the Kosovar authorities,
which aspire to UNESCO membership, to guarantee the
protection of religious sites, in particular the monastery
of Visoki Dečani. That is an absolutely fundamental
requirement.
It would be remiss of me to conclude without
invoking the European perspective, which recognizes
the integrity of the Balkan countries as a whole. Over
the course of the past several years, Serbia has made
significant efforts to draw closer to the European Union,
whether through internal reforms or by improving its
relations with its neighbours. We congratulate them
once again for those efforts, encourage them to pursue
the full implementation of their existing agreements
with Pristina and reiterate our wish to see them join the
European Union as soon as possible, once the necessary
conditions have been met. In that regard, we hope that a

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

first chapter in that negotiation process will be written
this year.
We are aware of and support Kosovo’s wish to follow
the same path, which is equally necessary for the future
of that country. We know that the Kosovar authorities
are fully aware of the challenges. We reiterate our trust
in them and our full support for their efforts, proof of
which is the stabilization and association agreement
due to be signed in the very near future.
Finally, along with other delegations, in the light of
the progress made so far, which we tirelessly applaud
every three months, we hope that the Council will at
last reconsider the frequency with which it takes up this
matter as a prelude to a comprehensive review of the
entire set of international measures concerning Kosovo.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): We
welcome Foreign Ministers Thaçi and Dačić back to
the Security Council. I commend both their countries
on their continued dedication to the normalization of
relations through the European-led dialogue between
Kosovo and Serbia. We believe that progress is indeed
being made, even if the tone of parts of today’s
discussion did not evince it. Let us be clear. The hands
extended by Serbia and Kosovo for reconciliation
must be firmly grasped. The kind of nationalistic
rhetoric we have heard in the Council today needs to
end. It is wholly counterproductive. To that end, the
United States agrees with other colleagues who, while
recognizing that the situation in Kosovo remains an
important matter for the Councils’ attention, believe
that the three-month reporting cycle has long outlived
its usefulness. The Security Council should extend the
reporting period for the Secretary-General to every six
months.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
Zarif for his briefing. We commend him for his service
and dedication to Kosovo and wish him well in his
next assignment, in Liberia. We welcome also the
appointment of Ambassador Tanin as the next Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
The United States has been a champion of
accountability throughout South-East Europe for
the crimes committed during the Balkan wars. Our
commitment has been to the principle of justice and
accountability for all as an essential ingredient to
sustainable peace. The last time the Security Council
met to discuss Kosovo (see S/PV.7448), the United States

S/PV.7510

made it clear that Kosovo must uphold its commitments
to respond to allegations of serious crimes committed
between 1998 and 2000, by adopting the legal measures
required to set up a robust specialist court to adjudicate
those cases. The allegations made by a few individuals
must not be held against the legitimate aspirations and
honour of the people of Kosovo. The best way to ensure
this is to advance individual justice for the crimes that
have been alleged. As a steadfast friend and supporter
of the Republic of Kosovo, a sovereign, democratic and
multi-ethnic State that exemplifies Euro-Atlantic values,
we commend Kosovo’s Government and Assembly for
having passed the constitutional amendment and law
to establish this specialist court, which will be able to
issue indictments and try cases in connection with the
evidentiary findings of the Special Investigative Task
Force.
There are serious allegations contained in these
findings, including of war crimes and other crimes
against humanity, and they deserve serious judicial
examination. Voting to establish this court was not easy
politically; voting to advance accountability rarely is,
but it is essential, and it was a major step forward in
fulfilling Kosovo’s international commitments and a
clear demonstration of the commitment of the people
of Kosovo to the values of human rights and the rule of
law, values that we in the United States and our partners
in the European Union and so many of us around this
table hold dear.
We applaud Kosovo’s leaders for their vision and
ability to put politics aside for the future of their country.
But the passage of this law is only the first step. The
Government must quickly conclude the negotiations on
a host State agreement with the European Union (EU)
and the Netherlands so that the specialist court can
indeed be established.
While Kosovo has worked diligently to improve its
judicial structures, the European Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) and the NATO-led Kosovo Force continue
to play indispensable roles in building security and
rule-of-law capacity in the country. Kosovo’s judicial
institutions will continue to need support to handle
highly complicated cases related to terrorism, war
crimes, human rights abuses, sanctions and corruption.
As the end of EULEX’s mandate nears, in 2016,
consideration should be given to mechanisms for
addressing outstanding cases and for continued support
to Kosovo’s judicial and law-enforcement institutions.

15-2613823/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

Increased coordination between EULEX and KFOR is
more important now than ever.
As I mentioned at the outset, we have been
encouraged to learn of progress towards normalization
of relations through the EU-facilitated dialogue. The
parties are closer than ever to resolving the outstanding
issues, including the principles for establishing
the association of Serb municipalities, energy,
telecommunications and freedom of movement on
Mitrovica bridge. We strongly encourage both sides to
find compromises on the outstanding issues from the
2013 Brussels agreement and reach agreements that
improve the lives of Kosovo residents regardless of
their ethnicity. We look forward to a positive outcome
in the next round of the dialogue, on 25 August.
Compromise on these issues will indeed be difficult but
remains essential to advancing the aspirations of both
Kosovo and Serbia to further integrate into European
and trans-Atlantic institutions.
We also commend both Serbia and Kosovo for
their continued commitment to fighting terrorism and
addressing the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters.
Both countries have worked to develop effective
preventive and response mechanisms to counter violent
extremism. We support efforts by both Serbian and
Kosovo officials to find practical ways to cooperate
on critical law-enforcement and counter-terrorism
issues. To be effective, it is essential that international
cooperation on counter-terrorism, countering violent
extremism and law enforcement include all of the
Balkans. That is why we fully support Kosovo’s
joining INTERPOL in the near term to enhance direct
coordination between Kosovo and the international
law-enforcement community.
In this vein, we repeat our call for all States Members
of the United Nations to acknowledge the importance
of Kosovo’s membership in INTERPOL as a means
to further facilitate law-enforcement cooperation on
counter-terrorism and organized crime. It is in all of our
interests to approve Kosovo’s bid for membership at the
INTERPOL General Assembly meeting in November.
Isolating Kosovo from participation in the instruments
of international cooperation on issues as important as
this only handicaps our collective efforts.
We also fully support Kosovo’s bid for membership
in UNESCO. Kosovo’s membership in UNESCO
would reinforce the importance that the international
community places on the World Heritage sites in

24/30

21/08/2015

Kosovo and the responsibilities of Kosovo authorities
for preserving those sites. Based on the Vienna formula,
Kosovo is eligible for membership in UNESCO as
a result of being a member of two United Nations
specialized agencies, the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank. We believe that it is important and
that all Member States should support Kosovo in this
effort.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Ivica Dačić, and
we share his sentiments.
We are grateful to Mr. Farid Zarif for the
presentation of the report (S/2015/579) and for his many
years of conscientious work as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
We wish him every success in his new and important
posting in Liberia.
Mr. Zarif’s briefing and the statements we have
heard have convinced us once again that the situation
in Kosovo is far from stable and should remain under
continuing international review. The statements made
by Mr. Thaçi only confirm that there are still very
major problems in the province linked, inter alia, to a
genuine attitude towards reconciliation. The situation in
the western Balkans as a whole remains turbulent. We
have seen how easily ill-advised words and actions can
reopen the long-standing wounds of old conflicts and
also how failure to tackle the root causes are reflected
in the contemporary realities of the region.
The Balkans face a number of serious challenges,
including inter-ethnic and interreligious antagonisms,
the surge in Islamist extremism and mass migration.
In Kosovo, the situation is further complicated
by socioeconomic problems and the increase in
unemployment, which stands at 55 per cent among
young people. That is why we deem it important not
to drop our guard or ignore the consequences of the
conflicts in the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
Many years have gone by, but the difficult
repercussions of this European tragedy continue to rear
their head, first of all with regard to the hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons who still have
not been able to return to their homes. This problem
cannot be swept under the carpet.

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

Secondly, we are troubled by the resurgence in
the activities of militant organizations such as the
Kosovo Liberation Army and armed groups that were
previously demilitarized in line with the universally
adopted decisions of the Security Council. The incident
that took place in Kumanovo in May exposed the
serious shortcomings that exist in terms of control over
cross-border movement by Kosovo criminal groups
into neighbouring countries. This represents a failure,
including on the part of the Kosovo Force.
Thirdly — and this thought was clearly expressed
at today’s meeting in the statements made by our
partners — we must continue our efforts to bring to
justice the perpetrators of serious crimes. We must do
so objectively and without any double standards.
After lengthy prevarication by Pristina, a decision
was finally adopted that should pave the way for the
creation of a specialist court to investigate the crimes
committed by members of the Kosovo Liberation
Army, including the trafficking in human organs
that was uncovered in the Marty report. Once again,
the decision was adopted under great international
pressure, and the result was achieved only after many
months of arm-twisting. What does that say about socalled Kosovo statehood? There is no certainty at all
that the mechanism being created in line with that
will be effective and protected from sabotage tactics.
Moreover, we are also troubled that the signing of the
law to establish the specialist court has been deferred
while the radical opposition attempts to challenge it.
We will keep that under close review.

S/PV.7510

designed to guarantee the survival of the Serb minority.
The plight of the Kosovar Serbs in the province is also
a serious concern. Violations of their rights continue,
including incidents committed on an inter-ethnic basis
and cases of desecration of Serbian Orthodox Church
shrines. Kosovo is riven with corruption. Decisions
taken in Kosovo judicial instances are of an increasingly
political character.
An illustration of that is the situation concerning
the property dispute between the Kosovar Albanian
economic entities, which are supported by the
municipal authorities, and the Visoki Dečani
Monastery. In that case, the court found against the
monastery. The illegitimate nature of the latest judicial
decision was highlighted both by United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, a
very reputable decision. The verdict must be reviewed.
It is being politicized and it is urgent that the review of
that verdict take place.
Ensuring the security and protection of Serbian
Orthodox monasteries and churches was and remains
a fundamental obligation, duty and responsibility of
the authorities in Pristina. What is happening with the
monastery in Visoki Dečani, the Church of Saint Petka
and other cathedrals is categorically unacceptable.
Order must be brought to the situation. The situation
must be addressed, including through the assistance
of the international presence. The issue must receive
special attention from the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General.

In any case, the perpetrators of crimes must be
brought to account regardless of the office they now
hold. We trust that the topic will be kept under full
review by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, the international community and
Mr. Zahir Tanin when he heads the Mission. Moreover,
we trust that they will draw on the records of Serbian
structures, above all those of the Serbian special
prosecutor on war crimes, in terms of their extensive
evidence on the cases in question. That is a major issue.

We are concerned at Pristina’s continuing steps
aimed at transforming the Kosovo security forces into
a full-fledged armed forces. There is no doubt in this
case that we are talking about a blatant violation of
resolution 1244 (1999), which does not provide for the
presence in the provincial territory of any armed groups
other than the Kosovo Force and an agreed number of
Serbian military personnel. The resolution stipulates
clear requirements with regard to the demiliaritization
of all Kosovar Albanian armed groups.

Turning to the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina under the mediation of the European Union, we
are seriously troubled by the failure to fully address the
main issue, which is the establishment of a community
of Serbian municipalities in Kosovo, in step with the
arrangements the parties agreed in 2013, whereby the
Serb communities would be granted genuine powers

We need to continue our efforts to curb the
participation of Kosovars in conflicts in the Middle
East. Again, this consideration was clearly highlighted
today in most of the statements made by the members
of the Security Council, including mention of their
recruitment by the Islamic State and other radical
organizations. Local authorities acknowledge that, in

15-2613825/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

terms of numbers fighting in hotspots, Kosovo has
the highest number in Europe of nationals per capita
who are fighting in such groups. However, effectively
combating that problem at an expert legislative level
is something that the authorities have acknowledged
that they are unable to do. We trust that the problem
will stay in the field of vision of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and of
other international presences, whose activities in the
province must continue.
In conclusion, I want to reaffirm our support to
the activities of the Mission, which remain the main
international presence in the province. Mr. Zarif has
done a great deal to make the Mission perform at the
highest level in implementing its commitments. The
Mission must command all the necessary financial and
personnel resources. We stress the importance of its
neutral status, its conscientiousness and its proactive
implementation of the mandates in the light of resolution
1244 (1999). We are certain that the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir
Tanin, will assume his new tasks with his characteristic
sense of responsibility. We wish him every success. We
call on the Kosovar Albanians to fully cooperate with
the new Special Representative.
Russia’s position on the issue of Kosovo remains
unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in
force as the mandatory international legal basis for a
resolution in Kosovo. No one is entitled to amend that
resolution, or any other Security Council decision;
and no one is entitled to ignore them. They must be
mandatatorily implemented by all.
We support the current reporting cycle and
frequency of reporting by the Secretary-General,
because expanding it will not resolve the problems. We
will simply see them pile up further. As seen in today’s
Council meeting, it appears that those problems remain
very serious. The Council must regularly continue to
keep under review what is happening in the province.
Ms. Darlow (New Zealand): Like others, I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zarif for his briefing this morning and for his
efforts over the past four years as the Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission (UNMIK) in
Kosovo. I wish him well in his next role, and we look
forward to working with his successor. I also welcome
Deputy Prime Minister Dačić and Mr. Thaçi to the
meeting.

26/30

21/08/2015

The last time the Council considered this agenda
item (see S/PV.7448), we, like others, urged the Kosovo
Assembly to take the remaining steps required in order
to establish a specialist court to try cases arising from
the European Union Special Investigative Task Force.
We are therefore pleased to note that the Assembly
recently voted to approve a constitutional amendment
for the establishment of the specialist court. We warmly
welcome that move, which we recognize was not easy.
It demonstrates an important commitment, not only to
justice and accountability but also, ultimately, to longterm reconciliation.
The decision of the Kosovo Assembly was
an important step towards addressing the serious
allegations that have been made, but it was of course
just a first step. There remains much to do before the
specialist court and associated prosecutor’s office
are established and functioning. Reaching that point
will not be a simple process. We therefore urge all
involved to build on the momentum of the decision of
the Kosovo Assembly and to drive the process forward
expeditiously.
In terms of the political situation, we welcome the
continued high-level engagement between Belgrade and
Pristina in the European Union-facilitated dialogue.
We encourage both sides to approach the dialogue
constructively. The more progress that is made in
normalizing relations, the more flexibility will need to
be shown by all leaders in order to address core issues.
Particular attention is needed to resolve outstanding
issues in northern Kosovo. Practical cooperation, such
as that demonstrated by the mayors of South and North
Mitrovica, helpfully contributes to the process. Beyond
that, we encourage both sides to make progress on
other issues identified in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2015/579), including the protection of cultural and
religious sites, the issue of internally displaced persons
and the question of missing persons.
Finally, with respect to the frequency with which
the Council considers this agenda item, New Zealand
echoes the words of others this morning and reiterates
the comments we made during the Council’s most recent
discussion on Kosovo, regarding the organization of the
Council’s work. We are not convinced that the Council’s
current practice with respect to UNMIK is calibrated
optimally. While it is important for the Council to hear
from those affected by its decisions, we believe that
there should be flexibility in how the Council monitors

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

the situation in Kosovo so that it can more appropriately
reflect the situation on the ground.
Mr. Casimiro (Angola): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, for introducing the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2015/579). We welcome the
participation in today’s briefing of Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and thank him for his statement. We
equally welcome Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
Angola reaffirms its position that resolution 1244
(1999) remains the applicable legal framework in efforts
to reach a solution for Kosovo through dialogue and
negotiation, based on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and relevant Council
resolutions. We therefore support the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Serbia and understand the
legitimate concerns of that country on the Kosovo issue.
We underline the fundamental role played by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in the Kosovo region in promoting
security, stability and respect for human rights, its
cooperation with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, and its engagement
with Pristina and Belgrade. We continue to note that
the overall security situation in Kosovo remains calm
and stable.
Concerning the general political environment,
we value the ongoing Belgrade-Pristina high-level
engagement in the European Union-facilitated dialogue,
in particular the meeting in Brussels on 23 and
29 June under the auspices of the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
Addressing outstanding issues of implementation,
including the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, is one
of the main points of contention in terms of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013. We hope that a final
political agreement can be reached soon.
We welcome the resumed participation of Kosovo
Serb representatives from the Serbian Civic Initiative in
the Kosovo Government and Assembly after an absence
of two months, enabling the governing coalition to
promote its extensive legislative programme. We regret
the failure of the Assembly of Kosovo to approve a

S/PV.7510

constitutional amendment on the establishment of
a specialist court for the prosecution of war crimes
committed during the Kosovo war.
Concerning human rights, we welcome the
organization on 21 and 22 April of a conference
on the implementation of a legal framework on the
protection of the rights of women and gender equality,
which took place in Pristina. We also welcome the
adoption on 28 May by the Assembly of Kosovo, with
assistance from the OSCE, of the human rights law
package, comprising new laws on gender equality,
anti-discrimination and the Ombudsperson institution,
as well as amendments to laws on the composition and
functions of the judiciary and the Kosovo strategy on
property rights.
We are deeply concerned over youth radicalization,
violent extremism and other transnational challenges
affecting the Kosovo region. We call on the authorities
to adopt and implement energetic measures and policies
to counter such negative and dangerous trends.
Finally, we commend the continued active role of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo in facilitating dialogue among communities
and officials and with international organizations,
particularly those focused on efforts aimed at preventing
and reducing tensions and promoting cooperation
among local authorities. We value the work carried
out by UNMIK under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, in the promotion of security, stability, rule of law
and respect for human rights, in accordance with the
Mission’s mandate.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
First, I want to acknowledge the presence of
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. I thank him for
sharing his perspectives with the Council. I also thank
Mr. Hashim Thaçi for his statement.
I want to thank in particular Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zarif for his insightful briefing
on recent developments in Kosovo. We are in his great
debt for the dedication and sprit of perseverance that
he has demonstrated in fulfilling his mission. While
we wish him well in his next assignment, we welcome
very warmly our colleague Mr. Tanin, as his worthy
successor in Kosovo.

15-2613827/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

We believe that when Belgrade and Pristina
endorsed the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations on 19 April 2013, the
stage was set for a visible and sustainable improvement
of relations between Serbia and Kosovo. Today, we are
encouraged by the continuation of the technical and
high-level dialogue between the parties in addressing
the outstanding issues related to the Agreement.
There is, however, a risk of reversing the gains
achieved thus far in peaceful intercommunity
relations if the parties are unable to achieve consensus
in implementing its outstanding provisions. The
conflicting interpretations by both sides on the issue
of the formation of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities constitutes an obstacle
to the full implementation of the agreement. That is
why we underscore the need for the parties not only to
exercise flexibility, but also to remain steadfast in their
commitment to the process.
It is significant that the technical talks between
the parties in the framework of the customs agreement
are witnessing continuing progress, with the support of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX). The dialogue has been successful in reaching
agreement for the opening of two interim border
crossings by 2016. Through that mechanism, hitherto
controlled goods, including much-needed medicines,
will be transported freely across boundaries, thereby
promoting increased commercial opportunities and
providing relief to the sick.
The relationship between justice and reconciliation
is another important dimension of Serbia-Kosovo
relations. Let me emphasize the nexus between
justice and reconciliation. There is an inextricable
link between them. In ensuring that the success of
reconciliation is complete, it is imperative that the
families of the victims of the Kosovo and Metohija
conflict receive justice. That is why, in our view, the
establishment of a specialist court to try war crimes is
an important and significant development. We expect
that the findings of the EULEX Special Investigative
Task Force concerning the inhumane treatment of
people and illicit trafficking in human organs will lead
to the prosecution of the perpetrators.
Genuine reconciliation remains crucial to
strengthening cohesion and laying the foundation
for peace and progress. The confidence-building
projects embarked upon by the United Nations Interim

28/30

21/08/2015

Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) have been
appropriately designed to achieve that objective. They
are facilitating dialogue not only between faiths but
also between cultures, and are already yielding tangible
results. Let there be no doubt about the pivotal role
of UNMIK in the promotion of security and stability
in Kosovo — it cannot be ignored. UNMIK remains
the bridge and the bridge-builder. We encourage the
Mission and the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tanin, to be unrelenting in their
quests for the achievement of the mandate in Kosovo.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of Serbia has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): Please allow me briefly
to respond to several statements we heard in various
interventions. I am very surprised that some of the
participants of at this meeting have said that we inserted
nationalist rhetoric into the discussion. I simply raised
the issue of Serbian cultural heritage, its protection and
the devastation of our monuments — monuments tht date
from the twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
That has nothing to do with nationalist rhetoric. What
do members of the Council think? Should we applaud
such acts of violence?
I am certain that we have the right to say something
in our own defence. To everything that I have presented
and demonstrated, Mr. Thaçi responded with the
word “genocide”. No, he first started with “fascism”,
“racism”, “genocide”, “rape” and “nationalist rhetoric”.
Those were the words he used. First of all — to the
representatives of the United States, the United
Kingdom and France — in both World Wars Serbia and
Yugoslavia were your allies and fought on your side
in the coalition against fascism. We can never be on
the fascist side. We fought against Albania in the First
and Second World Wars. As members of the Council
know, when it comes to Albania, after the World Wars
Yugoslavia was an advocate of friendship between
Enver Hoxha and Tito. Those allegations of genocide,
racism and fascism are absurd. Mister Thaçi mentioned
thousands of rapes. I am not against a court delivering
a judgement against someone accused of allegedly
committing a crime. But regarding that number, those
thousands of rapes that were actually mentioned and

15-26138

21/08/2015

Kosovo

the alleged rapes of young men — Mr. Thaçi cannot
apply double standards in regard to us.
I expect the great Powers to corroborate everything
that we did in past centuries, and not remain silent in
the wake of the accusations that we are facing — that
we are fascists, engage in racial rhetoric, that we are
rapists. I do not know what kind of words they are, but
UNESCO proclaimed four sites under its protection
to be in danger. From whom are they in danger? Not
from our side. That is why we object to Kosovo’s bid for
membership in UNESCO.
Eight out of 15 countries here have recognized the
independence of Kosovo, but I would like members to be
circumspect and to refrain from calling other countries
to recognize the independence of Kosovo. I listened to
the statement made by the representative of Jordan, and
I must say that Jordan has not had diplomatic relations
with Israel because of Palestine. I hope that there will not
come a time when its territorial integrity will be called
into question, and then having to wait for everyone else
to make a decision in regard to its territorial integrity.
I hope Jordan will not experience that first-hand. We
cannot applaud those and similar decisions.
We wish to have excellent relations with the United
States of America, as we deem it to be of key importance
for our future. But I would like to raise one question
because the United States called on all Member States
to support Kosovo’s bid to UNESCO. Can I ask the
United States of America, where were its principles
when it asked Member States a couple of years ago not
to vote for Palestine? I recall that President Obama said
that all countries should refrain and wait until Israel and
Palestine reach an agreement before they recognized
Palestine. Now the United States of America is asking
for the recognition of Kosovo and the admission of
Kosovo to UNESCO. But the same principle was not
applied in the case of Palestine.
Members of the Council know that at our latest
meeting in Brussels we were not able to reach an
agreement because the Albanian side was not willing to
accept all the agreements put on the table before us. The
Albanian delegation, which also included Mr. Thaçi,
refused this. He now mentions propaganda and all
pictures that I brought with me here of devastated sites.
Can he respond to those pictures — whether they are
genuine or not? Who is this person who demolished the
cross on the Orthodox church? Was he arrested? Does
the graffiti at this protected UNESCO World Heritage

S/PV.7510

site not say “ISIS”, “there is no god but Allah” and
“the Caliphate is coming”? I would just like to hear a
response to those questions.
I genuinely desire good relations with Pristina, and
Mr. Thaçi and I have established things on the right
footing and have initiated this in all good will. But I
must regretfully say that the same double standard
that has been applied to Israel and Palestine is being
applied to Kosovo. I am here as the representative of
the Republic of Serbia, and my task is to defend its
interests and those of the Serbian people. When we are
speaking of propaganda, I would like to point out that
Kosovo has apparently already become a member of
the United Nations. We should note that Mr. Thaçi’s
statement is presented as that of Mr. Thaçi, the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Kosovo. Have we thus recognized Kosovo
at this meeting of the Security Council as a Member
of the United Nations? We have witnessed this kind of
thing for years now and have tolerated it because we
do not want to exacerbate the issues. But why are we
being accused of being fascist or racist when we discuss
reconciliation? How can our words be condemned when
we are speaking and showing our concern about our
cultural heritage? What is wrong with my statements?
I would like to clarify that issue. I am genuinely
trying to find a sustainable solution to the Kosovo
issue, because in the status quo we are in, while Serbia
is said to be acting constructively, behind our backs
preparations are being made to recognize Kosovo as
a unilaterally proclaimed State. What is the difference
between that unilateral act of Pristina and the situation
of Israel and Palestine? I ask any country what it would
do if it experienced such a thing on its territory. That
is why it is important to uphold principles, and in our
case every principle has been flagrantly infringed and
violated. But double standards are something we will
never accept. As an example of this, I can cite two
statements by Hashim Thaçi recorded today, the first
to the effect that our cultural heritage has never been
better protected than it is today in Kosovo — when I
have shown the Council the pictures of what remains
of the Serbian cultural sites and monuments — and the
second saying that Albanians have always constituted
the majority population in Kosovo.
I should note that we wish to continue to cooperate
well and to maintain our dialogue in Brussels. We are
a very small country, and we cannot exert influence
on the work of the Security Council. Since it has been

15-2613829/30

S/PV.7510

Kosovo

stated that resolution 1244 (1999) is still in force, and
yet other countries are being urged not to comply with
or uphold that resolution, I believe we should hold a
meeting to discuss whether it is still in force and why
double standards are being applied in that regard.
Instead of reacting to these photographs with a concrete
response, some have spoken of fascism, racism and so
on. I find myself compelled to ask why I am here and
why the Council wants to have a dialogue with us. Why
are the great Powers saying that Serbia is a leader in the
region and a factor in its stabilization? I do not wish to
hear other countries insult my country, and that does
not contribute to reconciliation. On 27 August Austria
is organizing a meeting in Vienna, even proposing
a soccer match between the countries aspiring to
membership of the European Union (EU) and EU
member States, and we are required to show concrete
examples of such things as the preservation of cultural
heritage, to demonstrate our willingness to cooperate.
I have nothing against other ethnic and religious
communities speaking on the situation in Belgrade or
other cities and towns in Serbia. We do not want to
be told we are fascists or racists. Twenty years have
passed since the war and armed conflict. Many things
had changed significantly 20 years after, and since the
end of the Second World War. Yet 20 years after the end
of our conflict, we are still experiencing the same state
of affairs and the same conflicts. I simply wished to
explain my reaction to this and I will not repeat it again.
The President: Mr. Hashim Thaçi has asked for the
floor to make a further statement. I now give him the
floor.
Mr. Thaçi (spoke in Albanian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I am sorry that this
platform is being misused for the purposes of political

30/30

21/08/2015

propaganda and everyday political issues in Serbia.
Kosovo is a new, multi-ethnic country and a State
whose citizens are equal before the law. I am very sorry
that we are wasting the Security Council’s time.
We could talk and debate for hours, but the facts
are clear and unalterable. In my opening remarks I
mentioned that there could be no document, even in
this institution, capable of containing all the crimes
and the genocide that Serbia committed in Kosovo. The
war is over. Kosovo is an independent and sovereign
country, now recognized by 111 States. It is a member
of major international mechanisms and organizations.
It is strengthening its international status and has built
excellent relations with all the countries in the region.
In the coming days we will sign a border demarcation
agreement with Montenegro. We have fostered very
good neighbourly relations with a view to ensuring
peace and stability in the region. We have also begun
to normalize relations between Serbia and Kosovo
on an equal footing. Despite all the difficulties in
implementing the agreements, the dialogue has been
successful. I do not wish to discuss history here, but let
me just say that Kosovo is now on a clear path towards
progress and Euro-Atlantic integration, including being
a part of NATO, the European Union and the United
Nations.
The President: On behalf of the Security Council,
I wold like to express our gratitude to Mr. Farid Zarif,
who today made his last briefing to the Council in his
capacity as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We have
appreciated his leadership of UNMIK and we wish him
every success in his new assignment.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

15-26138
