UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/501
11 June 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 11 JUNE 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 11 June 1998,
which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

98-16562 (E)

120698

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/501
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 11 June 1998 from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
seventeenth monthly report on operations of the Stabilization Force (SFOR). I
would appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1998/501
English
Page 3

Appendix
Seventeenth monthly report to the Security Council
on the operations of the Stabilization Force

1.
There are approximately 35,000 troops currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all countries of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and from 20 non-NATO countries.
2.
Over the reporting period (21 April-20 May), the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) continued to conduct surveillance and reconnaissance by means of ground
and air patrols. Approximately 2,200 sorties were flown by combat aircraft,
with the SFOR helicopter fleet flying approximately 150 hours.
3.
Over the reporting period, SFOR continued to secure the transmission
towers used by Srpska Radio Television (SRT) at Duga Nijva, Udrigovo and Veliki
Zep in Multinational Division North (MND(N)), and at Trebevic and Leotar in MND
(South-East). In line with the SRT Restructuring Agreement which was concluded
by the Office of the High Representative in February, SFOR began a phased
operation on 20 May to withdraw from the five towers, withdrawing first from the
sites at Leotar, Udrigovo and Duga Nijva. Following withdrawal, SFOR will
contribute to ensuring SRT compliance with the Restructuring Agreement by media
monitoring, routine patrols of the tower sites and unannounced technical
inspections of the SRT tower equipment. SFOR and personnel of the Office of the
High Representative retain free, unrestricted and immediate access to the
towers.
4.
SFOR has stepped up its operations near the border with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, in order to use its existing authorities under Annex I A
of the Peace Agreement to help ensure compliance with the prohibition on the
transport of weapons established by Security Council resolution 1160 (1998).
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
5.
The parties remain generally compliant with most military provisions
of the Peace Agreement across the whole area of operations. However, over the
reporting period, the return of refugees and displaced persons led to increased
tension in a number of areas, most notably in the Federation, in Derventa and
Drvar and in MND(North) and MND(South-West).
6.
On 23 April, at Derventa, violence occurred at a Catholic mass which
had been organized in the village. Stones and Molotov cocktails were thrown by
a crowd of approximately 400 at SFOR buses transporting Bosnian Croats to the
village to celebrate mass. No injuries were reported. SFOR troops and members
of the United Nations International Police Task Force (IPTF) succeeded in
preventing the crowd from entering the church, which was subsequently evacuated,
and the Bosnian Croats were escorted from the village by SFOR troops.
7.
On 24 April, in Drvar, Bosnian Serbs and Croats clashed at a former
Bosnian Croat Army barracks in the town, which was being used as a resettlement
site for Bosnian Serb refugees. Bosnian Croats took over the Bosnian Serb
/...

S/1998/501
English
Page 4

Communal Council building, and set fire to vehicles belonging to international
organizations and to a number of buildings in the town, including the United
Nations civilian affairs offices and the IPTF station. The Bosnian Serb mayor
of the town was injured. SFOR troops dispersed the rioters, and officials of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
subsequently escorted the Bosnian Serb refugees from Drvar to Banja Luka.
8.
In addition, during the last week of April, 15 explosions and arson
attacks in Stolac in MND(South-East) destroyed at least 6 Bosniac-owned houses,
bringing to 31 the number of houses destroyed in the area since 1 January. An
additional 12 were damaged over the same period.
9.
Over the reporting period SFOR conducted a total of 301 inspections of
military weapons storage sites: 92 Bosniac; 70 Bosnian Croat; 120 Bosnian Serb;
and 19 Federation. The following weapons were confiscated: from the Bosnian
Serbs, three 90 mm tank shells and six hand grenades; from the Bosniacs, 1,600
rounds of 7.9 mm ammunition and 4,420 rounds of 7.62 mm ammunition; and from the
Bosnian Croats, five 82 mm mortar rounds. In accordance with SFOR policy, those
confiscated weapons will be destroyed, after a period of time to allow for
appeals.
10. SFOR supported 64 IPTF-led inspections of local police stations over
the reporting period, 23 in the Republika Srpska and 41 in the Federation.
During those inspections, the following weapons were confiscated: from the
Federation 24 rifles, 2 pistols, 26 grenades, 13 mines, 1 long-barrelled weapon
and 4,429 small arms rounds; from the Republika Srpska, 1 rifle, 15 grenades, 3
long-barrelled weapons and 79 small arms rounds.
11. Over the reporting period SFOR and IPTF dismantled 10 unauthorized
checkpoints, 1 in the Federation and 9 in the Republika Srpska.
12. SFOR monitored 1,034 training and movement activities over the
reporting period: 244 Bosniac; 42 Bosnian Croat, 648 Bosnian Serb and 100
Federation. Owing to non-compliance with the implementation of the common
licence plate programme (see para. 14 below), bans have been imposed until
further notice on the 121st and 820th Bosniac Army Brigade, on the 2nd Bosnian
Croat Guard Brigade, on the Bosnian Croat instruction centre and on the reserve
units of the 512th Bosnian Serb Brigade.
13. SFOR monitored 608 demining operations: 236 Bosniac; 174 Bosnian
Croat; 184 Bosnian Serb; and 14 Federation. A total of 189 anti-tank mines,
1,290 anti-personnel mines and 105 items of unexploded ordnance were removed.
There are currently no bans imposed on the entity armed forces for
non-compliance with demining operations. However, a training and movement ban
was placed on the Bosnian Serb Reserve Forces in MND(South-West), from 3 to
19 May, for non-compliance with countermining operations.
14. SFOR continues to monitor and to encourage compliance with the common
licence plate programme. While the civilian implementation of the programme has
been delayed until 31 August, military implementation began on 1 May.
Consequently, SFOR has monitored all routine patrols and inspections of military
convoys in Bosnian and Herzegovina for compliance with the programme. As
/...

S/1998/501
English
Page 5

reported in paragraph 12, bans have been placed on a number of units because of
non-compliance.
15. The overall ban imposed upon all activities of the Republika Srpska
Police Anti-Terrorist Brigade has not yet been lifted, owing to the Brigade’s
continuing non-compliance with the instructions of the SFOR Commander. However,
following a complete review by SFOR of Unit 5 of the Anti-Terrorist Brigade in
Doboj, it was decided to re-certify the unit. Consequently, on 11 May, SFOR
issued weapons permit identification cards, weapons and ammunition to 103
specialist policemen in Doboj, together with 10 vehicles and various types of
secure communication equipment.
16. On 14 May, SFOR and IPTF conducted joint compliance inspections of all
civil and specialist police premises in the Pale area, in the wake of the recent
move of the Republika Srpska Government from Pale to Banja Luka. As authorized
under the provisions of the Peace Agreement, IPTF, supported by SFOR, inspected
civil law enforcement facilities, while SFOR troops inspected six other
facilities in Pale to ensure compliance by the Specialist Police. The Republika
Srpska local authorities and the Bosnian Serb army and police representatives
were consulted at all stages of the operation in order to verify the legitimacy
of all personnel and activities, and all international organizations and
agencies were notified. Five military police officers from the Bosnian Serb
505th Brigade were detained in the Pale police station because they had no
identity cards, and their arms were confiscated. Inspections of 15 public
buildings and facilities in Pale were also conducted, without incident.
Cooperation with international organizations
17. Within its capabilities, SFOR continues to provide assistance to the
international organizations in theatre, working routinely with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Office of the High
Representative, IPTF, the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
UNHCR.
18. In the light of recent violent disturbances related to the return of
displaced persons and refugees, most notably in Drvar at the end of April, the
SFOR Commander, the High Representative and other principals agreed on the need
to establish a working-level mechanism to forestall future such disturbances
elsewhere. Accordingly, the Office of the High Representative has set up an
Inter-Agency Planning Group to enhance cooperation between the various
organizations in theatre. SFOR will participate in the Group, together with the
Office of the High Representative, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, IPTF, OSCE, UNHCR and the European Community’s Monitoring Mission. The
inaugural meeting of the Planning Group was held on 7 May 1998. In parallel
with the establishment of the Group, and in order to assist in the return of
displaced persons and refugees, SFOR also established action groups at theatre
and MND level. Their mission is to harmonize and direct SFOR efforts to assist
displaced persons and refugees, and to provide the linkages between SFOR and the
theatre and regional local structures of the Reconstruction and Return Task
Force and UNHCR. In addition, SFOR will establish a common return database, and
conduct information operations on themes related to displaced persons and

/...

S/1998/501
English
Page 6

refugees. It will also continue to conduct surveys to support returns of
displaced persons and refugees.
19. SFOR continues to support the installation phase of the municipal
elections, through the OSCE Election Results Implementation Committees at
national and local levels, and through the provision of a secure environment,
area security and support to IPTF.
20. SFOR also continues to provide assistance to the Office of the High
Representative in the field of civil air traffic, most notably assisting in the
development of operations at Sarajevo airport and continuing to work to enable
Mostar airport to open to commercial traffic in the near future.
Outlook
21. Returns of displaced persons and refugees are likely to continue to be
accompanied by acts of intimidation and violence. SFOR will help ensure the
provision of a secure environment to facilitate returns.
22. The detailed planning is now in place for the seamless continuation of
SFOR beyond the end of its current mandate on 20 June, subject to an appropriate
resolution of the Security Council.

-----
