A/S-24/PV.9

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Twenty-fourth special session

9

th meeting
Friday, 30 June 2000, 10 a.m.
Geneva

President:

Mr. Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Khorram
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the special session
of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/S-24/7)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take action on the draft resolution
recommended by the Credentials Committee in
paragraph 15 of its report. The Credentials Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
S-24/1).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of agenda item 3 (b).
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Proposals for further initiatives for social
development
(a) Review and appraisal of progress since the
World Summit for Social Development

(b) Proposals for further initiatives for the full
implementation of the Copenhagen Declaration
on Social Development and Programme of
Action of the World Summit for Social
Development
The Acting President: I first give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Bedredin Ibraimi, Deputy Prime
Minister of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.
Mr. Ibraimi (the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia) (spoke in Macedonian; English text
furnished by the delegation): At the outset, on behalf of
the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, I would
like to congratulate Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab on his
election as President of the General Assembly at its
special session on the implementation of decision
adopted at the World Summit on Social Development.
We thank him for his efforts in successfully organizing
the session and express the hope that our work will be
successful and fruitful. I would also like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
commitment to the special session and to the results
that it is expected to produce. Furthermore, allow me to
thank Switzerland for its hospitality and its efforts,
along with the citizens of Geneva. Our thanks go also
to all others who made a contribution to the
organization of this important session.
The start of the new millennium is the right
moment to review what has been achieved thus far and
to promote our future commitments in the field of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-60256 (E)
`````````

A/S-24/PV.9

social development. The several sessions held by the
Preparatory Committee and by the Commission for
Social Development demonstrated that little progress
has been made in implementing the commitments
undertaken at the World Summit on Social
Development. Seen from the perspective of the twentyfirst century, it can be concluded that the twentieth
century was the one in which humanity reached the
highest level of technological development, but it was
also one in which we faced the greatest sufferings and
humiliation, a century in which poverty was not
eradicated, a century without full employment, social
integration and social services for all.
The basic goals of every society are to decrease
and eradicate poverty and to improve the standard of
living of its people. It is necessary to undertake
appropriate measures and policies to reach these goals.
The United Nations has an important role to play in
designing international relations in this sphere,
especially in terms of the globalization of the world
economy and of narrowing the differences between rich
and poor countries. Countries in transition, as well as
developing, small and underdeveloped countries,
rightfully expect that this special session will be an
occasion when problems we are facing can be
identified and when concrete action for the full and
effective implementation of what was agreed upon in
Copenhagen can be undertaken.
In the period since the 1995 World Summit, the
Republic of Macedonia has been consistently pursuing
a policy of stabilizing economic trends and of
structural reform. The process of establishing a State
governed by the rule of law within a parliamentary
democracy is being continuously strengthened; the
political system facilitates democratic processes; we
enjoy civic tolerance, and human and civil rights and
freedoms, which represent the basis upon which the
Macedonian State has grown. The development of
inter-ethnic relations and stability are the key to the
peace and stability of the country and of the region,
which form the basis for strengthening our
international position.
Like other countries in transition, the Republic of
Macedonia has during this period been addressing the
issue of a large impoverished population and all the
implications of poverty. That situation was created by
several years of decline in economic activities, the
insolvency of economic actors, current deficits of
social funds, the implementation of privatization and

2

structural reforms, and the implementation of a
stabilization policy. In order to permit accelerated
economic development, a precondition for social
development, the Government of the Republic of
Macedonia, in May this year, adopted its 2003
programme for economic development and reform in
Macedonia.
Last year, the crisis in the region and the events
in neighbouring Yugoslavia had an impact in the
Republic of Macedonia as well. The social price that
our State paid was increased unemployment and a large
number of laid-off workers, a huge number of refugees
who were accommodated on our territory, and an
increase in the number of families that were the
beneficiaries of social assistance. However, with
enhanced involvement by the Government and other
entities, as well as through additional macro-economic
policy measures and with the support of the
international community, a larger decline in production
was prevented. With the end of military activities in the
region beginning in June 1999, a trend of growth in
industrial production commenced. As one of the
countries most affected by the Kosovo crisis, the
Republic of Macedonia concluded a new arrangement
with the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund. In this regard, the Government decided to
prepare two strategic documents: a provisional report
on decreasing poverty, and a strategy for decreasing
poverty.
Unemployment, among the greatest world
problems, is present in the Republic of Macedonia as
well. In addition to standing at a high rate,
unemployment in our country also affects large
numbers of young people. The Government is making
efforts to increase employment. Starting in 1995, with
financial assistance from the World Bank, we began
implementing our project on social reforms and
technical assistance, and its sub-project, the
programme for re-employment. The project is being
successfully implemented and its various benefits have
been confirmed by representatives of the World Bank.
By the end of this year we will adopt a national
strategy, that is to say an agreement on employment
among the Government, trade unions, chambers of
commerce and other actors, to stimulate and promote
forms of employment.
Regretfully, I have to stress that over the past two
years, at the international level, we have seen flagrant
violation of and disrespect for the fundamental values

A/S-24/PV.9

of democratic society. In addition to the natural
disasters that the world has faced, we are witnessing a
growing trend towards war, conflict and internal and
external tensions. From the perspective of the Republic
of Macedonia, I wish to elaborate upon the huge crisis
that occurred in the region of South-Eastern Europe,
the consequences of which endangered stability and
security in the Balkans and beyond in Europe.
The Kosovo crisis especially affected the
Republic of Macedonia. We managed to deal with a
huge number of refugees — 360,000, or 18 per cent of
the total population. This was an economic, social and
political situation that could have led to the
destabilization of the country, especially if one takes
into consideration the insufficiently prompt reaction of
the international community. The damages that the
Macedonian economy suffered, and still suffers, are
huge. All of this resulted in the deterioration of an
already difficult economic and social situation.
However, the citizens of the Republic of
Macedonia demonstrated a high level of humanity
towards the refugees. They also displayed tolerance,
solidarity and moderation under the enormous social,
political and economic pressures which had been
created and which could have resulted in undesired
consequences.
The Republic of Macedonia managed to
overcome these difficulties, but their consequences can
still be felt in the national economy. The elimination of
these consequences requires indispensable financial
assistance and support by the international community.
Compensation for damages wrought on the
Macedonian economy should be an obligation of the
international community. Therefore, I would like to
take this opportunity to call upon the international
community to continue its efforts and consistently
fulfil the commitments it has undertaken. Our presence
here confirms our common commitment to
strengthening cooperation in the interest of peace,
stability and security, as well as of social and economic
development.
Political stability as a precondition for economic
development is of great relevance and importance,
since without political stability we cannot imagine or
achieve economic prosperity and development in our
States, regions or worldwide.
I would like to underline the importance of the
Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe for the

Republic of Macedonia. We consider that it offers great
possibilities for the region to finally live in peace,
stability and prosperity and to be more promptly
integrated into the European family.
In the 1999-2000 period, progress has been
evident in relations between the Republic of
Macedonia and the European Union. The process of
association of Macedonia with the European Union
commenced with the ultimate goal being integrated
into the Union. It is noteworthy that the Republic of
Macedonia was the first country in the region to start
negotiations on the conclusion of a stabilization and
association agreement. We are working intensively, and
it is expected that negotiations will be completed by
the end of this year.
The Republic of Macedonia is decisively
committed to accelerating its integration into the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Great progress
has been made, and our activities and reform
orientation contained in the Annual National
Programme for Membership of the Republic of
Macedonia in NATO have been supported.
From all that I have stated here, it can be
concluded that the Republic of Macedonia actively
participates in present modern global trends, and I
would like to underline our commitments to a
consistent respect for and implementation of the
obligations undertaken at the World Summit for Social
Development and at this special session.
The Acting President: I would now like to invite
Her Excellency Mrs. Tembé Ashira Assih-Aissah,
Minister for Social Affairs of Togo to take the floor.
Mrs. Assih-Aissah (Togo) (spoke in French):
First and foremost, allow me to convey the warm
greetings of the President of the Togolese Republic,
General Gnassingbé Eyadema, and of the Togolese
Government and people.
Our session’s theme, “World Summit for Social
Development
and
beyond:
achieving
social
development for all in a globalizing world”, deserves
the interest of all of the countries in the world,
especially those of Africa, whose evolution towards a
better, more just and more equitable world is regularly
disrupted by constant socio-political crises, wars and
natural disasters. Togo thus welcomes the holding of
this session and assures you, Mr. President, that it will

3

A/S-24/PV.9

support any initiative that may serve to ensure the
socio-economic betterment of humankind.

against AIDS, which has been the object of a
systematic information and awareness campaign.

The economic difficulties of the 1980s confronted
my country with a major challenge, that of building a
just, equitable and progressive society. That meant
re-thinking social development policies and ensuring
that they had a real impact on the living conditions of
people in the context of meagre financial resources. It
is in line with these ideas that, like other countries,
Togo welcomed the World Summit for Social
Development in Copenhagen with the hope of having a
process launched that would provide relevant responses
to the social problems that have now been identified.

In summary, thanks to these actions, the main
social indicators are gradually improving in the health
and education sectors. Many other activities have also
been carried out to promote women and the private
sector. Concerning social integration, multi-sectoral
projects, implemented with development partners, are
also helping to achieve this goal.

We must recognize that the pre-Copenhagen
situation was not at all encouraging. The main
socio-economic indicators, which had been constantly
improving towards the end of the 1980s, underwent a
decline following the socio-economic and political
crisis which started in the year 1990. The choices and
objectives that were decided upon in 1995 have
allowed the Togolese Government to introduce
economic reforms and to take measures that would help
to place the macro-economic situation on a more
healthy footing and promote sustained growth. The
liberalization and restructuring of the economy have
strengthened the role of civil society, particularly that
of non-governmental organizations, groups and
production associations, in designing and implementing
development projects. Thus in the economic sector, the
average annual growth rate in our country was
4.4 per cent between 1995 and 1999.
In the fight against poverty, studies have been
drawn up that have made possible a real assessment of
the causes of poverty and provided reliable data for the
implementation of a certain number of programmes and
projects. The micro-projects programme has provided
considerable
assistance
to
agricultural
and
tradespersons’ groups and has promoted the
establishment and introduction of social and
community infrastructures. The extension of microfinance to help women in certain areas has given a new
dynamism to income-generating activities. The
implementation of an urban development programme,
giving rise to work with high labour intensity, has
promoted the creation of jobs for young people.
Specific projects have made it possible to improve
basic services such as schools, health services, water
supply and hygiene, while giving priority to the fight

4

We must recognize, however, that the constant
economic adjustments and austerity measures are
further marginalizing the most vulnerable and most
disadvantaged segments of the population, and their
ranks are constantly swelling. Despite these
difficulties, those segments of the population are
benefiting from many specific actions that are targeted
towards promoting activities in the fields of
consciousness-raising,
information,
education,
communication, prevention and social integration.
When we turn to the subject of employment, with
the combined effect of structural adjustment
programmes, the socio-political crisis which our
country has undergone and the incapacity of our
economy to generate productive jobs on a sufficient
scale, we see that the unemployment rate has worsened
and is estimated to represent more than 30 per cent of
the active population. Aware of the major challenge it
has to face, the Government has taken an array of
measures aimed at gradually curbing unemployment
among young people.
The socio-political disruptions that our country
experienced in its move towards democracy in the
1990s did not make it possible to create the best
conditions to reverse the trend towards a decline in the
living conditions of our people and the marginalization
of the disadvantaged social sectors.
To end this situation, political initiatives taken
with the support of the international community have
made possible the signature of the Lomé framework
agreement between the opposition and the presidential
majority. This agreement has marked the way for the
peaceful anchoring of democracy in our country. To
that end, a joint monitoring committee for this
Agreement has started work and an Independent
National Electoral Commission has been established.
Thus, efforts have been made to strengthen the rule of
law.

A/S-24/PV.9

The implementation of the Copenhagen
recommendations requires considerable financial
resources. This can be possible only if the
commitments of solidarity and partnership between
rich and poor countries are strengthened.
In that regard, measures such as the cancellation
of the debt of the least developed countries, the
opening up of industrialized countries’ markets to
products from developing countries, the introduction of
more just and equitable multilateral trade rules and a
reversal of the trend of reduced official development
assistance should be seriously considered.
Social development for all in a globalizing world
can become a reality only if there is real awareness of
responsibility at all levels. Present and future
generations will be eternally grateful to us for seeing to
that.
The Acting President: I now call on Her
Excellency Mrs. Suad El-Fatih, Adviser to the
President on Women and Children’s Affairs of the
Sudan.
Mrs. El-Fatih (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Kofi Annan for his growing interest
in third world countries and the Swiss Government for
hosting this Summit in this beautiful country.
Five years have elapsed since the World Summit
for Social Development adopted the Copenhagen
Declaration and Programme of Action, which placed
the human being at the centre of development. The
leaders of our countries committed themselves to
providing the much-needed political support for the
eradication of poverty, the promotion of full and
productive
employment,
the
reduction
of
unemployment and the fostering of social integration
through the implementation of the 10 Copenhagen
commitments.
Those five years have failed to bring about what
we had expected in terms of fulfilling the commitments
and the implementation of the recommendations
contained in the two Copenhagen documents. Social
conditions in developing countries, particularly in
Africa, continue to be stagnant, if not deteriorating, and
the gap between rich and poor countries has widened.
The degree of poverty has escalated in the least
developed countries. A sharp decline in employment
opportunities is clearly manifested and has led to the
crippling of the process of social integration. This has

had a negative impact on structural adjustment
programmes. The unprecedented heavy burden of
external debt and debt-servicing represents a major
obstacle to the attainment of development in the
indebted countries. It has become evident that the
process of globalization, which is based on
liberalization of trade, is exacerbating the already
precarious economic situation in developing countries,
particularly in Africa.
If appropriate preventive measures are not taken,
the negative impact of globalization will result in the
further deterioration of conditions in developing
countries. It will also lead to an increase in poverty
levels and to considerable job losses, thus negatively
affecting social development. The globalization and
monopolization of information will lead to the
marginalization of cultures and the disintegration of the
identity of many communities.
Although we recognize that social development is
a national responsibility, it cannot be successfully and
optimally achieved without the collective commitments
and efforts of the international community. In this
connection, we believe in the necessity of fulfilling the
yet-to-be-attained internationally agreed target of
0.7 per cent of the gross national product of developed
countries for official development assistance as soon as
possible.
We reiterate the importance of finding an
effective, equitable, development-oriented solution to
the external debt and debt-servicing burdens of
developing countries, which curtail their social
development. The Highly Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Debt Initiative must be financed and
implemented. The restructuring of the international
economic system is imperative in order to bring about
transparency and stability in the international monetary
system and to make the Bretton Woods institutions
more democratic and responsive to the challenges of
development, within the framework of international
monetary integration.
We emphasize the importance of enhancing the
capacities of developing countries to overcome
obstacles to development within the framework of
economic globalization by augmenting the trend of
industrialization, strengthening national infrastructures,
transfer of technology and access to knowledge and
information through international assistance. Another
important aspect is increasing and improving access for

5

A/S-24/PV.9

products of developing countries to international
markets through the reduction of tariff barriers and
other protectionist measures.
We call upon our development partners to show
more political resolve and genuine willingness to help
developing countries improve their competitiveness in
international markets. This can be attained only
through generous financial assistance from the
industrialized world directed towards improving and
enhancing weak infrastructures and augmenting
national institutional capacities.
It is imperative to put an end to the practice of
imposing economic sanctions and unilateral economic
coercive measures, in contravention of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, if we are to
create an international environment conducive to social
development for all. We should ensure the right to
development as an indivisible component of
internationally recognized human rights and the right
to food and medical care for all. I reiterate, it is
imperative to end economic sanctions and unilateral
economically coercive measures, in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
The international community should make greater
efforts to combat endemic diseases, especially malaria,
which is considered the greatest threat to life in a
considerable number of developing countries,
particularly in Africa. African heads of State recently
held a special summit to address this scourge.
Notwithstanding the unfavourable international
atmosphere, my country, as I stated earlier, has
registered remarkable progress in the area of social
development. I will briefly highlight some of the
achievements of the past five years.
First, in the field of economic development, the
Sudan has had a free market economy during that
period. The rate of growth of the country’s gross
domestic product averaged 5.6 per cent during the
period 1995-1999, while the inflation rate was reduced
to 16 per cent by the year 1999, as compared to 69.1
per cent in 1995. That rate continued to decrease
during the first half of 2000. Due to liberal economic
policies, the Sudan was able to attract flows of foreign
direct investment in the areas of oil, mining, energy,
agriculture and livestock.
Secondly, in
participation, in

6

the area of popular political
order to achieve balanced

development, the Sudan has adopted an advanced
federal system of government. This decentralized form
of government has increased administration at the local
level and proved to be the ideal way to ensure political
participation from the grass-roots to the uppermost
levels. To ensure the bridging of developmental gaps
and disparities between states, the federal Government
has allocated financial resources to the States
Development Fund to support development activities in
the least developed States.
Thirdly, in order to expedite the eradication of
poverty, the Government has formulated an effective
strategy and has sought to implement it by
incorporating the poor and disadvantaged in the cycle
of production. Two and a half million poor families
have been provided with suitable means for working
productively by the year 2002; the social security
umbrella has been extended to cover a wider range of
sectors; and specialized social funds have been
established to protect financially vulnerable groups
from the negative effects of the structural adjustment
programmes, by the time the national comprehensive
strategy is carried to completion, in the year 2002. The
Sudanese Savings Bank for Social Development was
established to help the poor and to help provide
production tools to small-scale producers and to the
disadvantaged. The zakat and wafq-endowment
resources are also being directed towards the poor.
Fourthly, in order to foster productive
employment and widen its scope, the Sudan articulated
and implemented a national economic-recovery
strategy from 1989 to 1993, with a view to achieving
comprehensive sustainable development. This strategy
aimed at producing a skilled labour force in order to
enhance productivity, empowering women through
their active involvement in the national economy and
reducing unemployment rates by the end of the national
comprehensive strategy in the year 2002. The
expansion of work opportunities in the countryside was
also targeted, with a view to improving living standards
there and to reducing migration from the countryside to
urban centres. Preferential privileges were granted to
labour-intensive projects, with the objective of creating
labour opportunities for 1 million people and of
eradicating child labour during the last three-year
programme of the national comprehensive strategy.
Fifthly, the ongoing effort to empower women
and promote the welfare of children reached its climax
after it was made a direct responsibility of the

A/S-24/PV.9

presidency. The President of the Republic has
appointed a woman to be his adviser on women’s and
children’s affairs. This advisory body is now engaged
in formulating a new strategy, defining programmes for
enabling women and protecting the welfare of families
and children, and articulating ways and means for the
effective implementation of this strategy.
The establishment of this unique advisory body
has increased the value, vitality and efficiency of the
Government’s work with women and for child welfare.
The strategies of the advisory body regarding women
and children are manifested in recent presidential
decrees. One of the important decisions of this body
has been to establish a children’s parliament in order to
promote the values of dialogue, personal opinions,
rights, duties and democracy in the minds of our
children. With respect to women and motherhood, and
upon the recommendation of the advisory body the
President of the Republic has decreed that all women
charged with minor crimes be released and be
rehabilitated so that they can lead decent and
honourable lives. The decree went further: it prohibited
the imprisonment of pregnant women until after they
have given birth and had two years to care for the
offspring.
The advisory body has recommended that,
besides the already approved pregnancy leave, women
be given maternal leave for two years, with full pay
during the first six months. Financial subsidies will be
given to women during the remaining 18 months of the
leave. These subsidies will come from the maternal and
childhood fund, which gets its resources from the
zakat, its endowment, voluntary contributions and
investment revenues.
Women in the Sudan have made remarkable
progress due to their continued struggle and wisdom.
Women are active partners in all walks of life in the
community. They now occupy high-ranking positions.
There have been women members of Parliament since
1965, as well as women advisers to the President,
women ministers, under-secretaries and executive
directors in the private and public sectors, and highranking women officers in the army and the police
forces. There are more than five hundred woman
judges, four of them in our Supreme Court. The
number of women in university and post-graduate
institutions is far greater than the number of men.
Women make up on average 62 per cent of
matriculating students. The Constitution and laws of

the Sudan do not discriminate between men and
women. In the midst of all this progress, there are no
conflicts between men and women in our society, and
our families are intact and provide good care for our
children and promote community cohesion.
Sixthly, as a result of the progress I have
mentioned, the employment rate has risen by 33 per
cent during the last decade. The percentage of women
in the labour market has exceeded that of men both in
towns and in the countryside. The use of child labour
has been reduced, thanks to the expansion of preschool education through the establishment of
kindergartens in urban and rural areas.
It is evident that the ability of Sudanese society to
promote social integration and mutual support has
greatly increased. Sudanese society has proved its
ability to deal positively with its cultural, religious,
geographic and ethnic diversities.
These abilities were enhanced by being enshrined
in the 1998 national Constitution of the Sudan, which
stipulated the adoption of a democratic, multiparty
system and the respect of internationally recognized
human rights and freedoms. It also established equality
before the law and the fact that citizenship is the basis
of constitutional rights and duties. The Constitution
also guarantees all groups the inherent right to preserve
their culture, language and religion and to raise their
children as they wish.
Our common goal of placing social development
high on the agenda of the international community
should inspire us to serious collective reflection and to
devise appropriate means to safeguard our noble
humanistic objectives against the vagaries of politics.
We should not give our narrow national interests
precedence over the overall progress of humanity, as
we should pave the way for safety and stability for all.
We must strive to ensure that prosperity is enjoyed by
all humankind.
The Acting President: I give the floor to
Mrs. Sumedha Jayasena, Minister for Social Services
of Sri Lanka.
Mrs. Jayasena (Sri Lanka) (spoke in Sinhalese;
English
text
furnished
by
the
delegation):
Mr. President, let me at the outset extend to you the
congratulations of the people and the Government of
Sri Lanka. It is also my privilege to continue with the
good work done by the previous Ministers for Social

7

A/S-24/PV.9

Services
in
the
Government
of
Chandrika
Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, President of Sri Lanka.

measures and schemes, have been promulgated since
1994.

Sri Lanka lost no time in implementing the
outcome of the World Summit for Social Development.
Our Government advocates a policy of development
with a human face, hence social development is a top
priority for us. The World Summit was timely in that it
sought a new social development paradigm within and
between countries. What is now required is for us to
work to implement and follow up the Programme of
Action.

A number of presidential task forces have also
been set up. These task forces examine and recommend
better ways of empowering, and protecting the rights
of, women and children as well as the disabled and the
elderly, and they also recommend ways of streamlining
and increasing the relevance and coverage of basic
elements of social development such as education and
health care.

A mid-term review of the outcome of the World
Summit was held at Manila in 1997 for the Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
(ESCAP) region. Now, at the end of the fifth year, we
are gathered here for the global review. Sri Lanka takes
modest pride in our achievements with respect to the
pledges made at the World Summit, despite constraints
brought about by terrorist violence and lack of
resources. Nevertheless, much remains to be done in
the short to medium term.
Sri Lanka has been noted since the early 1950s as
a social development model because of its strong
emphasis on improving the quality of life of the people
and because of its complex social protection and
integration programmes, at times at the expense of
investment in economic growth. Our achievements in
the area of health and education have been above the
global average. By 1999, Sri Lanka had achieved an
infant mortality rate of 15.9 per 1,000 births, a
maternal mortality rate of 2.3 per 10,000 live births,
and a life expectancy of 73.1 years, which is only
3 per cent below the average for the developed world.
On the educational front, Sri Lanka has achieved a
90.7 per cent literacy rate.
Currently, the programmes and projects on social
development are well focused and better targeted. The
programmes range from pauper allowances; special
protection programmes for the disabled, for vulnerable
women, and for children and the elderly; and pensions
and social security for the self-employed poor. These
programmes provide the necessary socio-economic
safety net to the vulnerable and marginalized groups
during the transition to sustainable and equitable
economic growth and development.
A number of legal enactments related to different
aspects of social development, such as protection for
workers, labour wage security and social welfare

8

Further, national steering committees on various
aspects of social development have been set up
pursuant to the decisions of the World Summit. These
mechanisms contribute to and facilitate policy-making
on social development at the national level through the
promotion of an active dialogue among State agencies,
donor agencies, non-governmental organizations and
the private sector on issues of social programme
implementation, coverage and effectiveness.
These steering committees also deliberate and
make decisions on other vital matters, such as the
improved targeting of programmes, the empowerment
of socio-economically marginalized groups and the
need for a national data base with multi-user access.
With the technical and financial support of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and under
the guidance of the National Committee on Social
Development,
a
technical
proposal
for
the
establishment of a social development management
information system has now been completed. This
information system will become functional in about a
month’s time.
We have taken many targeted measures to
ameliorate social conditions for important segments of
our society. However, national efforts alone cannot
address all social development challenges. Sri Lanka is
committed to liberal market economic policies, with
the aim of integrating into the world economy. Like
many other developing countries in similar situations,
we too have come to terms with the irreversible process
of globalization — a process that offers both
challenges and opportunities.
With capital, production and management moving
across borders, the impact of globalization on our
societies has become immense. This process also
brings in its wake additional demands on our societies.
The rule-based multilateral trading system that came
into being with the creation of the World Trade

A/S-24/PV.9

Organization was a response to the evolving process of
globalization. However, the new multilateral trading
system has not brought the promised benefits in terms
of market access to developing countries, nor were the
obligations that have been imposed on developing
countries consistent with their level of economic
development. There is great concern, therefore, that the
new multilateral trading system is not balanced and
that the benefits of the Uruguay Round were not fair
and equitable. It is therefore increasingly felt that the
framework rules in the international trade arena should
take into account the development dimension and the
impact such rules have on developing countries if we
are to prevent small economies from being further
marginalized in the global economy. In such a
situation, even the best laid national social
development plans can become unsustainable. Even
more disturbing would be the erosion of past social
development achievements.
What is required to provide better living and
social standards for our people is greater market access
with the imposition of fewer restraints and
conditionalities. Social standards or issues should not
constitute protectionism in disguise, intended to deny
market access. Demands that new labour standards or
environmental measures should be linked to trade are
tantamount to a further denial of market access to
developing countries. This would in turn have a
negative impact on economic and social development,
because developing countries would be deprived of the
ability to take advantage of their own competitive and
comparative advantages. We believe that greater
market access and the resulting economic growth
would be the most sustainable way to improve social
standards for our peoples. Economic history amply
demonstrates that truth.
As we redefine our development strategies, my
Government is committed to following that sustainable
course. As advocated by Her Excellency The
Honourable Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga,
President of Sri Lanka, we will pursue a free market
economy with a human face, and will provide safety
nets for the vulnerable segments of society.
The Acting President: I call next on His
Excellency Mr. Edgardo Mosqueira, Minister of the
Presidency of the Republic of Peru.
Mr. Mosqueira (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I am
very pleased to be here, participating in this debate on

key aspects of the implementation of the World
Summit for Social Development. Peru has formulated a
strategy for the implementation of the commitments
that were laid down at Copenhagen in 1995, in
particular commitments 2 and 8, comprising four tools
for the promotion of national development, the
reduction of poverty and laying the foundations for
generating wealth. They are: to strengthen the
economic stability of the country and ensure a suitable
institutional framework for the efficient operation of
the market economy; to consolidate the country’s
internal and external pacification by dismantling
terrorist movements, sustaining the fight against drugtrafficking gangs and settling pending boundary
problems; to build capacity in the neediest sectors by
investing in the social and economic infrastructure; and
to create opportunities for the development of
communities and of citizens.
Extreme poverty dropped by more than
12 percentage points between 1991 and 1997: from
26.8 per cent to 14.7 per cent. As for total poverty, it
fell by almost 7 percentage points in that same period.
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
indicates that Peru is in eightieth place in the Human
Development Index, a rise of six places compared with
its 1998 ranking.
I would like to share some of the principles that
have guided our strategy. Regarding commitment 1, the
various social programmes that have been undertaken
to build the capacities and opportunities of which I
spoke share a variety of mechanisms for participation
by citizens in the selection and prioritization of plans
and projects, as well as in their implementation and
financing. Citizens have thus become important
elements of society’s control of State action and of
ownership of the programmes and projects by the
beneficiary communities. This has fostered the
establishment of trust between the State and civil
society, an important element that had previously been
neglected. It has made possible the accumulation of
social capital in terms of organization, training and
leadership of the communities.
Considerable investment has been made in
capacity-building in the context of commitment 6 of
the Copenhagen Declaration. As a result of the
investment in health, the coverage of primary-care
institutions doubled between 1995 and 1998, going
from 6 million to 12.4 million users. School attendance
by children between the ages of 6 and 11 rose from

9

A/S-24/PV.9

87.3 per cent in 1993 to 95.6 in 1998: almost universal
attendance. The coverage of the drinking-water
network amounted to 67.7 per cent in 1998, compared
with 57.4 per cent in 1993, while sewage network
coverage rose from 40 per cent to 52 per cent within
the same period. Through investment in the energy
sector, we increased coverage at the national level from
52 per cent of the population in 1993 to 72 per cent in
1998.
Thanks to the participatory strategy of our social
programmes, many communities are now capable of
managing programmes and projects. This has made it
possible, for example, to hand over to them the
management of the health centres.
In the implementation of commitment 3 of the
Declaration, the capacity-building process of which I
have spoken has gone hand-in-hand with an effort to
generate opportunities for the poorest members of the
population. We are convinced that it is necessary for
the State to support the special role of individuals as
generators of their own incomes and of improved social
and economic conditions. This line of action is based
on defining visions of local development, identifying
the competitive and comparative advantages of the
various regions, and identifying the goods and services
that communities can develop to become part of an
integrated market.
Regarding commitments 4, 5 and 6, our Ministry
for the Advancement of Woman and Human
Development was created in 1996 with the specific
mission of emphasizing the promotion of citizenship
and the inclusion of vulnerable or disadvantaged
groups. Our national literacy programme, which
received the King Sejong Literacy Prize from the
United Nations Educational, Cultural and Scientific
Organization (UNESCO) in 1999, our national plan for
equal opportunities for men and women 2000-2005,
and our Commission for Indigenous Affairs all operate
within that ministry.
The indigenous population of the country was
consulted in 1998 to find out their vision of the future
through 2005 and to hear their proposals about what
they themselves could do to realize that vision and
what they think that the State should do. In a similar
vein, the Government, the corporate sector,
non-governmental
organizations,
grass-roots
communities and donors have undertaken a process of

10

dialogue on experiences and challenges in the struggle
against poverty.
On commitments 9 and 10, I should like to point
out that in accordance with the provisions of the 20/20
initiative, we have increased the resources allocated for
basic social expenditures, which now stand at around
$80 per person, compared with $12 in 1990. Peru has
thus been complying by allocating far more than
20 per cent of its budget to meet the population’s basic
needs.
Our task for the near future is to place the accent
on identifying and developing opportunities that will
allow the poorest Peruvians to become part of the
market economy and to be control their own future: a
future based on economic stability, social peace and
development opportunities.
Finally, as pointed out by President Alberto
Fujimori, the way in which globalization is affecting
countries with undeveloped economies reflects the
extent to which that process is essentially not
uniformly global, but is rather taking place within a
system of imbalances and discord that we should have
left behind. The success of poverty-eradication
programmes depends on the creation of a fairer world
order, the establishment of a truly free global economy
with access to developed-country markets, and the
adoption of international regulations that will permit a
sound relationship among financial markets.
The Acting President: I wish to remind
delegations of the time limit of seven minutes for
statements, which was established with a view to
completing our work in a timely manner.
I call next on His Excellency Mr. Eiki Nestor,
Minister for Social Affairs of Estonia.
Mr. Nestor (Estonia): It is a great honour for me
to speak on behalf of the Estonian Government and to
reaffirm our continuing commitment to social
development. I also would like to associate Estonia
with the speech made by the representative of Portugal
on behalf of the European Union and associated
countries.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the Division for Social Policy and Development for the
excellent preparatory work done for this session, and I
also wish to thank the Swiss Government for hosting
this special session.

A/S-24/PV.9

The United Nations conference held in
Copenhagen in 1995 highlighted the worldwide
importance of social development. The key objectives
agreed upon in Copenhagen included the eradication of
absolute poverty and the achievement of full
employment.
At the time of the Copenhagen Conference,
Estonia had already begun its transition to a market
economy. Key structural changes taking place in the
1990s were the fall of the agricultural sector and heavy
industries and a rapid growth of the service sector and
new technology industries. As a result, the structure of
the Estonian economy is now similar to that of
developed countries.
The
rapid
development
of
information
technology, which started with economic restructuring,
has had a considerable impact on our labour market; it
means that there is a high demand for qualified
specialists and skilled workers. A reform of state
vocational education institutions began in 1995 and
aimed at providing young people and adults with an
opportunity to obtain knowledge and skills that
employers need.
Equipping schools with computers and teaching
information technology is one of the priorities of
education. Today, 60 per cent of Estonian pupils and
students use the Internet every day. We expect the share
of high-tech industries to increase remarkably in the
Estonian economy.
The Estonian Ministry of Social Affairs has taken
an active part in developing labour market policy and
resolving employment problems, as long-term
unemployment and unemployment of young people
rank among some of the most serious social problems
in Estonia. In 1999 the Employment and Training
Chapter was prepared for the National Development
Plan. One of its most important principles was to focus
more on the implementation of active labour market
measures and to increase the number of people
involved. Special attention is being paid to the need to
increase the role of social partners in solving
employment problems and promoting cooperation
between employment offices, training providers and
employers.
As outlined in the National Development Plan,
the objectives in the field of employment and training
are the following: first, to increase the flexibility of the
educational system and to strengthen its capacity to

adapt to changes reshaping educational, social and
economic sectors; secondly, to create conditions for
employers and workers to acquire new skills and the
knowledge necessary for coping with employmentspecific, structural and technological changes; thirdly,
to integrate persons in risk groups into the labour
market and to ensure their access to education; and,
lastly, to guarantee equal opportunities for men and
women in employment.
Taking into account the European Union
Employment Strategy, Estonia has prepared its first
annual Employment Action Plan, which will be the
basis for developing national labour market policies
and for coordinating cooperation of various ministries
to solve employment problems. Estonia will continue
to develop labour market policies on the basis of
economic and labour market analyses and forecasts,
involving in this process all relevant institutions at the
national and regional levels.
In preventing poverty, it is important not only to
provide people with jobs, but also to ensure adequate
wages. The basic principles of the Estonian national
wage policy are provided in labour laws that also
provide employees with minimum guarantees. The
establishment of more favourable wage conditions is
permitted in collective agreements and employment
contracts and upon the employer’s decision.
Since the beginning of 1991 the minimum wage
level has been fixed with a tripartite agreement
between the State, employers and trade unions.
Tripartite agreements are signed every year, and the
society has approved the procedure. Today, trade
unions and employers’ organizations are involved in
solving different problems related to employment and
to the labour market, both at the central and local
levels. In order to involve the local initiative and make
the local stakeholders responsible for solving local
employment problems, tripartite employment councils
have been formed in the counties.
Since 1995, unemployment benefits have been
paid to those unemployed who are registered in a State
employment office. As the unemployment benefit is
small, the unemployed still face a considerable poverty
risk. In 1999 the Government of Estonia approved the
concept of unemployment insurance, and this system
will be built up this year.
Estonia’s population is rapidly ageing. Without
reforming the existing pension system, growth in the

11

A/S-24/PV.9

number of pensioners will lead either to a fall of the
pensions-to-wages ratio or will force an increase in
public funding. Such a situation may widen the gap
between public expectations and the reality.
According to the pension reform concept, Estonia
will establish a pension system consisting of three
pillars. The first pillar is a State-managed compulsory
pay-as-you-go pension scheme. The second pillar is a
privately managed pension scheme, preserving the
current pension-to-wage ratio and ensuring the growing
purchasing power of pensions. The third pillar is a
privately managed voluntary funded pension scheme.
Persons whose income, together with wages and
social security benefits, remains below the
Government-set level are receiving a subsistence
benefit. This type of benefit is funded from the State
budget and paid out by local governments.
In 1998-1999 the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the Estonian Ministry of Social
Affairs and the University of Tartu carried out a joint
project entitled the “Elaboration of a National Strategy
for Poverty Alleviation in Estonia”, highlighting the
fact that poverty is one of the most serious social
problems restricting social development.
Estonia was the first applicant country to the
European Union to start the ratification of the
European Code of Social Security. Our Government
signed the Code in the fall of last year, and we will
ratify the document next year. On 31 May of this year,
the Estonian Parliament ratified the Revised European
Social Charter.
The Estonian Government takes a serious attitude
towards social development issues; our aim is a wellfunctioning, all-inclusive civil society.
The Acting President: I now invite His
Excellency Mr. Soubanh Srithirath, Minister to the
Office of the President of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, to take the floor.
Mr. Srithirath (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): At the outset, my delegation wishes to
extend our warmest congratulations to the President for
presiding over this important special session of the
General Assembly and to express our conviction that
under his wise leadership this session will be crowned
with success.

12

The Copenhagen Declaration and Programme of
Action represent a new international consensus on the
need to address the core social issues. Since their
adoption, major steps at national, regional and
international levels have been taken towards the
realization of the goals. So far, initial achievements
have been recorded.
However, we are witnessing the negative impact
and an unfavourable environment in the five-year
process of its implementation. For example, the
resources allocated for social development have
declined; the external debt burden has grown; and with
the liberalization of capital flows, the world has
become more vulnerable to sudden financial shocks
that have severe social and economic consequences.
All this has caused serious impediments on the way to
achieving social development.
My delegation fully shares the view expressed by
many representatives that the world has become a more
unequal place, both within and between nations, with
increasing inequality in income, employment, access to
social services and opportunities for participation in
public and civil society institutions. Globalization has
also posed major challenges for the developing
countries, particularly the least developed ones.
In the light of the aforementioned, the
international community, particularly the United
Nations, has a crucial and coordinating role to play in
order to solve this problem, to mobilize financial
resources and to provide technical assistance to the
developing countries, especially the least developed
and landlocked developing countries.
The consensus reached at the World Summit on
Social Development is indeed the implicit objective of
the Lao Government’s socio-economic development
programmes, which are aimed at improving the wellbeing of people, providing social services and
gradually reducing poverty. All efforts have been made
towards their implementation. Since 1996, the
Government’s budget allocation to the social sector has
increased from 11 per cent to 19 per cent.
Encouraging achievements have been made. From
1993 to 1998 the rate of poverty has fallen from
46 per cent to 39 per cent. In addition, there has been
some significant progress in education and health; the
primary school attendance rate increased to 76 per cent
in 1999; the mortality rate for infants under one year
has dropped from 125 per 1,000 births to 113 per 1,000

A/S-24/PV.9

births, and mortality of children under the age of five
has dropped from 182 per 1,000 to 142 per 1,000.
Public health care has expanded in recent years at
both the village and district levels throughout the
country. The immunization programme has been
expanded to most villages. New programmes for
maternal health and safe motherhood have been
established. AIDS control and prevention have been
given adequate attention.
Despite the significant achievements in education
and health, we still continue to face other major
difficulties closely linked to poverty alleviation, the
transition to a market-driven economy, the consistent
building-up of basic infrastructure and capacitybuilding.
People’s living standards in the rural areas are
one of our great concerns. For this reason, the Lao
Government has set up the rural development and food
production programmes, the objectives of which are to
promote
market-oriented
production,
diversify
agriculture and provide access to the market and basic
social services. For the first time, the paddy production
output of 2.1 million tons in 1999 has rendered the
country self-sufficient in foodstuffs. Furthermore,
women and multi-ethnic minority groups are also our
main target groups for fair treatment to enable them to
become fully integrated into society and reap the
benefits of economic opportunities.
As a result of high inflation and depreciation of
our national currency stemming from the Asian
financial crisis, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
has experienced negative effects of macroeconomic
instability, which has been a major handicap in our
attempts to increase social expenditure and to address
unemployment issues. Presently, the situation on all
fronts is becoming stable.
In order to deepen the dialogue on our
development policies and strategies, especially poverty
eradication, the Lao Government has launched a
round-table process 2000-2002 to persuade our
development partners of our needs, development
coherence and priorities. The dialogue also aims at
optimizing resource mobilization and developing a
shared and transparent framework of cooperation with
our partners in reaching the goal of changing the
country’s status as one of the least developed countries.

In this context, I would like to take this
opportunity to express our deeply felt gratitude to the
international and donor community for their continued
support for our development. Their valuable support
has indeed been a significant complementary factor of
national efforts to achieve progress.
In concluding, while the primary responsibility of
realizing the Copenhagen commitments lies with
national Governments, international cooperation and
assistance, particularly in the area of finance, are
essential to fully and successfully implementing these
commitments. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
for its part, will continue to exert all efforts to
contribute to the process of translating the lofty goals
of the Copenhagen Summit into action.
The Acting President: I call on Her Excellency
Mrs. Kadi Sesay, Minister of Planning and Economic
Development of Sierra Leone.
Mrs. Sesay (Sierra Leone): My delegation wishes
to express profound gratitude to the Government and
people of Switzerland for their gracious and warm
hospitality in their beautiful city.
Like many speakers before me, the Sierra Leone
delegation agrees that there has been some progress
towards achieving the commitments set out five years
ago. But a lot remains to be done. As we observe
advances in some areas, we particularly note setbacks
and indeed deterioration in others. Growing national
economic difficulties, exacerbated by global financial
crisis and civil conflicts in many parts of the world,
have inhibited the fulfilment of the Copenhagen
commitments in many countries, Sierra Leone being
one of them.
But I stand in this historic building, in such an
august Assembly, with a sense of pride inspired by the
indefatigable will of the people of Sierra Leone to
stand firm against the forces of evil, anarchy and
brutality that have for nine years fought to completely
destroy the nation called Sierra Leone, its
infrastructure and institutions. To quote our President,
Mr. Ahmad Tejan Kabbah,
“we have resisted attempts by an inhuman
alliance of local, regional and international vested
interests to exploit our natural resources in
exchange for weapons of mass destruction to
wage war against the people of Sierra Leone”.

13

A/S-24/PV.9

We welcome the initiative taken by Great Britain
to submit to the Security Council a draft resolution
against the illegal and immoral trade in Sierra Leone
diamonds by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF)
rebels and their external accomplices — a trade that
has for many years fuelled their barbaric and inhuman
atrocities against the innocent and peaceful citizens of
Sierra Leone. Our hope is that the Security Council
will speedily expedite this draft resolution’s adoption.
The cost in human life, suffering and destruction
is unspeakable; the extensive nature and intensity of
human rights violations, especially against innocent
women and children are unparalleled. The present
initiative by the United States, supported by Britain, to
submit a draft resolution for the establishment of a
special tribunal to try rebel leader Foday Sankoh and
his cohorts for war crimes in Sierra Leone, so as to
address the issue of impunity, is highly commendable.
The continuous insecurity has frustrated the
efforts of the Sierra Leone Government to stabilize the
economy and create a sustainable environment for
social development. The safety and security of life and
property of Sierra Leoneans therefore remains a high
priority, as the armed forces of Sierra Leone strive to
consolidate the Government’s authority, until every
inch of Sierra Leonean soil is completely liberated. So
for Sierra Leone, the maintenance of law and order, the
protection of the life and property of the citizens and
the control of the integrity of Sierra Leone as a nation
are prerequisites for the implementation of the great
ideals of the Copenhagen Declaration.
For there can be no socio-economic development
if a people is not free and safe. There can be no poverty
alleviation if a nation is steeped in civil conflict. In
fact, as poverty has been seen to be a cause of many
conflicts in Africa, any sustainable solutions to these
conflicts must begin and end with addressing the
causes of poverty.
The contraction of economic activities and the
fact that rebels continue to hold on to the mining and
agriculturally productive areas of the country have
contributed to undermining the Government’s earning
capacity, with an attendant decline in social
expenditures. This in turn has reduced Sierra Leonean
citizens’ access to social services: education, health,
shelter, water and sanitation. All of this is occurring in
a country with an unprecedented number of amputees

14

who can no longer fend for themselves and their
families.
Sierra Leone therefore welcomes the current
World Bank/International Monetary Fund initiatives for
country-owned poverty reduction strategy papers
leading to concessional lending through the Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility and linked with the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt
Initiative, launched in 1996 with the aim of helping
relieve the debt burden of the poorest countries that are
committed to fighting poverty and pursuing economic
reform programmes.
Sierra Leone, however, wishes to warn that the
processes for qualifying for debt relief are too
complicated and too slow. The process must be fasttracked and extended to all developing countries. For
unless we tackle the debt burden through full debt
cancellation, and use those resources for poverty
reduction programmes, most of our countries will
continue to wallow in poverty and stagnant economies.
Accordingly, Sierra Leone is now in the process of
producing its national poverty reduction strategy paper,
which will go to the Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility by the end of the year.
The widespread damage to the social fabric and
economic infrastructure has particularly affected
women, children and the aged. It is the Government’s
intention to provide community-based support services
for the benefit of war victims, in particular to promote
the demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers
and to help the highly traumatized, the amputees and
sexually abused women and girls. The Government has
now begun instituting a social security scheme as a
social safety net that will provide support to the most
vulnerable members of our community. Several
microcredit schemes particularly focusing on women
are being run by the Government and several
non-governmental organizations. Various programmes
aimed at improving access to preventive and basic
health-care services and safe drinking water nationwide
are being formulated or are already in progress.
Sierra Leone currently receives some resources
from both Governments and other international donors
for the implementation of various programmes. But in
order to ensure that these resources, which are aimed at
improving the condition of the poor, reach their target
beneficiaries, the Government is currently putting in
place an aid coordination mechanism for the effective

A/S-24/PV.9

mobilization, utilization and management of aid flows
in order to alleviate poverty.
The progress of any nation is symbolized by the
status of its women, who not only constitute the
majority of its citizens, but are the pillars of all
societies. Gender equality and the empowerment of
women therefore become an imperative. Sierra
Leonean women have entered the annals of history for
their bold and unflinching stand for democracy. They
did this first in 1996 by demonstrating against and
removing the military junta and, that same year, by
bringing into being the democratically elected
Government of Mr. Ahmad Tejan Kabbah. Then, on
6 May 2000, these fearless women again stood up
against the RUF rebels who were refusing to disarm, in
violation of the Lomé Peace Agreement. This
culminated in the 8 May civil society protests that led
to the eventual capture of the rebel leader and his
cohorts. This is to the credit of Sierra Leone and of
Sierra Leonean women in particular. However, even
though women are such vocal members of civil society,
they need to be given more opportunity to hold more
top decision-making positions.
The immediate way forward for Africa is for
concerted efforts by the world community to address
the root causes of conflict in our continent and to
provide timely interventions to put out the fires of
conflict and stop them from becoming unmanageable.
Moreover, the international community must encourage
and provide the necessary support so that countries
with emerging democracies can consolidate democracy,
good governance and respect for human rights and the
rule of law.
Unless this is done, all the ideals of
Copenhagen + 5 and Beijing + 5 will be meaningless.
For without security and peace there will be no socioeconomic development.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Government and
the people of Sierra Leone, I wish sincerely to thank all
friendly countries — especially Great Britain, the
United States of America, Germany and Canada — and
the multilateral agencies, especially the European
Union, the United Nations and its humanitarian
agencies, for their invaluable support, which has
helped to sustain Sierra Leone during nine years of
brutal war.
But I believe special thanks must go to our
brothers in the subregion as members of the Economic

Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
especially the troop-contributing countries — Nigeria,
Guinea, Ghana and Mali. And let us not forget the
United Nations peacekeeping force troop-contributing
countries, some of whose citizens lost their lives so
that Sierra Leoneans might live in peace.
The Acting President: I give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Nana Aicha Foumakoye, Minister of
Social Development, Population, Advancement of
Women and Child Protection of the Niger.
Mrs. Foumakoye (Niger) (spoke in French): I
should like first of all to perform a pleasant duty: to
convey to you, Mr. President, and to all of the members
of the Bureau my most heartfelt congratulations. I
should like also to extend the warm greetings of
Mr. Tandja Mamadou, President of the Republic of the
Niger, and of the Government, to all participants here.
My country participated in the Copenhagen
World Summit on Social Development in March 1995.
The commitments that emerged from this important
forum, which were aimed, inter alia, at fighting
poverty, promoting productive employment and
increasing social integration fully reflect the concerns
of the Niger, one of the poorest countries in the world.
In recent years, the socio-economic situation of
my country has worsened significantly, resulting in an
unprecedented deterioration in the standard of living of
almost all segments of our society. These setbacks can
be attributed, inter alia, to a harsh natural environment,
inadequate economic policies, recurring droughts and
the low level of development of social sectors. The
situation is also the result of a growing informal sector
in our economy and of the chronic political instability
that prevailed in our country from 1990 to 1999.
It is clear that major challenges remain to be met
with respect to the Niger’s socio-economic situation.
For that reason, Niger has, since the Copenhagen
Summit, devised strategies and undertaken various
activities aimed at implementing the recommendations
emanating from the Summit. Those activities range
from developing programmes and policies to the
adoption of concrete measures for their effective
implementation.
The Niger has put together a national framework
programme to fight poverty and a national social
development policy. Following the round table on
poverty held here in March 1998 between the Niger

15

A/S-24/PV.9

and its principal development partners, the programme
to fight poverty — which aims in the short and medium
term to reduce that scourge and in the long term to
eradicate it — was launched upon finalization of the
institutional setup, which consists of a national steering
committee, a programme management unit and a
technical follow-up committee. Indeed, a number of
projects are being implemented in several areas of our
country thanks to the assistance of our development
partners.
The national social development policy, for its
part, above and beyond the fight against poverty, aims
to achieve two major goals: first, to strengthen social
integration, and secondly, to promote social justice and
equity. A major step forward was taken recently with
respect to the second objective with the Niger’s
ratification in August 1999 of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, and with the adoption in May 2000 of
legislation introducing a quota system benefiting
women.
The social development policy incorporates the
following sectoral policies: social promotion and
protection, population, promotion of women and
protection of children. A five-year plan of action is
also currently being finalized following a consultative
process.
In the area of job creation, the actions taken have
been mainly of an institutional nature.
Concerning resource allocation, 30 per cent of
public expenditure is devoted to the social sector, with
15 per cent going to essential social services, for which
12 per cent of official development assistance is
earmarked.

and democracy, which is the most effective way of
combating poverty. Local elections will be held soon
and will complete the democratization process, which
has gotten under way in so promising a manner.
Let me also mention that peace has been
re-established in the north and east of our country, and
that we have established a national human rights
commission and a national commission for social
dialogue. Likewise, I should like to point out that civil
society is fully involved in all development activities
and decision-making processes.
Nonetheless, manifold and significant constraints
still exist. In order to try to deal with these constraints
and to try to live up the commitments that emanated
from the Copenhagen Summit, the Niger joins its voice
to those of previous speakers to put forward some
proposals and suggestions for new initiatives.
At the national level, improved follow-up of the
20/20 Initiative is required with a view to mobilizing
the resources required for financing social services; the
poverty-reduction strategy should be integrated into the
macro-economic framework to ensure sustainable
human development; increased responsibility should be
given at the grass-roots level through a decentralization
process; there should be increased concertation
between the various actors involved in social
development in order to enhance coordination of
activities and ensure a sounder use of resources; strong
support should be given to the private sector by
building the capacities of key players; and emphasis
should be placed on the development of human
resources, specifically of women.

In the Niger we are fully aware of the fact that the
modest progress that has been made can be maintained
and consolidated only if consistent and vigorous action
is taken to ensure good governance and the continued
strengthening of managerial capacities in our national
economy.

At the international level, the international
community must evince greater solidarity with
developing countries in their fight against poverty.
Debt should be cancelled or converted into socialsector assistance, and official development assistance
should be greatly increased. In that connection, it is
time that my country — whose level of public finance
is extremely low and which has no prospect of
immediate recovery — benefited from the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative. Economic data
and more information about wages must be made
available as soon as possible, because these areas pose
a serious challenge to our public finance system.

In this framework, following the legislative and
presidential elections of November 1999, our
Republic’s institutions are striving to consolidate peace

Despite all the problems it is facing, the
Government of the Republic of Niger reaffirms its
determination to pursue the implementation of the

I believe that the results achieved to date,
although modest, are heartening. Overall, the poverty
development index dropped from 66 in 1994 to 64 in
1997.

16

A/S-24/PV.9

recommendations adopted at the World Summit for
Social Development. It reaffirms its commitment to
continue dialogue with all its development partners,
with the needed transparency and greater rigour in
decision-making and in the allocation of public
resources. In that connection, the authorities of the
Fifth Republic have decided to add dynamism and
vigour to their guidance of how development is
managed. To that end, the imminent formulation of a
national social and economic development plan for the
period 2000 to 2004, which will amalgamate all current
programmes and policies, will provide a general frame
of reference for future action.
Let me conclude by recalling the words of an
eminent individual, who said that if economic matters
overtake or turn their back on social issues, the social
conditions of tomorrow, having been undermined, will
paralyse economic progress.
The Acting President: I call next on Her
Excellency Mrs. Jeanne Dambendzet, Minister of Civil
Service, Administrative Reform and Advancement of
Women of the Congo.
Mrs. Dambendzet (Congo) (spoke in French): At
New York just a few weeks ago, from 5 to 9 June 2000,
the General Assembly held a special session on
women, to review the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action five years on.
Now, since 26 June, here at Geneva, the Assembly has
been meeting to review the implementation of the
10 commitments adopted by Member States at the
Copenhagen World Summit for Social Development.
The goal of those 10 commitments was to combat
poverty and to eradicate extreme poverty. What is the
situation five years after Copenhagen?
In the light of the report of the Preparatory
Committee for the present session — the high quality
and relevance of whose deliberations we commend —
we should acknowledge that, despite progress in
certain countries, many of the important commitments
that were adopted have not, unfortunately, been
fulfilled. The Declaration and Programme of Action
therefore remain timely. The international community
must be mobilized; it must be truly determined to
redefine its approach and find new means to respond to
the expectations of the millions of individuals who
believe in it. I would add that we need genuine political
will with an underpinning of greater and more active
solidarity with the poor.

Besides stating the facts and identifying the
problems facing mankind, and besides the great
challenges that must be confronted to bring about
social development, the international community
should join together to create a new awareness that can
lead to a rejection of the shame that is poverty, the
degrading, dehumanizing poverty in which the majority
of the world’s population stagnates — while at the
same
time
colossal
financial,
material
and
technological wealth is spent to less human ends.
Five years ago, the Copenhagen Summit was a
high point of dialogue and cooperation, which certainly
attested to the determination of world decision-makers
to work to bring about social development and to
combat poverty taking into account the cultures and
conditions prevailing in each State. Those were the
stakes embodied in the Copenhagen Declaration and
Programme of Action, which gave rise to high hopes
among countless individuals.
But do we feel today that we have accomplished
our mission? Far too many outside factors have
destroyed so many poor countries’ efforts to implement
the 10 commitments and to move towards sustainable
social development. Indeed, the implementation of
national plans that had offered hope in the health,
education, employment and social-integration spheres
continues to be thwarted by many obstacles. Those
obstacles have been put in place by debt servicing, the
continuing decline in official development assistance,
protectionism in many forms, and the creation of false
values that tempt young people in the absence of any
true culture — in short, obstacles that constitute a vise
from whose grip no attempt at a solution has succeeded
in releasing us.
That is why, while we welcome such measures as
the 1999 Cologne initiative on debt relief for heavily
indebted poor countries, the Congo urges the
international community to work towards the outright
cancellation of such debt: the conditionalities that are
part of the Cologne initiative make it deceptive and
raise questions about it. Likewise, although it is now
clear that, because of what is at stake, globalization is
the principal challenge of the twenty-first century,
hesitation persists because globalization involves
threats to the sovereignty and the cultural and historical
uniqueness of weaker States, and raises serious
questions about the development prospects of the
poorest among them.

17

A/S-24/PV.9

More than ever before, there must be prior
consideration of appropriate ways to ensure that
globalization will meet our hopes for the development
of peoples in unity and interdependence, so that it does
not become a nightmare for the weakest, as happened
with the insistence on democracy. Hence, to minimize
its negative impact, we must define the moral
principles and ethical issues that are raised by
economic globalization. For example, can we ensure
that women in rural areas have jobs and incomegenerating activities in the face of large-scale
agri-business?
Other constraints on social development were
also identified by the Preparatory Committee: civil
wars, non-application of principles of democracy and
good governance, non-respect for human rights,
violence and discrimination of all kinds, social
disunity, et cetera.
Here, let me touch on the situation in my own
country. In 1995, at the time of the Copenhagen
Summit, the Congo had been living in democracy since
1991, when the Congolese people opted for a return to
political pluralism, to respect for the rule of law, and to
good governance. It was because this was not
internalized that civil wars, with their attendant
disastrous human and material consequences, have
tormented Congo since 1993. Those wars destroyed the
economic and social fabric of our country.
To restore daily life in our country, particularly in
Brazzaville, and to re-establish a minimum level of
social infrastructures, the Government established a
100-day emergency reconstruction programme in
November 1997. The priority activities of that
programme, which cost about 10 billion CFA francs,
included the following: re-establishing the safety and
peace of the people; re-establishing electricity, water
and telephone networks; re-establishing national radio
and television; rebuilding local administrative facilities
and public equipment; cleaning up the city of
Brazzaville in order to prevent epidemics; re-opening
schools and hospitals; and establishing an agreed
framework of reference with our development partners.
On behalf of my Government, I would like to thank
everyone in the international community who gave us
support.
In order to continue with these activities and to
accelerate the reforms already launched to allow the
country to combat poverty and to promote social

18

development, the Government has established a
strategic tool for economic and social policy. I am
speaking of the interim post-conflict programme for
2000-2002. This program, which will cost 511 billion
CFA francs, has been designed to start the real
transition from the crisis management phase which our
country has undergone to the phase of growth and
sustainable development.
Moreover, the Government has been working,
within the framework of its fight against poverty, to
re-establish essential services in the areas of health and
primary health care, basic education, sanitation and the
rebuilding of our judiciary for the promotion and
protection of human rights. The participation of the
private sector in these activities has been backed by a
pilot programme which directs external assistance
towards non-governmental organizations and other
community organizations.
Turning to employment policy, the establishment
of the Congolese Job Fund, which is a privately
managed institution specializing in job promotion, will
promote training activities and financing for specific
programmes, as well as self-employment projects and
micro-enterprise initiatives. In addition, a young
people’s job fund has just been established by a
specific law.
The objectives of the World Summit for Social
Development and beyond — achieving social
development for all in a globalizing world — can be
realized in developing countries only if the following
dynamic measures are taken first: remove the
cumbersome, lengthy and constraining procedures of
the European Union so as to release financing due to
States, cancel the debt, increase development
assistance and ensure a real technology transfer.
It is premature at present to try to assess the
future effects of globalization on development.
However, it is necessary to strengthen international
cooperation and solidarity to allow access for all to the
global village, through mastering new technology, the
cost of which must take into account the financial
situation of beneficiary countries. To act in any other
way would only increase the inequality that is so
strongly disparaged and would fuel doubts about the
ability of the international community to promote the
noble ideals contained in the Charter of our universal
Organization.

A/S-24/PV.9

Social development continues to be dependent on
an environment where peace and security guarantee the
expression of democracy and the protection and
promotion of human rights. It is for all of these aims
that the Government and the Congolese people, under
the strong vision and leadership of President Nguesso,
are devoting every effort.
I could not conclude my statement without
congratulating the President, as well as the entire
Bureau, for the way in which our debate has been
guided. My congratulations also go to those who have
organized these meetings. I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking the authorities and people of
Switzerland for our warm welcome here.
The Acting President: I now invite His
Excellency Mr. Girma Birru, Minister for Economic
Development and Cooperation of Ethiopia, to take the
floor.
Mr. Birru (Ethiopia): Please permit me at the
outset to express my delegation’s appreciation to the
President for the excellent manner in which he has
conducted the work of this special session of the
General Assembly on the World Social Summit and
beyond, to which we attach paramount importance.
We are confident that this session will come up
with concrete and comprehensive actions and
initiatives to fully implement the commitments made at
the Copenhagen World Social Summit. We believe that
our collective commitment and shared responsibility
can serve as our anchor for present and future
international economic cooperation, and we place a
particular premium on it as we confront the challenges
of poverty, unemployment and social exclusion.
We are convinced that the agenda for social
development provides a useful framework to
undertake, in an integrated fashion, the international
policies, programmes and plans of actions on social
development which have been adopted at different
forums by the international community.
External debt continues to be a serious obstacle to
social development. In the case of Africa, the stock of
external debt and its servicing has continued to drain
our major foreign exchange earnings, while eroding
Africa’s creditworthiness. In light of already grim
resource flows caused by declines in official
development assistance, the crippling burden of
international debt has seriously hampered social

development prospects for most of our countries. The
situation of the least developed countries is more
precarious.
It is obvious, therefore, that, unless there is a
swift and substantial effort to relieve the debt burden,
we can never invest adequately to enhance our capacity
for social development and our competitiveness in a
liberalizing international trade. For social development
efforts to bear fruit and economic reforms to succeed in
our countries, all creditor nations and multilateral
financial institutions should adopt concrete measures,
including debt cancellation, by going beyond debt
rescheduling and the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Debt Initiative.
It is the conviction of my delegation that each of
our countries, including those in Africa, must take
charge of its own comprehensive social development.
The call on the international community to do the
maximum possible for Africa in the economic area is
an appeal to help remove the obstacles hindering the
social development of the continent so that Africa can
progress through the efforts of its own people.
The continued socio-economic decline in the least
developed countries generally has been a source of
grave concern. This is evidenced by the alarming
increase in the number of people living in absolute
poverty, economic decline, or stagnation. This dismal
deteriorating situation is compounded further by lack
of resource flows, dwindling direct foreign investment,
reduction in export earnings, the excruciating debt
crisis, rising unemployment — especially among the
youth — and environmental degradation.
The persistence of these problems could easily
undermine the stability of the world economy and pose
serious threats to international peace and security.
Immeasurable work has been done to redress the
economic situation in which most of our countries find
themselves. A lot more, however, needs to be done by
the developed countries and the international financial
institutions to extricate many of the world’s poor
countries from being completely submerged by the
heavy burdens imposed by the present unfavourable
international economic system. More specifically, new
additional resources, at both multilateral and bilateral
levels, need to be provided by our development
partners if any improvement in the lives of the teeming
millions in the developing countries is to be assured.

19

A/S-24/PV.9

While referring to the social development crisis
in developing countries, particularly in Africa, I cannot
but make some brief remarks about the situation in my
own country.
Human and social conditions in Ethiopia prior to
the Social Summit were typically characterized by a
marked deterioration in the living conditions of the
people. The confluence of factors such as bad
governance and ill-designed economic and social
policies of the then Government, protracted civil war
that lasted for nearly 30 years and drought were the
causes that led to the unacceptably low level of human
and social development. A major segment of the
population was deprived of the bare minimum
necessities of life. In the past, the social sector was
neglected and perceived as being secondary, parasitic
and dependent on other sectors rather than being the
source of productivity and strategic input to the
economic sector. Consequently, the sector was not the
beneficiary of a fair share of the budget allocation and
institutional innovation.
Stabilizing and reviving the economy and
improving the living conditions of the people were,
therefore, the priority objectives of my Government.
Poverty reduction has consequently been the utmost
preoccupation of the Government, even since long
before the
Copenhagen
Summit
for
Social
Development. The economic policy of Ethiopia
adopted in 1991 unambiguously reflects that the
overriding priority is poverty reduction, while
promoting social justice and equity.
In terms of creating an enabling environment to
implement the agreed commitments, the Government
has put in place relevant development policies and
strategies. Based on the macro frameworks, sectoral
policies and
strategies
were
designed,
and
implementation has been started in priority sectors.
Policies in the areas of population, health, education,
women, employment and HIV/AIDS have been
formulated and adopted. The Constitution embodying
the core values and beliefs of Ethiopians has been
adopted, and the first and second multiparty elections
were held in 1995 and 2000, respectively.
Our efforts have produced tangible results,
although much remains to be done. The delivery and
coverage of social services in health and education
have shown remarkable improvement and expansion.
Health service coverage has increased by about

20

10 per cent, while the enrolment rates has increased in
primary and secondary education by 20 per cent and
3 per cent, respectively. The participation rate of girls
has also increased at all levels of schooling. The share
of social services increased from about 25 per cent to
28 per cent in recurrent expenditure and from about
20 per cent to 23 per cent in capital expenditure
between 1995 and 1998. The real per capita
expenditure on social services as a whole has increased
over the past seven years. More importantly, our
defence expenditure was dramatically reduced, from an
average of 65 per cent of the total Government
expenditure in the 1980s to less than 5 per cent in
1997, shortly before the Eritrean war of aggression.
One of the most successful innovative approaches
adopted to fund the social sector in Ethiopia has been
the formulation and implementation of sector-wide
programmes. Ethiopia, with the support of its
development partners, has formulated education and
health sector development programmes with an
investment capital of $1.5 billion and $0.63 billion,
respectively, over five years. These programmes are the
first real opportunities to implement the Government’s
social policies and strategies. The implementation of
these programmes calls for an increase in resources and
a radical shift in resource allocation within each sector.
The Government is already committed to financing
about 70 per cent of the programme costs from its own
sources, and the commitment is being realized in
practice despite the tight budgetary constraints.
While vast opportunities exist for development,
Ethiopia is confronted with enormous challenges as
well. Some 45.5 percent of its 60 million people still
live in absolute poverty. The recurrence of drought has
been a norm rather than a risk, and currently up to
10million people are threatened by famine.
Environmental degradation accompanied by population
pressure has weakened the resource base upon which
sustainable development depends. There is a need to
rehabilitate hundreds of thousands of displaced people
due to Eritrea’s recent war of aggression. The
unsustainably high level of external debt is also a
crushing burden on an economy like Ethiopia’s, and
high debt-servicing requirements prevent us from
making adequate investment in education and health
care and from responding effectively to emergencies.
The continued decline in official development
assistance, continued dependence on a single
commodity for export earnings and the absence of

A/S-24/PV.9

meaningful market access for the main export items of
the country are factors undermining the overall
development prospects of the country.
In conclusion, while looking forward to the full
implementation of the Copenhagen Declaration and
Programme of Action, we remain committed to
continuing our endeavours on all fronts to fulfil the
aspirations of our people for their social well-being,
prosperity and security.
The Acting President: I call on His Excellency
the Honourable Norwood Langley, Vice-Minister for
Planning and Economic Affairs of Liberia.
Mr. Langley (Liberia): Liberia is grateful for this
opportunity to participate in this gathering of
stakeholders, this special session of the General
Assembly entitled “World Summit for Social
Development
and
beyond:
achieving
social
development for all in a globalizing world”.
I should hasten to note that the past five days of
discourse by the presenters before me have adequately
platformed the realities of a new and highly potent
revolution; a revolution which will change the way we
live, work, play, organize our societies and, ultimately,
define ourselves. This revolution is globalization.
Achieving social development for all in a
globalizing world, in my opinion, is indeed an
appropriate theme for special session, and I salute the
Swiss Government and the United Nations organizers.
I am honoured to be here and will speak to the
concerns of post-conflict least developed countries.
Half a decade has elapsed since we gathered in a
similar fashion in Copenhagen to lay out a global
social development agenda. Following deliberations at
the Summit, the international community agreed on 10
commitments to serve as guideposts in identifying
solutions to the problems of poverty, unemployment,
social disintegration and so forth. Now, at this session
of the General Assembly, we are undertaking an
assessment of the progress achieved thus far and of the
drawbacks and constraints which have stood as
obstacles to full implementation of the Summit’s goals.
During the preparatory process for this session, it
was realized that most Governments, especially those
of developing countries, are still unable to meet the
basic needs of their citizens. Poverty, illiteracy and
treatable diseases abound. In some countries hunger
and famine have led to malnutrition and numerous

deaths. Internal conflicts contribute to these appalling
conditions for millions. Declining terms of trade,
increasing external debts, a reduction in official
development assistance and stringent structural
adjustment programmes which do not consider social
implications worsen the situation. In addition, the
forces of globalization, while presenting many
opportunities, carry considerable risks. Unfair trade
practices, unequal technological know-how and low
prices for the agricultural commodities on which most
least developed countries depend are factors that
impede the social progress of least developed
countries.
My country, Liberia, has not been able to record
significant success in meeting the social development
agenda, principally because of the decade-long civil
conflict that raged during the 1990s. All institutions
that addressed social needs and dispensed social
services were devastated. Three years after the war, the
duly elected Government has the Herculean task of
restoring the pre-war level of basic health services,
schools and food distribution. There are the added
problems of rehabilitating ex-combatants and
reintegrating them into civil society with newly
acquired skills to enable them to live productive lives.
In order to address these problems, the Government of
Liberia has endeavoured to establish an environment of
durable peace conducive to revitalizing the national
economy. However, the post-conflict situation requires
an infusion of financial assistance to jump-start the
process. Unfortunately, such assistance is in woefully
short supply.
The Government has made numerous appeals for
international assistance only to be lectured about
human rights, which seem to exclude the most basic
right of sustenance, the right to have adequate meals
and good health. Nevertheless, the Government of
Liberia continues to engage international donors and its
partners in development to help revive the economy as
a basis for setting and implementing a social
development
agenda
that
accords
with
the
10 commitments made at the Copenhagen Summit.
Our deliberations have considered all the
dimensions and constraints that have prevented
countries, both developed and developing, from
meeting the socio-economic needs of our people. For
developing countries to improve their capacity they
require increased development assistance, equitable
terms of trade, debt cancellation and reduction, and

21

A/S-24/PV.9

structural adjustment programmes tailored to the
specific needs and circumstances of individual
countries. This will enable them to utilize their meagre
budgetary resources for people-centred projects.
We have set the year 2015 as the target date to
significantly reduce poverty and ameliorate the
conditions that result from it. The success achieved by
then will depend on how we view ourselves.
Continuing to consider the peoples of the world in
terms of “they” in the North and “we” in the South can
only accentuate the great divide and the unwholesome
thoughts that nurture the indifference to long-standing
social injustices.
In closing, I wish to note that the human family
has come a long way since the United Nations came
into being. The new millennium offers the promise for
us to give tangible expression to the preambular edict
of the United Nations Charter, which mandates us
“to employ international machinery for the
promotion of the economic and social
advancement of all peoples”.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Her Excellency Ms. Estelabel Piad Herbruger,
Vice-Minister of Youth, Women, Childhood and the
Family of Panama.
Ms. Herbruger (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): As
a representative of the Panamanian Government, which
is led by President Mireya Moscoso, I would like to
convey her greetings to the representatives gathered
here and to the peoples they represent. Let me also take
this opportunity to thank the fraternal people of
Switzerland and their Government and to say how
grateful we are for their generous hospitality and for
the kind attention that my delegation has received since
its arrival in this prosperous country.

population lives in poverty. The poverty is
concentrated in the rural and indigenous areas, where
77 per cent of the poor population lives.
The Government of Panama has made great
efforts to reduce poverty, to promote employment and
to achieve social integration. It is worth noting that
Panama is among the countries in the Latin American
region that have devoted the most resources to
improving the living conditions of their populations,
earmarking approximately 20 per cent of its gross
domestic product to public spending in the social field.
Nevertheless, these great efforts have not
achieved the desired results due to the inefficiency of
social expenditures and the lack of adequate targeting
of geographic areas and vulnerable groups. The
Government’s capacity to invest in social development
is limited because the country’s high level of
indebtedness requires us to earmark 21.8 per cent of
the national budget to servicing the public debt.
Among the priority activities for attacking
poverty is the implementation of a rural development
programme, which, in addition to broadening access to
basic social services for rural populations, is reducing
their production shortages. As regards the indigenous
population, the State considers it essential to base its
actions on the needs of that population itself,
respecting its identity, values and culture, providing
social organization and introducing modern methods of
production. To make progress in this process, we have
created
a
National
Council
for
indigenous
development, which is made up of representatives of
the indigenous population and of the Government.

Next November Panama will be hosting the
twelfth Ibero-American Summit of heads of State and
Government. Its slogan calls for uniting children and
adolescents on the basis of justice and equity in the
new millennium. That event will be of great
importance for the future development of IberianAmerican generations, because we will deal with
highly significant matters of common interest to our
countries.

Among the main objectives of our Government is
improving the quality and coverage of health care,
which is closely related to the social development of
the people. Although 80 per cent of the Panamanian
population is estimated to have access to health
services, and approximately 90 per cent to have access
to drinking water, we are developing programmes to
broaden these services in order to achieve a higher
level of coverage for the rural and indigenous
populations. These people are at a disadvantage by
comparison with persons living in urban areas, where
more than 95 per cent of the population has access to
such services.

We are a small country, with 2.8 million
inhabitants, of which 60 per cent live in urban areas.
Approximately 37.3 per cent of the Panamanian

Education is one of the most important weapons
for combating poverty. In this connection, in recent
decades Panama has undertaken significant efforts to

22

A/S-24/PV.9

broaden coverage. In recent years its efforts to improve
the quality of education have placed it among the Latin
American countries that devote a relatively high
proportion of their resources to this sector. We have
managed to achieve almost total coverage at the
primary level; the actual figure is 94.7 per cent
coverage. This has had a positive impact on reducing
illiteracy, which in the last 30 years has fallen from
25.2 per cent to 7.8 per cent.
One of the greatest concerns of our Government
is generating opportunities for productive employment.
With 11.6 per cent of the economically active
population currently unemployed, our goal is to enable
Panamanian families to earn adequate and stable
incomes. To address this situation, we have undertaken
significant actions to foster private investment and
promote growth. We have, among other things, availed
ourselves of the enormous potential of the assets of the
old Panama Canal Zone by incorporating them into the
economy.
To promote social integration and equal
opportunity, Panama has undertaken a number of
normative measures, notably, our ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child; the reform of
the electoral code that guarantees women the
opportunity to hold elective offices; the law regarding
opportunities and facilities for handicapped persons;
the law that establishes equality of opportunity for
women; the law that eliminates sexist language in
school books and texts; the law providing a special
regime of criminal responsibility for adolescents; and
our recent ratification of International Labour
Organization Conventions 182 and 138 regarding child
labour.
In 1997 we created the Ministry of Youth,
Women, Childhood and the Family, the main purposes
of which are to foster human development through
participation and the promotion of equality. Through
the efforts of the Ministry, we have established the
National Council for the family and young persons, the
National Council for women, the National Council for
youth and the National Council for older adults. These
are positive steps for the organized participation of
civil society.
For the first time in Panama’s history, a woman is
at the helm of the country. This is the result of the fight
waged by the women of our Republic for the right to
participate actively in the decision-making process and

in the economic, social,
development of the country.

cultural

and

political

The Government of Panama recognizes the
family as the basic unit of society and the fact that it
plays a fundamental role in development, in addition to
being an essential factor in bringing about social
integration. In this respect, we have implemented
policies and programmes to strengthen the capacity of
the family to perform its social functions and to assist
the development process. We are placing emphasis on
the welfare of children and women, family values and
education as important tools for achieving social
development.
To sum up, the Republic of Panama faces the
same development problems as other countries in the
region. Nevertheless, it is classified by international
organizations as an upper middle-income country,
which limits its access to benefits from international
donors. This is due to the fact that in the classification
process account was taken of per capita income and
national indicators, which mask the enormous
disparities and inequities not only between regions but
also between population groups.
The Government would like at this point to make
several recommendations aimed at promoting social
development worldwide. In this respect we suggest that
participatory assessments be carried out on the social
impact of structural adjustments in each country, and
that this exercise include the United Nations agencies,
Governments and civil society, so as to adapt economic
reform strategies to economic realities. We must also
appeal to the international community to redouble its
efforts to give support to the most vulnerable countries
in a spirit of international social justice and genuine
human solidarity.
In conclusion, it is important to underscore the
fact that Panama reaffirms its commitment to the
Copenhagen Declaration and Programme of Action and
to the new measures to be adopted at this special
session of the General Assembly. Panama reiterates its
support for efforts to enhance existing policies on
children, adolescents, the environment and equal
opportunity, as well as for the goals that have been set
to ensure a better quality of life for the peoples of Latin
America and the world.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Gerbert Betancourt, Vice-Minister of
Public Health and Social Welfare of El Salvador.

23

A/S-24/PV.9

Mr. Betancourt (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like to convey, on behalf of the
Government of El Salvador, our sincere congratulations
on the election of Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, as well as on
that of the other members of the Bureau, to conduct the
proceedings of this twenty-fourth special session of the
General Assembly, entitled “World Summit for Social
Development
and
beyond:
achieving
social
development for all in a globalizing world”.
We are gathered here at this special session to
review the progress made in the field of social
development and to renew our commitments, motivated
by the conviction that all countries present have been
working in the spirit of the commitments we have
entered into.
The realities of the past five years have been
characterized by difficulties in the area of international
finance and in trade relations between countries, as
well as by problems resulting from the impact of
natural disasters and international cooperation flows,
all of which have limited progress towards the social
goals set at Copenhagen.
However, El Salvador has continued to work to
enhance its ability to provide for the social needs of the
most vulnerable sectors of our population.
The implementation of the 1992 Peace
Agreement made El Salvador one of the most
successful examples of conflict resolution through
understanding. This laid the foundation for a
democratic, participatory, integrated and pluralistic
coexistence, which created conditions conducive to
progress in the implementation of the commitments
undertaken in the field of social development.
In the framework of the Social Summit, the
progress achieved by El Salvador can be summed up as
follows.
In 1995 we began a process of educational reform
that was defined and implemented through the broad
participation of the citizenry. At present there are
approximately 5,000 organizations in El Salvador,
consisting of parents, students and teachers, who
constitute school governing bodies.
Through the Educo programme, ranked number
one in the world by the World Bank, we are addressing
the needs of children in the poorest rural areas of the
country. This programme makes it possible for the

24

community itself to hire teachers and manage their
children’s education.
We have increased the school-enrolment ratio by
14 per cent and reduced the rate of illiteracy for people
aged 15 to 60 to 17 per cent, the lowest rate in
El Salvador’s history.
Furthermore, in 1995 we launched the national
school health programme, which encompasses
educational services, medical care, nutrition, water and
hygiene, improved means of access and the promotion
of social participation. The programme is currently in
force in 100 per cent of the rural schools in our
country.
The programme has made it possible to reduce,
throughout the entire system, the number of students
who drop out, repeat grades or are over age. Its impact
on health and nutrition has also been very evident. We
are determined to find the ways and means of
broadening the scope of this programme and increasing
its benefits.
From 1995 to date, the budget of the Ministry of
Health has doubled, and, with the help of contributions
from international cooperation, we have strengthened
our human resources. We have also broadened,
rehabilitated and equipped a large network of facilities
throughout the country, which has made it possible to
increase coverage and provide higher-quality care and
to reduce the incidence of disease, especially of
contagious illnesses.
In 1999 we initiated a far-reaching structural
reform of the entire system, with the participation of all
actors concerned, governmental and non-governmental
organizations, academics, individuals and trade unions.
As regards the fight against poverty, the overall
poverty rate fell from 59.7 per cent in 1991 to
44.6 per cent in 1998. Over the same period, the
absolute poverty rate also fell, from 28.2 per cent to
18.9 per cent. We have also reduced the rate of rural
poverty by 8 percentage points, to approximately
58.6 per cent in the period under consideration.
With respect to other basic social services, water,
for instance, is a very limited resource in El Salvador.
Making it drinkable and supplying it to households is a
priority which requires a major investment on the part
of our country. The projects that are under way will
soon make it possible for the first time to meet the
needs of the urban population and neighbouring areas.

A/S-24/PV.9

In the period from 1994 to 1999, the public and
private sectors made a substantial effort to reduce the
national housing shortage. An important part of that
effort, aimed at assisting war-affected communities,
was
undertaken
through
non-governmental
organizations.
These achievements, in conjunction with
economic stability, support for the agricultural
economy and significant investments in rural roads,
have led to a considerable improvement in the quality
of life of the population and to advances in poverty
reduction.
Priority has been given to combating domestic
violence through the adoption of relevant legislation.
Furthermore, in 1998 we instituted a new penal code.
We have promoted gender equality by updating
and implementing our national policy for women,
which enables us to address that goal in a way that cuts
across all government institutions. Joint efforts by the
Government and private enterprise have aimed at
consolidating such values in our society through
communication strategies involving a variety of media.
To fulfil its commitments with respect to social
development, the Government has allocated additional
resources to that sphere, and has enhanced the way in
which they are used. Thus, 1998 saw the largest public
investment in the social sphere in our history:
34 per cent of the national budget.
Social development is a global task for which
cooperation among countries and among societies must
be strengthened. We are convinced that this session
will revitalize our commitment to social development
and that we shall agree together to promote integrated
strategies that will guarantee the well-being of our
peoples.
As a preliminary step, the Government of El
Salvador is promoting a new alliance among
Salvadorans to ensure that all individuals, families and
communities will be stakeholders in the pursuit of
well-being and progress.
That is the challenge facing all the countries here
assembled: we must together forge an international
alliance for the sustainable social development of our
peoples.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Her Excellency Mrs. Kunzang Namgyel, Head of the

Multilateral Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Bhutan.
Mrs. Namgyel (Bhutan): It is an honour and a
pleasure for me to address this special session of the
General Assembly. On behalf of the Bhutanese
delegation, I would like to congratulate Mr. Theo-Ben
Gurirab on his assumption of the presidency of the
Assembly at this session. My delegation would like to
commend the Commission for Social Development and
the Preparatory Committee for their laudable work in
preparing for the session. We would also like to thank
the Government of Switzerland for its hospitality and
for the excellent arrangements for this session.
We are gathered here five years after Copenhagen
to reaffirm our commitment to the Declaration on
Social Development and the Programme of Action, to
review and assess progress in the implementation of
the Programme, and to recommend new initiatives and
actions for achieving social development. We have
come with much hope and with the expectation that the
outcome of the session will include realistic and
concrete proposals to achieve the goals of our agreed
commitments.
During the course of the debate over the past few
days, many speakers have highlighted the obstacles
faced by developing countries in overcoming the
problems of poverty, unemployment and social
disintegration, including the impact of globalization on
social development, the social consequences of
financial crises, the burden of foreign debt on
impoverished nations and barriers to trade. They have
called for concerted efforts by the international
community to reaffirm our political will and to
translate it into concrete action in terms of adequate
resources and measures. My delegation fully concurs
with those views.
Allow me to share the experience of my country
in our efforts at social development. Bhutan is a landlocked least developed country with extremely
mountainous terrain and remote and scattered
settlements, and the costs of social development have
indeed been very high for us. However, under the
enlightened leadership of our king, Jigme Singye
Wangchuk, we have in the course of the last four
decades achieved remarkable progress. The guiding
principles of our development philosophy has been
people-centred, aiming towards what we in Bhutan call
gross national happiness. This means that the people,

25

A/S-24/PV.9

their needs, their well-being and their happiness are
considered central to all development efforts. It means
that economic growth is not an end in itself but only a
means for achieving the goals of social and human
development.
Participation by the people and decentralization
are among the major goals of our development strategy.
To that end, we have introduced significant changes to
the system of public administration and local
governance. Local development bodies have been
strengthened to ensure people’s participation and
decision-making in all development activities, starting
right at the village level.
I would also like to mention that we have spelt
out our vision for peace, prosperity and happiness in
the form of a document entitled “Bhutan 2020”, and
that we are very clear in terms of what we want to
achieve and how to achieve it. During the past four
decades, we have accorded the highest priority to the
social sectors with about 30 per cent of our national
budgets earmarked for them. Even the remotest corners
of the country are being served with health, education
and agricultural extension facilities. As a result, our
goal of providing basic social services to the people
has been largely achieved. There has been a visible
improvement in the quality of life of the people. Infant
and maternal mortality rates have been almost halved
within the past few decades. Life expectancy has
increased from 47 to 66 years. We have achieved
overall child immunization coverage of 90 per cent,
and 65 per cent of the Bhutanese rural population has
access to safe drinking water and sanitation. Health
coverage for our population is estimated to be around
90 per cent. Diseases such as leprosy and iodinedeficiency-related disorders are on the verge of
eradication.
As for education, all Bhutanese citizens enjoy
free education from the primary to the tertiary level.
Another fast-growing initiative is non-formal
education, with thousands of students, most of whom
are women.
Despite our successes, we continue to face many
challenges and constraints in our efforts at ensuring
social development. An emerging problem is creating
appropriate job opportunities to meet the rising
aspirations of the younger generation. In the next five
years alone, another 50,000 young people are expected

26

to join the labour market. Another concern is the
growing trend in rural-to-urban migration.
One fifth of the world’s population lives in our
region of South Asia. It is home to 43 per cent of the
world’s poorest people. While individual countries of
the region have accorded high priority to social
development, compounding factors of population
explosion, environmental degradation and extreme
poverty make achieving any meaningful development
highly difficult. Consequently, there is a vast
movement of destitute people in search of better
livelihoods. For Bhutan, this means that as a result of
the modicum of success in our development efforts as
mentioned earlier, we continue to face the problem of
illegal economic migrants, which poses a grave
challenge to our peace, our security and our
sovereignty.
Developing countries continue to look upon
official development assistance as a very important
source of financial support in our countries’ efforts at
socio-economic development. However, declining
levels of official development assistance over the years
do not augur well for the developing countries,
particularly the least developed ones. While we thank
those donors that have lived up to their commitment of
allocating 0.7 per cent of gross domestic product to
official development assistance, we urge the others to
do the same.
I am pleased to report that the next round table
meeting for Bhutan, when the Government of Bhutan
and its donors will meet to review and discuss
cooperation, will be held for the first time in Bhutan, in
November this year. The outcome of that meeting will
provide a vital input to the formulation of our ninth
five-year plan. Our development partners have made
significant contributions to enabling Bhutan to meet its
development challenges and to the success we have
achieved. On behalf of the Government and the people
of Bhutan, I would like to take this opportunity to
record our appreciation to all our development
partners, both bilateral and multilateral, and to seek
their continued cooperation and support.
In conclusion, each of our Governments, in a
spirit of partnership, must ensure that we translate the
noble commitments made at Copenhagen into concrete
action. As for my country, we would like to assure the
Assembly of our full commitment to doing so.

A/S-24/PV.9

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Navin Chandarpal, Special Envoy
of the President of Guyana.
Mr. Chandarpal (Guyana): The 1995 World
Summit for Social Development emphasized two
simple truths. First, without social development and
social justice there can be no peace and security within
and among our nations. Secondly, in both economic
and social terms, the most productive policies and
investments are those that encourage people
individually and nationally to maximize their
capacities, resources and opportunities.
As we gather together for this special session of
the General Assembly, let us remember that our heads
of State and Government intended the Copenhagen
Programme of Action to serve as a catalyst for positive
change — a catalyst to eradicate poverty,
unemployment, social exclusion and the great divide
between the rich and the poor, both within and among
nations; a catalyst to assume duties and responsibilities
within this global village; duties to be carried out not
only by Governments, but also by civil society,
international organizations and other actors of
influence at the national and international levels.
In fact, the presence at this special session of
such a wide range of interested organizations, agencies
and individuals further reminds us that the social
contract concluded five years ago remains equally
relevant today at the turn of the century and
millennium.
Over the past five years, Member States of the
United Nations have shared experiences and good
practices in efforts to achieve the 10 commitments
undertaken at Copenhagen. Earlier this month, another
special session of the General Assembly reviewed
progress and proposed further action in the important
area of gender equality and equity. Similarly, within the
United Nations and other forums, greater attention has
been given to the development challenges of Africa and
the least developed countries, the social costs of
structural adjustment programmes, the dearth of
resources available for social development and the root
causes of underdevelopment in developing countries.
The Cologne Debt Initiative, the trade negotiations for
Lomé IV, the 20/20 initiative and arrangements for a
special meeting on financing for development are just
some of the steps taken in this regard.

The experiences of Guyana, as a small developing
country seeking to provide a high quality of life for its
citizens, have demonstrated the importance of political
will, both nationally and internationally, for the
achievement of social justice and development. The
strengthening of democratic structures and institutions
since 1992 has proved to be a good basis for
participatory approaches to resolving poverty,
unemployment, unequal access to basic social services
and the marginalization of certain social groups within
our society. Over the years, the budget for the social
sector has steadily increased, with emphasis on health
and education. Diversification of the economy, efforts
to attract foreign direct investment and incentives for
the private sector, including small enterprise
development, have been actively pursued as part of
income and employment generation strategies. Poverty
alleviation programmes, housing, and safe water and
sanitation policies, have been specially targeted on the
poorest and most vulnerable in society.
Despite these efforts, important challenges
remain. Poverty eradication remains a formidable task
as policy makers seek to balance limited financial
resources with the need to respond to the most basic
needs of Guyanese citizens.
Building on the many initiatives taken so far, the
Guyana Government has developed a Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper which acknowledges that the
fight to reduce poverty must be four-pronged. First,
this strategy aims at stimulating economic growth
through improving the business environment and
providing sector-specific enhancements that will
benefit the poor. Secondly, it focuses not only on
improving economic and social infrastructure, but also
on enhancing poor people’s access to affordable health,
education, water and housing facilities. Thirdly,
pending the realization of the benefits of these two
approaches, it will immediately provide a safety net to
those who are more seriously disadvantaged. Finally,
special poverty intervention programmes will be
introduced to areas where prevailing poverty levels are
still high.
Such an approach, however, calls into question
the means at the disposal of a developing country such
as Guyana to have a multi-pronged strategy to
eradicate poverty. A case in point is that, despite
improved educational standards in the country, as funds
are channelled into the education sector, qualified
graduates continue to migrate to countries with the

27

A/S-24/PV.9

capacity to pay higher emoluments. This brain drain
involves not only the young people, but also older
professionals, including teachers and doctors, whose
services in a globalizing economy have become
increasingly competitive. At the same time, the
demands of the labour market have had to adapt to the
skills available in the country.
Another issue of critical importance to social
integration, moral values and the fabric of society itself
is the steady increase in violence, crime and the
trafficking and abuse of illicit drugs. The drug trade
not only corrupts individuals and systems by the
enormity of its inducement but also threatens
governance within our very country. Offenders,
although largely youths, comprise all age groups, with
even grandmothers being used in some cases as
“mules” for the drug trade. This situation has not been
helped by recent mass deportations of criminals to
Guyana by the developed countries on the pretext that
they were born in Guyana.
The Copenhagen Declaration and Programme of
Action have inspired nations to take initiatives to
reduce poverty. It is true that some have worked more
resolutely than others and that the levels of success
have varied significantly. However, one lesson stands
out in relation to the efforts of developing countries.
Even those who have made great efforts at the national
level are severely constrained by the realities of the
international climate.
This forum needs to come to grips with the reality
that good governance and inclusive policies are
extremely important for a better sharing of the national
cake in order to reduce the level of poverty. But it is
equally important to note that for most countries of the
world the national cake is much too small. The
principles of good governance, inclusive policies,
transparency, justice and equity must also apply in the
international arrangements between States.
Globalization and the rule of the market place
cannot provide the vehicle for improving the conditions
of the developing world. Instead of globalization
serving to promote greater cooperation among States,
the process is being pushed to give increasing
advantage to the already developed world. The wide
gap between the developed and the developing
countries is widening further. Developing countries are
greatly disadvantaged by their inability to have access
to improved technology. In spite of the commitments

28

made by developed countries to place a high priority on
technology transfer, they continue to treat technology
as a commodity on the market.
A critical need for developing countries is to
improve production, productivity and market access.
We need to be embraced in a world of cooperation, not
stabbed by the daggers of hostile competition which
globalization is promoting.
Our experiences since 1995 have taught us that
despite positive interventionist measures aimed at
improving social conditions, our national success in
achieving the goals of the Copenhagen Programme of
Action is largely dependent on the availability of
resources. Sustained and improved domestic economic
growth and an enabling international environment must
be seen as pillars of support for the social development
of developing countries. Such an environment must
ensure markets for our products and more favourable
and fairer terms of trade. Similarly, debt cancellation
initiatives must be considered effective tools to reduce
the debt stock, thus releasing much-needed funds for
the social sector and increased salaries.
We need massive debt reduction and meaningful
development assistance. We need a more facilitating,
development-oriented arrangement for international
financial institutions. Aid must be a global dove, not a
Trojan horse.
In 1995 the late President of Guyana, Mr. Cheddi
Jagan, made a call for a new global human order to
address many of the economic and social ills
recognized in the Copenhagen Declaration and
Programme of Action. In presenting a number of
proposals for issues such as poverty alleviation, debt
relief, employment generation, population explosion
and urbanization, he called for a strong partnership
between Governments and agencies from both the
North and the South. This call remains relevant and
necessary today.
Every country can and must take internal actions
to maintain social progress, and this forum must serve
to reinspire and reinvigorate all countries to do so. But
this forum will be a sad disappointment and we will
have failed to meaningfully use the five years since
Copenhagen if major forces do not take their heads out
of the sand in order to recognize that the main
impediments to achieving social progress are structural
in nature, deeply rooted in the massive inequality and
unjust relations between States.

A/S-24/PV.9

This special session affords us the opportunity to
accelerate the process of addressing the situation of the
poor and the powerless. Less than a third of 1 per cent
of global income — approximately $80 billion
yearly — is all that is needed to address poverty. If the
rich and poor countries do not act together to overcome
want and hunger, there can be no lasting peace. This is
not just a partnership, but a forging of our collective
destiny in the interests of all peoples.

Five years after Copenhagen, let us be true to our
consciences and leave Geneva with the resolve to deal
with the causes and not merely the symptoms of
poverty. Let us recommit to accelerate social progress
worldwide through a more enabling national
environment enhanced by fair, just and equitable
relations among the members of our global family.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

29
