146

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

4. Notes with satisfaction the decision of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law to
organize, in connexion with the eighth session of the
Commission, an international symposium on the role of
universities and research centres in the teaching, dissemination and wider appreciation of international
trade law :md to seek voluntary contributions from
Governments, international organizations and foundations to cover the cost of travel and subsistence of
participants from developing countries;
5. Invites States which have not ratified or acceded
to the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement
of Foreign Arbitral Awards:w of 1958 to consider the
possibility of adhering thereto;
6. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on Ir.ternational Trade Law should:
(a) Continue in its work to pay special attention
to the topics to which it has decided to give priority,
that is, the international sale of goods, international
payments, international commercial arbitration and
international legislation on shipping;
( b) Continue to consider the legal problems presented by different kinds of multinational enterprises,
in accordance with the decision thereon adopted by the
Commission at its sixth session;
( c) Accelerate its work on training and assistance
in the field of international trade law, with special regard to the promotion and teaching of international
trade law at universities, taking into account the special
interests of the developing countries:
( d) Continue to collaborate with international organizations active in the field of international trade law;
( e) Continue to give special consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in mind
the special problems of land-locked countries;
(f) Keep its programme of work and working methods under review with the aim of increasing the effectiveness of its work;
7. Invites the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law to consider the advisabilitv of
prep:uing uniform rules on the civil liability of producers for damage caused by their products intended for
or involved in international sale or distribution, taking
into account the feasibility and most appropriate time
therefor in view of other items in its programme of
work;
8. Decides to increa,e the membership of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law from
twenty-nine to thirty-six in accordance with the following rules:
(a) The seven additional members of the Commission shall be elected by the General Assembly for a
term of ,ix yems, except as provided in subparagraph
(c) bdow;
( b) In electing the additional members, the General
Assembly shall observe the following distribution of
seats:
(i) Two from African States,
(ii) Two from Asian States;
... )' One frum E:.istern Emopc:rn States:
( ]!j
(iv) One fwm Latin Ame1ican St:lte1.;
(v) One from \Vestern Euwpean and other States:
ao United Nations, Treaty Serles, vol. 330, No. 4739, p. 38.

( c) Of the additional members elected at the first
election, to be held during the current session of the
General Assembly, the terms of three members shall
expire at the end of three years; the President of the
General Assembly shall, by drawing Jots, select these
members as follows:
( i) One from those elected from African States;
(ii) One from those elected from Asian States;
(iii) One from those elected from the other regions;
(d) The additional members elected at the first election shall take office on 1 January 1974;
(e) The provisions of section II, paragraphs 3 to 5,
of General Assembly resolution 2205 (XXI) shall also
apply to the additional members;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the twenty-eighth
session of the General Assembly on the Commission's
report on the work of its sixth session.

2 I 97th plenary meeting
12 December /973
3166 (XXVIH). (:onvenlion on the Prt>vention
and Punishment of Crimes against lntt>rnationally Prolt>cled PPrsons, including Diplomatic -\genls:n

The General Assembly,
Considering that the codification and progressive
development of mternational law contributes to the
implementation of the purpo.<es and principles set forth
in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,

Recalling that in response to the request made in
General Assembly resolution 2780 (XXVI) of 3 December 1971, the International Law Commission. at
its twenty-fourth session, studied the question of the
protection and inviolability of diplomatic agents and
other persons entitled to special protection under international law and prepared draft articles:'~ on the prevention and punishment of crimes against such persons,
Having considered the draft articles and also the
comments and observations thereon submitted by States,
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental Nganizations~,:i in response to the invitation extended hy
the General Assembly in its resolution 2926 (XXVlI)
of 28 November 1972,
Convinced of the importance of securing international
:igrcernent on appropri:,,tc and effective measures for
the prevention and punishment of crimes agaimt diplomatic agents and other internationally protected persons in Yiew of the serious threat to the maintenance
and promotion of friendly relations and co-operation
among ~tatcs created by the commission of such
crime~:.
Hal'ing elabo,ared for that purpose the provisions
contained in the Convcn1 i,111 annexed hereto,
1. Adopts the Convention on the Prevention and
Puni~hment of Crimes agaimt Internationally Protected
Pcrsnns, iw:ludin,: Diplomatic Agents, annexed to the
r,rc,c·nt rl',(0 hition:
:n S, ·c· · ( hhcr ,b.:i •w)m '", p. J 50,
3~ ()(;~cial Rer-ords n/ 1/i,, Gclirral Assembly, 1·wenty-sn·enth
Sessio". Supplement So. JO iA/87 l 0/Rev.l), chap. HI, sect B.
33 A/9127 and Add.l.

147

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2. Re-emphasizes the great importance of the rules
of international law concerning the inviolability of and
special protection to be afforded to internationally
protected persons and the obligations of States in relation thereto;
3. Considers that the annexed Convention will enable States to carry out their obligations more effectively;
4. Recognize? also that the provisions of the annexed Convention could not in any way prejudice the
exercise of the legitimate right to self-determination
and independence, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, 34 by peoples struggling against colonialism,
alien domination, foreign occupation, racial discrimination and apartheid;
5. Invites States to become parties to the annexed
Convention;
6. Decides that the present resolution, whose provisions are related to the annexed Convention, shall
aways be published together with it.

2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973
ANNEX
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes
against Inte1·nationally Protected Persons, including
Diplomatic Agents

The States Parties to this Convention,
Having in mind the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations concerning the maintenance of int ::rnational peace and the promotion of friendly relations and cooperation among States,
Considering that crimes against diplomatic agents and other
internationally protected persons jeopardizing the safety of
these persons create a serious threat to the maintenance of
normal international relations which are necessary for cooperation among States,
Believing that the commission of such crimes is a matter of
grave concern to the international community,
Convinced that there is an urgent need to adopt appropriate and effective measures for the prevention and punishment
of such crimes,
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1
For the purposes of this Convention:

1. "Internationally protected person" means:

(a) A Head of State, including any member of a collegial
body performing the functions of a Head of State under the
constitution of the State concerned, a Head of Government
or a Minister for Foreign Affairs, whenever any such person
is in a foreign State, as well as members of his family who
accompany him;
( b) Any representative or official of a State or any official
or other agent of an international organization of an intergovernmental character who, at the time when and in the
place where a crime against him, his official premises, his
private accommodation or his means of transport is committed,
is entitled pursuant to international law to special protection
from any attack on his person, freedom or dignity, as well
as members of his family forming part of his household;
2. "Alleged offender" means a person as to whom there is
sufficient evidence to determine prima facie that he has corn-

mitted or par,ticipated in one or more of the crimes set forth
in article 2.
ARTICLE 2

1. The intentional commission of:
(a) A murder, kidnapping or other attack upon the person

or liberty of an internationally protected person;
(b) A violent attack upon the official premises, the private
accommodation or the means of transport of an internationally
protected person likely to endanger his pelfson or liberty;
( c) A threat to commit any such attack;
(d) An attempt to commit any such attack; and
(e) An act constituting participation as an accomplice in
any such attack
shall be made by each State Party a crime under its internal
law.
2. Each State Party shall make these crimes punishable by
appropria,te penalties which take into account their grave
nature.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article in no way derogate
from the obligations of States Parties under international law
to take all appropriate measures to prevent other attacks on
the persun, freedom or dignity of an internationally protected
person.
ARTICLE

3

1. Each State Party shall take such measures as may be

necessary to establish its jurisdiction over the crimes set forth
in article 2 in the following cases:
(a) When the crime is committed in the territory of that
State or on board a ship or aircraft registered in that State;
( b) When the alleged offender is a national of that State;
(c) When the crime is committed against an interna,tionally
protected person as defined in article 1 who enjoys his status
as such by virtue of functions which he exercises on behalf
of that State.
2. Each State Party sha11 likewise take such measures as
may be necessary to establish its jurisdiction over these crimes
in cases where the alleged offender is present in its territory
and it does not extradite him pursuant to article 8 to any of
the States mentioned in paragraph 1 of this article.
3. This Convention does not exclude any criminal jurisdiction exercised in accordance with internal law.
ARTICLE 4

States Parties shall co-operate in the prevention of the crimes
set forth in article 2, particularly by:
(a) Taking all practicable measures to prevent preparations
in their respective territories for the commission of those
crimes within or outside their territories;
( b) Exchanging information and co-ordinating the taking of
administrative and other measures as appropriate to prevent
the commission of those crimes.
ARTICLE 5

1. The State Party in which any of the crimes set forth in

article 2 has been committed shall, if it has reason to believe
that an alleged offender has fled from its territory, communicate to all other States concerned, directly or through the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, all the pertinent
facts regarding the crime committed and all available information regarding the identity of the alleged offender.
2. Whenever any of the crimes set forth in article 2 has
been committed against an internationally protected person,
any State Party which has information concerning the victim
and the circumstances of the crime shall endeavour to transmit
it, under the conditions provided for in its internal law, fully
and promptly to the State Party on whose behalf he was exercising his functions.
ARTICLE

6

1. Upon being satisfied that the circumstances so warrant,
34 Resolution 2625

(XXV), annex.

the State Party in whose territory the alleged offender is

148

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

present shall take the appropriate measures under its internal
law so as to ensure his presence for the purpose of prosecution or extradition. Such mea~ures shall be notified without
delay directly or through the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to:
(a) The State where the crime was committed;

( b) The State or States of which the alleged offender is a

national or, if he is a stateless person, in whose territory he
permanently resides;
( c) The State or States of which the internationally pro•
tected person concerned is a national or on whose behalf he
was exercising his functions;
(d) All other States concerned; and

( e) The international organization of which the internationally protected person concerned is an official or an agent.

2. Any person regarding whom the measures referred to in
paragraph 1 of this article are being taken shall be entitled:
(a) To communicate without delay with the nearest appropriate representative of the State of which he is a national or
whi~h is otherwise entitled to protect his rights or, if he is a
stateless person, which he requests and which is willing to
protect his rights; and

( b) To be visited by a representative of that State.
ARTICLE 7

The State Party in whose territory the alleged offender is
present shall, if it does not extradite him, submit, without
exception whatsoever and without undue delay, the case to its
competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, through
proceedings in accordance with the laws of that State.
ARTICLE

8

I. To the extent that the crimes set forth in article 2 are

not listed as extraditable offences in any extradition treaty
existing between States Parties, they shall be deemed to be
included as such therein. States Parties undertake to include
those crimes as extraditable offences in every future extradition treaty to be concluded between them.
2. If a State Party which makes extradition conditional
on the existence of a treaty receives a request for extradition
from another State Party with which it has no extradition
treaty, it may, if it decides to extradite, con~ider this Convention as the legal basi5 for extradition in respect of those crimes.
Extradition shall be subject to the procedural provisions and
the other conditions of the law of the requested State.
3. States Parties which do not make extradition conditional
on the existence of a treaty shall recognize those crimes as
extraditable offences between themselves subject to the procedural provisions and the other conditions of the law of the
requested State.
4. Each of the crimes shall be treated, for the purpose of
extradition between States Parties, as if it had been committed not only in the place in which it occurred but also in
the territories of the States required to establish their jurisdiction in accordance with paragraph 1 of article 3.
.ARTICLE

9

Any person regarding whom proceedings are being carried
out in connexion with any of the crimes set forth in article 2
shall be guaranteed fair treatment at all stages of the proceedings.
ARTICLE

10

1. States Parties shall afford one another the greatest
measure of assistance in connexion with criminal proceedings
brought in respect of the crimes set forth in article 2, including
the supply of all evidence at their disposal necessary for the

proceedings.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this article shall not
affect obligations concerning mutual judicial assistance embodied in any other treaty.
ARTICLE

II

The State Party where an alleged offender is prosecuted
shall communicate the final outcome of the proceedings to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall transmit the information to the other States Parties.
ARTICLE

12

The provisions of this Convention shall not affect the ,application of the Treaties on Asylum, in force at the date of the
adoption of this Convention, as between the States which are
parties to those Treaties; but a State Party to this Convention
may not invoke those Treaties with respect to another State
Party to this Convention which is not a party to those Treaties.
ARTICLE

13

1. Any dispute between two or more States Parties concerning the interpretation or application of this Convention
which is not settled by negotiation shall, at the request of one
of them, be submitted to arbitration. If within six months from
the date of the request for arbitration the parties are unable
to agree on the organization of the arbitration, any one of
those parties may refer the dispute to the International Court
of Justice by request in conformity with the Statute of the
Court.

2. Each State Party may at the time of signature or ratification of this Convention or accession thereto declare that
it does not consider itself bound by paragraph 1 of this article.
The other States Parties shall not be bound by paragraph 1
of this article with respect to any State Party which has
made such a reservation.
3. Any State Party which has made a reservation in
accordance with paragraph 2 of this article may at any time
withdraw that reservation by notification to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
ARTICLE

14

This Convention shall be open for signature by all States,
until 31 December 1974 at United Nations Headquarters in
New York.
ARTICLE

15

This Convention is subject to ratification. The instruments
of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.
ARTICLE

16

This Convention shall remain open for accession by any
State. The instruments of accession shall be deposited with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
ARTICLE

17

I. This Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth

day following the date of deposit of the twenty-second instrument of ratification or accession with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the Convention
after the deposit of the twenty-second instrument of ratification or accession. the Convention shall enter into force on
the thirtieth day after deposit by such State of its instrument of
ratification or accession.
ARTICLE

18

1. Any State Party may denounce this Convention by written
notification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. Denunciation shall take effect six months following the
date on which notification is received by the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.

149

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee
ARTICLE

a working language of the General Assembly and
its Main Committees.

19

The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
all States, inter alia:
(a) Of signatures to this Convention, of the deposit of
instruments of ratification or accession in accordance with
articles 14, 15 and 16 and of notifications made under article
18;
( b) Of the date on which this Convention will enter into
force in accordance with article 17.
ARTICLE

"Interpretation
"Rule 52
"Speeches made in any of the six languages of
the General Assembly shall be interpreted into the
other five languages, provided that interpretation
from and into Arabic shall be made only in the
Assembly and in its Main Committees.

20

"Rule 53

The original of this Convention, of which the Chinese,
English, French, Russian anri Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, who shall send certified copies thereof to all
States.

"Any representative may make a speech in a
language other than the languages of the General
Assembly. In this case, he shall himself provide for
interpretation into one of the languages of the
General Assembly or of the committee concerned.
Interpretation into the other language., of the General
Assembly or of the committee concerned by the
interpreters of the Secretariat may be based on the
interpretation given in the first such language.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized
thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this
Convention, opened for signature at New York on 14 December 1973.

3191 (XXVIII). Inclusion of Chinese among the
working languages of the General Assembly,
its committees and its subcommittees and in•
clusion of Arabic among the official and the
working languages of the General Assembly
and its Main Committees: amendments to
rules 51 to 59 of the rules of procedure of
the Assembly

"Languages of verbatim and summary records
"Rule 54
"Verbatim or summary records shall be drawn up
as soon as possible in the languages of the General
Assembly, provided that such records shall be drawn
up in Arabic only for the plenary meetings of the
Assembly and for the meetings of the Main Committees.

The General Assembly,
Having regard to its decision to include Chinese
among the working languages of the General Assembly
and to amend accordingly the relevant provisions of
the rules of procedure of the Assembly, 311
Having regard to its decision to include Arabic
among the official and the working languages of the
General Assembly and its Main Committees and to
amend accordingly the relevant provisions of the rules
of procedure of the Assembly, 36
Having considered the notes by the SecretaryGeneral,87
Decides, with effect from 1 January 197 4:
(a) To replace rules 51 to 59 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly by the following rules:

"VIII.

"Languages of the Journal of the United Nations

"Rule 55
"During the sessions of the General Assembly, the
Journal of the United Nations shall be published in
the languages of the Assembly.

"Languages of resolutions and other documents
"Rule 56
"All resolutions and other documents shall be
published in the languages of the General Assembly,
provided that publication in Arabic of such documents shall be limited to those of the Assembly and
its Main Committees.
"Publications in languages other than the languages
of the General Assembly

LANGUAGES

"Official and working languages

"Rule 57
"Documents of the General Assembly, its committees and its subcommittees shall, if the Assembly
so decides, be published in any language other than
the languages of the Assembly or of the committee
concerned.";

"Rule 51
"Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish
shall be both the official and the working languages
of the General Assembly, its committees and its
subcommlttees. Arabic shall be both an official and

(b) To renumber the subsequent rules accordingly.

85 See resolution 3189 (XXVIII).

ae See resolution 3190 (XXVIII).

2206th plenary meeting
18 December 1973

87 A/C.6/L.961 and A/C.6/L.976.

•

•

•
