A /75/PV.36

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

36th plenary meeting

Monday, 7 December 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 131
Global health and foreign policy
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/75/236 and
A/75/577)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.18)
The President: In the midst of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which is radically transforming
our economies and societies, the discussions and actions
of the General Assembly on global health and foreign
policy are of special importance. I welcomed members’
participation last week in the Assembly’s thirty-first
special session in response to the pandemic, which was
an important opportunity to renew our commitment to
multilateralism and the people we serve. The issue will
continue to be a priority for my presidency during the
seventy-fifth session.
The past two centuries have seen enormous
achievements in global health. The quality and
accessibility of health services have improved. Many
infectious diseases that were once leading causes of
death are under control across most of the world owing
to improvements in sanitation, food safety and nutrition
and the introduction of new vaccines and antibiotics.
But as the pandemic has demonstrated, we cannot be
complacent. Just one year ago, the Assembly adopted
a political declaration on universal health coverage
(resolution 74/2) in a comprehensive commitment to a
healthier world for all. It is time for us to match our

ambition with action with a view to improving the
health and well-being of all. At least half of the world’s
population does not have full coverage of essential
health services. More than 800 million people spend at
least 10 per cent of their household budgets on health
care. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the old, the
poor, the displaced and other vulnerable groups that are
not protected by universal health coverage have been
hit the hardest. And the pandemic has proved that no
one is safe unless everyone is protected.
This afternoon, the General Assembly will
consider draft resolution A/75/L.18, on instituting
an International Day of Epidemic Preparedness. The
COVID-19 pandemic has cost around 1.5 million
lives and shown the dire socioeconomic consequences
that such pandemics can have. It is a wake-up call for
greater political commitment and action, multilateral
cooperation and health-care solidarity, which are
essential to supporting global economic recovery and
building back better. I call on all Member States to
support the COVAX initiative and related multilateral
efforts to ensure fair and equitable access to vaccines.
In addition, we must work together to ensure that
all necessary tools, from diagnostics to preventive
equipment to treatments, are made available to all
who need them. The pandemic provides a compelling
case for the importance of investing in health areas
right now. I encourage all countries to expand that
investment with a view to achieving universal health
coverage, including ensuring that tuberculosis services
are supported, preparing for the worst-possible health
emergencies and building the foundations for a better

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-34400 (E)

*2034400*

A/75/PV.36

future. In that process, I also urge development partners
to create incentives and support funding for universal
health coverage and preparedness.
I now give the floor to the representative of Viet
Nam to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.18.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): On behalf of Canada, the
Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal,
Spain and my own country, Viet Nam, I have the
honour to introduce, under agenda item 131 of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, draft
resolution A/75/L.18, entitled “International Day of
Epidemic Preparedness”.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has spread all
over the world, with devastating effects on human
lives. However, this is not the first epidemic that we
have faced in recent years and it will not be the last.
We have witnessed epidemics such as HIV/AIDS,
Ebola, Middle East respiratory syndrome, severe acute
respiratory syndrome and H1N1, among others. Other
epidemics may emerge at any moment in future and
surpass the intensity and gravity of previous outbreaks
if we do not make preparations. In its declaration on the
commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations (resolution 75/1), the General Assembly
points out that we should all be prepared. The pandemic
caught us off guard, but it has also served as a wake-up
call regarding the need to improve our preparedness.
We believe that observing an International Day
of Epidemic Preparedness will be a significant way
of helping to achieve that goal. It will remind all
stakeholders of the impact that recent epidemics have
had and of the need to maintain a permanent awareness
of the importance of including epidemic prevention
in all of their activities. It will also emphasize the
importance of raising preparedness levels in order
to ensure that the response to any epidemic that may
arise is prompt and adequate. Last but not least, it
will stress the importance of partnerships among
all individuals, communities and States, as well as
regional and international organizations, at every stage
of epidemic management.
Throughout the negotiation process for this draft
resolution we have sought to listen to the priorities of
our fellow Member States and to reflect them in the
text. We are very pleased that the draft text passed the
silence procedure successfully and is now ready for
consideration in plenary. We would like to take this
opportunity to express our sincere appreciation to all
2/16

07/12/2020

delegations for their participation in the negotiations as
well as those that have sponsored the draft resolution.
We hope that all Member States will continue their
kind support for the draft resolution by adopting it
by consensus.
Mr. Othman (Malaysia): The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has brought the world to its
knees in a real-life example of the butterfly effect,
where small deviations can have big consequences. We
have witnessed the reach of a single virus, which has
claimed the lives of more than 1.4 million people around
the world. It is indeed a human crisis, compounded by
severe health and socioeconomic consequences.
We are often advised to think big, but sometimes
we need to start by thinking small. The world is overarmed, with billions of dollars being spent on weapons,
including weapons of mass destruction that could cause
catastrophic harm to humans. And yet collectively we
were not fully prepared to fight this invisible enemy.
While the COVID-19 crisis is sending shockwaves
around the globe, low-income developing countries
are in a particularly difficult position when it comes
to responding to the pandemic. The challenges we are
confronting today are more than just about the pandemic.
They are rather about the world that is coming into
being as a result of our response to a global health crisis.
We have seen stronger calls for a coordinated global
response. At the same time, we are also threatened by
the consequences of some unilateral actions.
We believe that a strong health system is crucial
for Malaysia, but it is also crucial to our common
global security and prosperity. It is patently obvious
by now that no nation can defeat a global disease with
a local response. While countries need strong publichealth systems, those systems must engage, learn and
cooperate with one another. On 3 December, at the
thirty-first special session of the General Assembly,
held in response to COVID-19, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Malaysia stated that
“our national measures must be supported by
a concerted global effort. Interdependency and
solidarity must be the order of the day, in the name
of our joint destiny, our shared humanity and the
value of our common hope.” (A/S-31/PV.2)
Malaysia, for its part, will continue to contribute
actively to that endeavour. We are pleased to be
the host of one of the regional hubs of the United
Nations
Humanitarian
Response
Depot-World
20-34400

07/12/2020

Food Programme, which provides the international
humanitarian community with supply-chain solutions,
including humanitarian-relief cargo shipments in
support of global COVID-19 operations. In addition,
Malaysia hosts a World Health Organization (WHO)
representative office, with six collaborative research
centres operating in four government agencies and
two public universities. Malaysia is also proud to
host the WHO Global Service Centre in support of its
pivotal work.
A multilateral approach and international
solidarity are the only way to safeguard our common
future. Malaysia continues to call for a vaccine that is
accessible, equitable and affordable. We also believe that
a vaccine, once developed, must promote international
collaboration rather than nationalistic competition.
In that context, Malaysia decided to join the COVAX
Vaccine Global Access Facility to ensure that eventual
vaccines reach those in greatest need, whoever they are
and wherever they live.
Health issues play a crucial role in economic and
social development and the conduct of our foreign policy
and international relations. At the United Nations,
health is an integrated element of a number of different
Sustainable Development Goals. Improving health and
access to health services for all has a direct impact on
our ability to ensure poverty and hunger reduction,
education and peaceful societies, among other things.
Progress on health therefore means progress towards
realizing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Malaysia also believes that nations need to
prepare for uncertainties and equip their societies
to be resilient. In that regard, the health-care system
should be affordable and accessible to all. Effective
universal health coverage in Malaysia was achieved
in the 1990s. The Government of Malaysia provides
highly subsidized health care for all residents through
its extensive network of public hospitals and clinics. A
comprehensive range of services is covered, including
health promotion, disease prevention and curative
and rehabilitative care. All residents of Malaysia are
able to access those services with minimal payment,
while services for disadvantaged populations, such as
the poor, persons with disabilities and the elderly, are
provided free of charge. That creates a strong safety
net, ensuring that no one is denied access to necessary
health care, regardless of ability to pay. The WHO
continues to recognize that Malaysia provides quality

A/75/PV.36

health-care services based on its high-performing
health-care system and well-trained workforce.
The principal goal of every nation’s foreign policy
is to uphold national security and interests. At the same
time, Malaysia believes firmly that foreign policy and
international relations must be guided by the values of
global solidarity, humanity and cooperation. Malaysia
will continue to promote those linkages within its
immediate geographical region, as well as through
organizations with broader memberships such as the
United Nations.
Ms. Hoe (Singapore): My delegation thanks
the delegations of Viet Nam and Indonesia for their
leadership in facilitating the draft resolutions entitled
“International Day of Epidemic Preparedness”
(A/75/L.18) and “Global health and foreign policy:
strengthening health system resilience through
affordable health care for all” (A/75/L.41). Singapore is
pleased to be a sponsor of both resolutions, which are
especially relevant and salient this year as the world
continues its fight against the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
Healthy populations are an essential foundation
of sustainable development and social progress. In
order to ensure the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals, we need to invest in strong health
systems and ensure universal access to quality health
care. Addressing the world’s most urgent and pressing
global health challenges demands a coordinated and
collective international response. A prime example
of that is the COVID-19 pandemic, which is the most
grievous global health crisis the world has faced in a
century. Globally, there have been more than 15 million
reported cases of COVID-19 and tragically, more than
1.2 million people have succumbed to the disease.
The pandemic has also taken a severe toll on people’s
mental health and well-being and has wreaked havoc
on economies across the globe. Its negative effects risk
reversing hard-won development gains and hampering
progress towards achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
A virus knows no borders, and COVID-19 has
highlighted not only the interconnectedness but also the
vulnerabilities of the global community. Multilateral
institutions such as the United Nations and the World
Health Organization (WHO) have a critical role to
play in leading and coordinating international efforts
to overcome the COVID-19 crisis. Such cooperation

20-344003/16

A/75/PV.36

will be key in developing vaccines and ensuring their
fair and equitable distribution and in enhancing the
international community’s resilience and preparedness
to cope with future pandemics. It will also play a
crucial role in helping individual countries build the
capacity and capability to deal with such global health
emergencies and in strengthening global collaboration
and support for all the countries affected.
Singapore has worked closely with other member
States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) on a regional approach to combating the
pandemic. That included establishing the ASEAN
Coordinating Council working group on public health
emergencies to lead the regional health response, as
well as the ASEAN regional reserve of medical supplies
and the ASEAN COVID-19 Response Fund to fortify
the region’s joint response capacity in public-health
emergencies. Other frameworks under discussion,
including a comprehensive recovery framework and
strategic framework on public-health emergencies,
will also provide guidance on recovery strategies and
bolster the region’s readiness to fight future pandemics.
At the international level, Singapore is working
actively to support global efforts to combat the
pandemic. No single country can solve all the complex
challenges associated with COVID-19, including
vaccine development and distribution. That is why
Singapore has championed vaccine multilateralism.
We have been an early supporter of the COVID-19
Vaccine Global Access Facility (COVAX). Together
with Switzerland, Singapore co-chairs the Friends of
COVAX informal group in support of equitable global
access to a pool of safe and efficacious COVID-19
vaccines. Singapore is also honoured to represent
members of the Forum of Small States on the Access
to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator Facilitation Council.
This pandemic will be brought to a halt only when there
is equitable access to vaccines for all people across
the globe.
Singapore remains fully committed to working
with all countries and stakeholders, and with the
United Nations and other international organizations,
including the WHO, to intensify our collective efforts
to build stronger and more resilient health systems at all
levels in order to tackle the immediate health security
risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic and enhance
our preparedness for similar public-health emergencies
in future.
4/16

07/12/2020

Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
In addition to its impact on the lives of millions of
people, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
is having serious socioeconomic consequences for
all countries and is endangering achievements in
sustainable development, including with regard to
health We developing countries will pay the greatest
cost of the impact of the pandemic itself, in addition
to the socioeconomic effects that the current unjust
international order produces. There will be little
progress in global health as long as a system that
favours the few and dispossesses the many persists. At
the same time, the urgency of addressing the impact of
COVID-19 should not cause us to lose sight of the global
health challenges we already face, such as HIV/AIDS,
malaria, tuberculosis and non-communicable diseases,
among others, which also disproportionately affect the
poorest countries. It is an unsustainable paradox that
our world has so much scientific development and so
many economic resources and yet millions of people are
dying from curable or preventable diseases. That is also
a consequence of the current unjust international order.
It is alarming that some are using the context of
the pandemic to resort to unilateralism. Some countries
have unleashed an unbridled and irresponsible race
to secure for themselves alone the means we need
to confront the pandemic, and they are intensifying
unilateral coercive measures that are contrary to the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
The Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights have called for such
measures to be lifted in the current context because
the countries affected face additional difficulties in
responding to the pandemic.
In addition to COVID-19, Cuba has had to face
an unprecedented intensification of the criminal
economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed
by the United States for six decades and reinforced
with unconventional methods of warfare, constituting a
flagrant, massive and systematic violation of the human
rights of the Cuban people and the main obstacle to
our economic and social development. Between April
2019 and March 2020 alone, the blockade has caused
losses to Cuba in excess of $5 billion, including more
than $160 million in the health sector. The accumulated
losses in this sector over the six decades of this policy
already exceed $3 billion. How much more could
Cuba have done for the health of its population or in
support of the efforts of other developing nations,
20-34400

07/12/2020

A/75/PV.36

including in the context of COVID-19, if it had been
able to count on all the resources of which it is being
illegitimately deprived?

of Epidemic Preparedness, and A/75/L.47, on the
United Nations Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021–2030),
introduced under agenda item 131.

The blockade prevents Cuba from acquiring
technologies, raw materials, reagents, diagnostics,
medicines, devices, equipment and spare parts
necessary for the better functioning of its public-health
systems. Not having the right medicine or technology at
the right time to save a life causes suffering and despair
that can never be quantified. The genocidal nature of
this policy has once again become evident in these times
of pandemic. The United States has used the current
context to deprive the Cuban people of mechanical
ventilators, masks, diagnostic kits, protective goggles,
reagents and other supplies for the management of
this disease, which make the difference between life
and death for patients and the health personnel caring
for them. As if that were not enough, amid the current
world health emergency the United States has launched
a crusade, based on false and mendacious accusations,
to try to discredit and hinder the international medical
cooperation that Cuba provides and which constitutes
a genuine example of South-South cooperation. It is
thereby jeopardizing the access of millions of people
around the world to quality health services. It is doing
so because it cannot accept the fact that despite the
blockade, Cuba has been able to send 52 medical
brigades to 39 countries and territories to help fight
COVID-19.

Health does not simply mean freedom from disease
but is rather about an all-inclusive wellness. India has
taken a holistic approach to this issue, based on the
four main pillars of health care. The first is preventive
care. We have put special emphasis on yoga, ayurveda
and fitness as means of controlling lifestyle diseases,
such as diabetes, hypertension and depression. In
many countries, societies have reverted to healthy
dietary practices that respect food diversity and include
traditional and immune-boosting local foods and food
grown without chemicals or pesticides. The second
pillar is affordable health care. India launched its
national health protection scheme in September 2018,
based on a twin-focus approach, expanding access to
primary health-care services to health and wellness
centres and providing poor and vulnerable families
with insurance coverage for secondary and tertiary care
hospitalization. The health and wellness centres deliver
comprehensive primary health care, bringing it closer to
communities, and more than 150,000 such centres are
now operational. As of 4 December, 24,608 hospitals
have been impanelled under the programme, more than
half of them in the private sector. A total of 126 million
health cards have been issued, and 14 million people
have been treated under the scheme.

We firmly believe that the solution to today’s
global problems, including those related to the health of
human beings, will depend on choosing multilateralism,
international cooperation and solidarity in our common
efforts to tackle the COVID-19 pandemic and other
global health challenges. The world will always be able
to count on Cuba’s voice and modest contribution.
Mr. Sharma (India): A healthy life is every
person’s basic right, and the onus is on our respective
Governments to make every possible effort to ensure
that right is fully protected and enjoyed by all. We
thank Indonesia for putting forward this year, on behalf
of seven Member States, draft resolution A/75/L.41,
on strengthening health systems’ resilience through
affordable health care for all. We appreciate the
contribution of the Foreign Policy and Global Health
Initiative in mobilizing political support for major
public-health issues, thereby ensuring that they are
high on the international agenda. We also welcome
draft resolutions A/75/L.18, on the International Day

The other arm of the national health protection
scheme is providing health-insurance cover of up to
$7,000 per family per year for secondary and tertiary
hospitalization. That insurance is provided to about
100 million households, or about 500 million people,
who are poor and highly vulnerable. It provides
cashless, paperless access to health services for every
beneficiary at designated hospitals across the country.
We have opened more than 6,700 special pharmacies
where vital medicines are available at affordable prices.
The cost of stents for heart patients has been slashed
by 80 per cent, and the cost of knee implants reduced
by 50 to 70 per cent. Hundreds of thousands of kidney
patients in India are also availing themselves of free
dialysis services provided by the Government.
The third pillar is improvements to the supply side.
We have taken several major steps to provide quality
medical education and develop medical infrastructure.
To improve access to tertiary care, expand medical
education and increase the number of medical
professions, we plan to open 157 new medical colleges.

20-344005/16

A/75/PV.36

The fourth pillar is mission mode intervention. We
have introduced a national nutrition policy to improve
people’s nutritional status, especially for disadvantaged
groups, including mothers, adolescent girls and children.
For the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 2030
has been set as the target year for ending tuberculosis.
We plan to achieve that target by 2025, five years ahead
of the deadline. To reach that ambitious goal, India
has started implementing a national strategic plan and
has substantially increased its allocation of funds for
tuberculosis control.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has highlighted systemic weaknesses in health systems
and vulnerabilities in the capacity to prevent and
respond to pandemic threats. We need to address the
major weaknesses and gaps in order to strengthen
global coordination and ensure that the world is better
prepared to curb the effects of future health-related
crises. We need to capitalize on existing programmes,
such as the Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT)
Accelerator and the COVAX Vaccine Global Access
Facility, in order to ensure affordable and equitable
global access to diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines,
while strengthening health systems. We must also come
up with long-term strategies and road maps to put in
place a system to deal with future pandemics. Equitable
access to affordable medicines, diagnostic tools and
technologies remains a concern. We must address all
barriers to access to medicines and new technologies,
including through the use of flexibilities provided
in the World Trade Organization Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
and the Doha Declaration on the Implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Community
health workers play a crucial role in covering the last
mile in service delivery, and we need to strengthen
their capacity.
From the early stages of the virus’s spread, India
has taken proactive measures that ensured that we
stayed ahead of the curve. We have provided medical
and other assistance to more than 150 countries to fight
COVID-19. The India-United Nations Development
Partnership Fund, managed by the United Nations
Office for South-South Cooperation, is working
diligently in support of projects responding to the
COVID-19 pandemic. The motto of the Government of
India, “Together, for everyone’s growth, with everyone’s
trust”, resonates with the core SDG principle of leaving
no one behind. We are committed to partnering with
6/16

07/12/2020

Member States and other stakeholders to synergize our
efforts to accelerate progress towards achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals and universal health
coverage through the most productive, efficient and
effective utilization of resources.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.18, entitled “International Day
of Epidemic Preparedness”. I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to the delegations already listed in document
A/75/L.18, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Chile, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, the Gambia, Georgia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, Rwanda, Saint Lucia,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, Suriname, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.18?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/27).

A/75/L.18

was

adopted

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.
20-34400

07/12/2020

Ms. Korac (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to join the consensus on resolution
75/27 and thanks Viet Nam and the core group for their
constructive engagement.
We have two small items to raise. We would like
to note that the United States submitted a notice of
withdrawal from the World Health Organization that
will become effective on 6 July 2021. We therefore
dissociate ourselves from references in the resolution to
the World Health Organization and personal protective
equipment, and from its paragraph 3. With regard to
the resolution’s references to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, we addressed our concerns
about this issue in a general statement on 13 November.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of
its consideration of agenda item 131.
Agenda item 34
Prevention of armed conflict
(a) Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolutions (A/75/L.31 and A/75/L.38/
Rev.1)
The President: I would like to remind members
that the debate on sub-item (a) of agenda item 34 will
be scheduled during the resumed part of the session, on
a date to be announced.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Turkmenistan to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.31.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian): I
have the honour of introducing draft resolution A/75/L.31,
entitled “The role and importance of a policy of neutrality
in maintaining and strengthening international peace,
security and sustainable development”. On behalf of
the delegation of Turkmenistan, I would like to thank
all delegations for the constructive and productive
negotiations, as a result of which we were able to arrive
at a substantive resolution.
Today’s meeting is taking place at a very difficult
time for humankind, when our world has encountered
a common foe, the coronavirus disease pandemic,
while armed conflicts continue around the world. In
that connection, in March of this year, the SecretaryGeneral appealed for an immediate ceasefire in every

A/75/PV.36

corner of the world. Turkmenistan, along with many
other countries, supported that appeal.
In introducing today’s draft resolution, the
Government of Turkmenistan is motivated by its belief
in the policy role and importance of neutral States
as a stabilizing factor in the work of strengthening
international peace, security and sustainable
development. Ensuring sustainable development is
impossible without peace and security, and without
sustainable development, peace and security come
under threat. All these notions are intertwined and
should be considered as a whole in the understanding
that ensuring peace, fairness, inclusivity and the
expansion of economic opportunity are all inherently
interconnected. The political phenomenon of State
neutrality and of neutral States’ experience with
mediation, contributing to the peaceful settlement
of disputes and the prevention of conflicts, including
through preventive diplomacy, can undoubtedly
contribute to strengthening peace and stability and
easing tensions all over the world. The draft resolution
acknowledges the positive role of neutral States in
providing and delivering humanitarian assistance
in difficult emergency situations and in cases of
natural disaster.
The draft resolution touches on the important organic
connection between the economic, and specifically
the geo-economic aspect, of political stability and
neutrality. As practical experience has shown,
responsible economic and trade investment projects
are capable of calming and neutralizing acute foreign
political conflicts and enabling effective measures
to be taken through preventive diplomacy. Paragraph
3 of the draft resolution welcomes a decision by the
Government of Turkmenistan to host an international
conference on peace, security and development devoted
to the International Day of Neutrality, 12 December. We
have no doubt that our adoption of the draft resolution
will help to expand today’s understanding of the role
and significance of a policy of neutrality in supporting
and strengthening international peace, security and
sustainable development. We would like to express
our gratitude to the delegations that have sponsored
the draft resolution and hope that it will be adopted by
consensus, and we call on States that have not yet done
so to become sponsors.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.38/Rev.1.

20-344007/16

A/75/PV.36

07/12/2020

Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/75/L.38/Rev.1. This year,
the text focuses on the Russian Federation’s progressive
militarization of the occupied territories of Ukraine,
that is, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol, as well as parts of the Black Sea and
the Sea of Azov. The draft resolution addresses a matter
of fundamental concern, not only for my country but
for the United Nations membership at large. It is about
the challenges emerging from Crimea’s progressive
militarization, which are undermining security and
stability in the region and beyond. By occupying the
peninsula and transforming it into a powerful military
outpost in the region, the Russian Federation has violated
fundamental norms and principles of international law,
first and foremost the Charter of the United Nations.

Two decades later, my country had to confront
an attack unleashed by a nuclear-weapon State that
had signed up to the assurances of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We do not doubt
that when the Russian delegation speaks today, we
will hear the same narrative we have heard before,
according to which Russia did not breach the Budapest
Memorandum and the issue of Crimea is closed. But an
issue that is such a flagrant violation of international
law cannot be closed. There is no statute of limitations.
That narrative is a classic manipulation of the facts by
the Russian Federation, but the real facts are that Russia
has brutally violated the Budapest Memorandum and
that Crimea is an integral part of Ukraine temporarily
occupied by an aggressor State that has subsequently
tried to annex it illegally.

Crimea continues to be inaccessible to any
verification or inspection under the relevant
international treaties. Since February 2014 the Russian
Federation has significantly expanded its military
presence in Crimea with land, air and naval components,
endangering the security of countries far beyond the
Black Sea region. Let us take a look at the current
security landscape in Crimea. We see an ongoing
influx of weapons and equipment capable of delivering
nuclear weapons, the seizure of former nuclear-weapon
storage sites, attempts by Russia to take de jure control
over nuclear facilities and materials, the construction
of new warships, the conduct of military exercises, the
conscription of the local population into the Russian
armed forces, the militarization of education and the
creation of obstacles to the exercise of navigational and
commercial rights and freedoms.

The General Assembly has already reconfirmed
those facts in several decisions. The occupation and
subsequent militarization of Crimea have led to an
expansion of the area from which Russian warships
and military aircraft can be deployed beyond Ukraine’s
borders and the Black Sea region. The aggressor State
has rejuvenated its ability to project its power, which can
now reach Southern Europe, the Middle East and North
Africa. Need I remind the Assembly that the Russian
Black Sea fleet, from its naval base in Crimea, has been
actively involved in combat operations in Syria?

Just two days ago, we marked the twenty-sixth
anniversary of the signing by three nuclear States,
including Russia, of the Budapest Memorandum,
which aimed to provide security assurances in
connection with Ukraine’s accession to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. I would
like to remind the Assembly that under the Budapest
Memorandum, the first obligation of the three nuclear
States is “to respect the independence and sovereignty
and the existing borders of Ukraine”. The next
paragraph obliges the three States
“to refrain from the threat of use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of
Ukraine, and that none of their weapons will ever
be used against Ukraine”.
8/16

Alarmed by recent developments on the ground,
Ukraine, together with the co-sponsors, has submitted
an updated text of the draft resolution on the “Problem
of the militarization of the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well
as parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov”. This
year’s draft resolution contains a number of important
elements, including those focusing on the illegal seizure
and establishment of control over former nuclear-weapon
storage sites in Crimea, the destabilizing impact on the
international verification and arms-control regimes,
the continued supplying of weapons, the gradual
militarization of education, the illegal conscription into
the Russian armed forces and the negative implications
of the situation for maritime trade. The draft resolution
seeks to ensure that Russia withdraws its military
forces from Crimea, ends its temporary occupation of
Ukraine’s territory, halts its harassment of commercial
vessels and lifts restrictions on international shipping
in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov. In other words,
the resolution seeks to restore respect for legal norms,
ensure the fulfilment of commitments and obligations
20-34400

07/12/2020

and prevent further violations so as to promote our
common security and welfare.
Just a few minutes ago, also under agenda item
34, “Prevention of armed conflict”, the Assembly
recognized the role of neutrality in maintaining
international peace and security. Ukraine fully shares
that view. It is a fact, however, that international peace
and security cannot be maintained if conflicts are
fuelled and international law is violated. That is the sad
reality for Ukraine, Crimea and the Black Sea region,
and that is what our draft resolution is about. A vote
in favour of it will signal a firm willingness to put a
stop to these menacing developments for the benefit of
all of us States that are neutral or aspire to neutrality,
for members of alliances and for the benefit of peace.
I therefore urge all Member States to vote in favour of
draft resolution A/75/L.38/Rev.1, on the problem of the
militarization of Crimea, in a clear demonstration of
their strong commitment to the norms and principles of
international law and the Charter.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolutions A/75/L.31 and A/75/L.38/Rev.1.
Delegations wishing to make a statement in
explanation of position or vote on either or both of the
draft resolutions are invited to do so now. Before giving
the floor for explanations of position or vote, I would
like to remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Altarsha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to explain its position
with regard to draft resolution A/75/L.38/Rev.1, on
the problem of the militarization of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine,
as well as parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
We remain of the view that certain Member States
continue to engage in negative practices that undermine
our discussion of the agenda item on the prevention of
armed conflict by taking an exclusionary approach.
The draft resolution reflects political polarization.
It only fuels conflict and dissent and is certainly not
an attempt to calm the situation. The fact is that the
results of the Crimea referendum have translated into
stability. Based on the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, we are against politicization
and believe that the General Assembly should not be
involved in politicized issues by overburdening its
agenda with matters that do not contribute to resolving

A/75/PV.36

conflicts around the world or in the region concerned.
Accordingly, my delegation will vote against the draft
resolution before us and urges all States to vote against
it or abstain in the voting.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation has asked that the
politicized draft resolution (A/75/L.38/Rev.1) submitted
by Ukraine be put to a vote. We will of course vote
against it, and we call on all sensible delegations to do
the same.
For the third year in a row the General Assembly
has been obliged to watch the performance that the
Ukrainian delegation puts on merely in order to
unleash another torrent of lies about what is going on in
Russian Crimea and create a schism within the General
Assembly. Kyiv cannot reconcile itself to the fact that
the inhabitants of Crimea made a decision about their
own future through the 2014 referendum, according to
which Crimea and the city of Sevastopol first chose
independence and then became part of the Russian
Federation. That was the way that the people of the
peninsula realized the right to self-determination that
is enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The
only thing left for the Maidan authorities, who pushed
Crimeans away with their acts and rhetoric of hatred,
is to churn out futile, lying and feeble resolutions
in impotent anger. One of them is once again before
us today.
As before, no consultations on the draft text have
been held. We understand our Ukrainian colleagues’
reluctance to do that. It is shaming to discuss a document
that is packed with lies and incapable of standing up to
fact-checking. So instead of holding a discussion, they
try to make Member States think that their vote will
somehow affirm Ukraine’s territorial integrity. Sadly,
many still believe that deception.
Kyiv’s absurd attempts to distort the genesis of
Crimea’s reunification with Russia after the Maidan
coup and the current state of affairs on the peninsula
were eloquently debunked by Crimeans themselves at
a Security Council Arria-formula meeting on Crimea
that we convened at the end of May. We summed
up its conclusions in a Security Council document
(see S/2020/530), which I recommend to members if
they have not seen it. Needless to say, our Ukrainian
colleagues refrained from participating or from joining
the dialogue with the Crimeans. It basically does not suit
them to have any objective facts of any kind trickling

20-344009/16

A/75/PV.36

out of the peninsula, so they struggle to counter the
information that Ukrainians have been sharing widely
on social media after visiting Crimea. The Ukrainian
authorities do not need the truth. They do not want
to admit that if anyone is occupying Crimea, it is the
Crimeans themselves alone. And as we know, it is not
really possible to occupy one’s own home.
Like everyone here, we feel for Ukrainians.
We wish them a speedy recovery from the virus of
Maidan insanity, which is a great deal more dangerous
and destructive than the coronavirus. And the draft
resolution they have submitted today fully reflects
that madness. It is not really about Crimea but about
the increasing deterioration of Ukraine, which is more
and more becoming a sort of anti-Russia. Essentially,
its only national strategy is blaming its neighbour for
every misfortune. The Ukrainian authorities are using
that strategy in their attempts to distract their people
from the state that Ukraine is now in, six years after its
so-called European choice. So far, unfortunately, that
tactic appears to be working, thanks partly to active
assistance from the Maidan’s puppet masters, our
American and European colleagues.
A vote in favour of this iteration of the Ukrainians’
lying propaganda is merely helping to keep afloat the
illusion that the path of this State to its own eventual
destruction enjoys support around the world. Instead of
thinking about how to save their country from complete
collapse, our Ukrainian colleagues back home will be
bragging about the Assembly’s vote and another socalled victory over Russia. I ask members to think
about that before casting their ballots.
Today’s vote will have no effect whatever on the
Crimeans’ decision. They will merely be convinced
once again as to the correctness of their 2014 decision
to reunite with Russia. And the sooner Ukraine
acknowledges the futility of its attempts to return the
Crimeans against their will, the better off it will be.
Ms. Ahmadova (Azerbaijan): We have asked
to speak in connection with draft resolution
A/75/L.38/Rev.1.
The United Nations is a critical pillar of
multilateralism and plays a central role in ensuring
that everyone involved in addressing peace and
security concerns upholds the purposes and principles
of the Organization. Support for that role and for
safeguarding the collective security, political and
humanitarian mechanisms of the United Nations is
10/16

07/12/2020

crucial to maintaining peace, stability and sustainable
development. Coherent global responses and common
efforts, with the United Nations at their core, are
the most effective ways to address conflicts, fight
climate change and global terrorism, manage forced
displacements and migratory flows and achieve the
goals of peace, inclusive sustainable development and
human rights for all.
Azerbaijan voted in favour of the adoption
on 27 March 2014 of resolution 68/262, entitled
“Territorial integrity of Ukraine”, and our position in
support of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders
remains unchanged. In situations of international
disputes, armed conflicts or political crises involving
relations between States, no solution is acceptable
that is inconsistent with international law, particularly
where fundamental norms such as those relating to the
obligation of respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of States are
concerned. Strict compliance with those norms, their
universal application and the fulfilment in good faith
of the obligations assumed by States is vital to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position or vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/75/L.31 and A/75/L.38/Rev.1.
Draft resolution A/75/L.31 is entitled “The role
and importance of a policy of neutrality in maintaining
and strengthening international peace, security and
sustainable development”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution,
and in addition to the delegations already listed in
document A/75/L.31, the following countries have
also become sponsors: Afghanistan, Angola, Armenia,
Bahrain, China, Cuba, Djibouti, the Gambia, Ghana,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania, Nicaragua, the Russian Federation,
the Sudan, Suriname, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Togo, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
20-34400

07/12/2020

A/75/PV.36

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.31?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/28).

A/75/L.31

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution A/75/L.38/
Rev.1 is entitled “Problem of the militarization of
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as parts of the Black Sea
and the Sea of Azov”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to the delegations already listed in document
A/75/L.38/Rev.1, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Greece, Liechtenstein, the Marshall
Islands, Montenegro and New Zealand.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom, United States
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Cambodia, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Russian Federation, Serbia, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zimbabwe

Abstaining:
Algeria, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand,
Togo, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Viet Nam,
Yemen
Draft resolution A/75/L.38/Rev.1 was adopted by 63
votes to 17, with 62 abstentions (resolution 75/29).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the eight Nordic and
Baltic countries — Estonia, Finland, Iceland,
Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Sweden and my own
country, Denmark.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms
the illegal annexation of Crimea and the Russian
Federation’s ongoing violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. Our policy of non-recognition
remains firm. We are deeply concerned about the
increased militarization of the Crimean peninsula by
the Russian Federation, particularly the transfers of
highly destabilizing weapon systems and military
personnel to Crimea. We urge the Russian Federation
to stop such activity, which has worsened the security
situation in the Black Sea region. We are equally
concerned about the deteriorating human rights
situation in Crimea, which especially targets Crimean
Tatars. We also condemn forced conscriptions, which
run counter to international law. There is an urgent
need to allow access to Crimea for human rights
monitoring mechanisms of the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
As we have stated on numerous occasions, Russia must
withdraw its military forces from Crimea and end its
illegal annexation of Crimea without delay.

20-3440011/16

A/75/PV.36

We will never accept any State’s attempt to change
another State’s borders by force. That is at the heart
of the rules-based international order and crucial to
ensuring international peace and security.
Ms. Zahedi (United Kingdom): I am taking the
floor to reaffirm the United Kingdom’s full support for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders. Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea in March
2014 was a flagrant violation of Russia’s international
commitments and a direct challenge to the rulesbased international order. Russia’s actions remain a
direct challenge to international security, with grave
implications for the international legal order that
protects the unity and sovereignty of all States.
The United Kingdom condemns that violation of
international law, and we reiterate that we do not and
will not recognize Russia’s illegal annexation of the
Crimean peninsula. Crimea remains an integral part of
Ukraine, and we are deeply concerned about Russia’s
continued destabilizing actions on the peninsula,
which also pose a threat to the entire international
community. The militarization of Crimea includes the
transfer of weapon systems, including nuclear-capable
aircraft missiles, weapons, ammunition and military
personnel, by the Russian Federation into the territory
of Ukraine; the Black Sea fleet’s strengthening of its
coastal missile brigades with Bal and Bastion systems
capable of destroying targets at sea and on land, which
is a concern for all countries in the Black Sea region;
the conscription of Crimean residents into the Russian
armed forces, including assignment to military bases in
the Russian Federation; and Russian education policies
in Crimea, which aim to indoctrinate children into
joining the Russian military forces.
Let us also not forget that in November 2018,
Russian naval officers and border guards forcibly seized
three Ukrainian vessels in the Black Sea and detained
24 Ukrainian servicemen. The Russian authorities
admitted to using force to seize the three Ukrainian
naval vessels. They also acknowledged opening
fire during the incident, seriously injuring several
Ukrainian servicemen. Russia continues to display a
total disregard for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. It instigated and continues to fuel the conflict
through support to the Russian-backed armed forces in
eastern Ukraine. We must stand together and respond
robustly to such actions. The adoption of resolution
75/29 today sends a strong signal to Russia that its
12/16

07/12/2020

illegal behaviour and attempts to integrate Crimea into
Russia are unacceptable.
Ms. Tang (Singapore): I am taking the floor to
explain my delegation’s vote on resolution 75/29,
which was just adopted. As a small country, Singapore
is deeply committed to multilateralism and respect
for international law. We have always supported
the principles of respect for territorial integrity,
non-interference in the domestic affairs of a sovereign
State, respect for sovereignty and the rule of law. We
have also taken a consistent position in opposing the
annexation of any country or territory as a clear violation
of the principles of international law. Singapore notes
that several changes and additions were made to the
text of the resolution we have just adopted. We would
have preferred a more succinct resolution, focused on
the principles of international law. While we continue
to have concerns about some of the language used
in the resolution, Singapore supported it as a matter
of principle, because it relates fundamentally to the
principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Singapore also reaffirms its clear and consistent view
that all countries must adhere to international law and
support the right to freedom of navigation as provided
in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I am
taking the floor to deliver a general statement on behalf
of the United States. The United States would like to
thank the facilitator for her efforts on resolution 75/29
and Ukraine for its leadership on this important issue.
Nearly seven years into its occupation of Ukraine’s
Crimean peninsula, Russia’s increasing militarization
of Crimea poses a serious and growing threat to our
common security. As today’s resolution affirms our
joint support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity in the face of continued Russian aggression,
the United States has sponsored it. The United States
does not and will not ever recognize Russia’s purported
annexation of Crimea. Crimea is Ukraine.
Mr. Tozik (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus has
consistently taken the position that it is unacceptable
to introduce country-specific resolutions in the
General Assembly that are designed exclusively as an
instrument of political accusation. Their adoption only
strengthens confrontation and in no way contributes to
resolving specific disputes. Resolution 75/29, presented
today, is one-sided, politicized and very selective about
the range of destabilizing factors in the region. That
20-34400

07/12/2020

inflames mutual recriminations and makes it more
difficult to find peaceful solutions to the situation. The
resolution lacks any reference to the Minsk agreements,
which in our view should be essential, and there were no
expert consultations on the document. We believe that
dialogue and mutual respect are the main preconditions
in maintaining regional stability. The Republic of
Belarus has always participated in the process aimed at
achieving a peaceful settlement in south-east Ukraine.
We have made significant contributions to the holding
of meetings of the contact group on Ukraine and its
working subgroup in Minsk. Belarus intends to continue
contributing to the dialogue in any way possible and
stands ready to continue ensuring conditions for
negotiations on the Minsk platform on any level and in
any format.
Mr. Situmorang (Indonesia): I would like to
begin by reaffirming Indonesia’s consistent position
of upholding and respecting the principles of
non-interference, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all countries within their internationally recognized
borders, including Ukraine. Indonesia is therefore
opposed to any action aimed at annexing or illegally
occupying the territory of any sovereign country or
territory that would contravene the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations or international law.
With regard to the current situation in Crimea,
Indonesia stresses the importance of dialogue and
diplomacy among the States concerned in order to
resolve the ongoing problems in Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, as well as parts of the Black Sea and the Sea
of Azov. In that connection, we abstained in the voting
on resolution 75/29, as we are aware of the view that
some of its elements may further exacerbate tension
among the parties concerned and harm the environment
for political dialogue. Finally, Indonesia encourages
the States concerned to take the necessary measures
to de-escalate tensions in order to open the way for
negotiations. In addition, we call on the international
community to support the diplomatic efforts of all the
relevant parties towards the political settlement of this
particular issue.
Mr. Sahraei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
asked for the floor to explain my delegation’s position on
resolution 75/29, entitled “Problem of the militarization
of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as parts of the Black Sea
and the Sea of Azov”.

A/75/PV.36

Based on its principled position, the Islamic
Republic of Iran is of the view that a General Assembly
resolution should address an international situation
while taking into account the purview and jurisdiction
of each of the main bodies of that organ, in line with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We strongly oppose the politicization
of United Nations mechanisms and the unconstructive
interference of third parties in bilateral issues.
Any attempt in that direction would undermine the
credibility of the United Nations system, and my
delegation would not support such an approach. We
firmly believe that debates on multifaceted issues of
a highly political and controversial nature within the
setting of the General Assembly cannot be helpful in
furthering efforts to achieve a workable solution to an
issue on which agreements were reached in Minsk in
2015 that were endorsed in Security Council resolution
2202 (2015). While there is an accurate international
mechanism in place that is supported by the Security
Council, referring the issue to the General Assembly
could bring out existing differences and sow division
among Member States rather than achieving a solution.
Once again, my delegation emphasizes the
importance of dialogue and diplomacy between the
States concerned and strongly supports achieving a
peaceful solution to the ongoing problem. We believe
that any attempt outside the aforementioned agreed
framework will not lead to a tangible or durable solution
unless endorsed by both States concerned.
Mr. Khaldi (Algeria): My delegation has asked for
the floor to explain its vote on resolution 75/29 entitled
“Problem of the militarization of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol,
Ukraine, as well as parts of the Black Sea and the Sea
of Azov”. The Algerian delegation has abstained in
the voting on the resolution on this topic for the third
consecutive year, in view of the fact that the resolution
remains unbalanced. We regret that no consultations
were held with Member States in order to achieve more
consensual language and address the issues of concern
in a more comprehensive and transparent manner. In our
view, the adoption of a divisive resolution containing
controversial elements undermines the international
efforts to resolve this conflict peacefully in the
internationally agreed format. Furthermore, seeking a
solution outside that format might further exacerbate
tensions in the region and jeopardize the prospects for
a political solution to the issue. In conclusion, I would

20-3440013/16

A/75/PV.36

like to reiterate Algeria’s strong commitment to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
multilateralism, as well as to the peaceful settlement of
conflict through direct dialogue and negotiations.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
I call on the representative of the Russian
Federation, who wishes to speak on a point of order.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Needless to say, we deplore the vote that was
just held on resolution 75/29, submitted by Ukraine.
The issue is not about the content of this absurd and
deceitful resolution. As I explained in my statement
before the vote, whether the resolution was adopted or
not was not going to influence the Crimeans’ position
or the status of the peninsula in any way. We are merely
disappointed that the Ukrainian Maidan regime will get
yet another propaganda tool that it will not hesitate to
use to further hoodwink its own population, contrary to
logic, arithmetic and common sense. And the General
Assembly, willingly or not, has become implicated in
that process. This situation can only raise concerns.
Since everything suggests that the Ukrainian
leadership is not prepared to refrain from the practice
of submitting absurd drafts that bear no relation to
reality, we urge the Assembly to cast aside political
considerations and to think about the ordinary
Ukrainians whom the noisy, frenzied Maidan minority
continues to force down a devastating social, economic
and political path with the support of our Western
colleagues.
The Assembly may think that I am exaggerating,
spreading Russian propaganda, slandering a young
democracy that is battling a mythical Russian
aggression. Far from it. The Maidan insanity that its
Western sponsors unleashed in 2014, like a genie from
a bottle and for their own geopolitical purposes, refuses
to subside, because the necessary sobering signals from
outside have not reached it, largely thanks to those
same geopolitics. That suits the Western countries,
which care nothing for Ukrainians’ lives or future. That
is why they are also willing to keep alive the Maidan
fever that is so ruinous for Ukraine through gestures
such as their support for today’s resolution. It is like
encouraging drug addicts with extra doses instead of
persuading them to get treatment.
14/16

07/12/2020

We in Russia know just how serious this Ukrainian
illness has become since the Maidan virus struck,
because we have always preserved friendly and kindred
ties with ordinary Ukrainians that the Maidan regime
has failed to sever for the past almost seven years
despite all its efforts. Indeed, the Assembly was able
to see for itself how far the disease has progressed in
the statement that the Permanent Representative of
Ukraine, Sergiy Kyslytsya, made a week ago at the
meeting commemorating the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the end of the Second World War (see A/75/
PV.33). Permanent Representative Kyslytsya made an
intervention there that gave a distorted interpretation
of the origins and conduct of the war and was deeply
shocking not only to Russians but to Ukrainians and
every country of the former Soviet Union. No one of
common sense or even a modicum of understanding of
history could remain indifferent to something arousing
such feelings of disgust and repugnance. It was truly
painful to hear such things from the representative
of a country that is one of the heirs of the victorious
Soviet people.
Incidentally, since Ambassador Kyslytsya spoke
after us and we did not have an opportunity to reply to
him and did not want to cloud a celebratory occasion,
we would now like to take this opportunity to apologize.
Not to Ambassador Kyslytsya, of course, but to those
to whom he offended in his speech — the Ukrainian
veterans who shed their blood in the ranks of the Red
Army for freedom and the right to life of their people,
whom Hitler wanted to enslave and wipe off the face
of the earth along with every other Slavic people.
Considering that the war spared not a single Soviet
family, that may include Ambassador Kyslytsya’s own
family and the families of the Ukrainian leaders who
continue to inflame the Maidan lawlessness. But that
is up to their conscience. I also want to apologize to
the hundreds of thousands of Jews, Poles, Russians and
Ukrainians slaughtered by the Nazis and their Ukrainian
nationalist henchmen, who are considered heroes in
Maidan Ukraine today, and to the veterans from the
United States, Great Britain, France and other countries
for the fact that Ambassador Kyslytsya, speaking on
the seventy-fifth anniversary of victory, equated their
fellow soldiers from the Soviet Union — alongside
whom, at the cost of millions of lives, they broke the
backbone of Hitler’s forces and stopped the fascist
plague — with Nazis. And I apologize for the fact that
such words of blasphemy and sacrilege were uttered
within the sacred walls of the General Assembly of the
20-34400

07/12/2020

United Nations, an organization that owes its founding
to the victory of humankind over fascism.
We do not know if he will apologize himself
someday. But as long as the General Assembly continues
to adopt phantasmagorical resolutions such as today’s at
the initiative of the Maidan authorities, that moment is
still a long way off. I would like to ask my colleagues to
think about that next time Ambassador Kyslytsya asks
them to support another such deceitful, anti-Russian
resolution — and considering its consequences,
anti-Ukrainian as well — with no relation to reality.
The President: I call on the representative of
Ukraine, who wishes to speak on a point of order.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I regret to have to say
that the Russian representative has shown once again
that the Russians do not give a monkey’s about the
rules in this house and that his statement actually had
nothing to do with a point of order. It is regrettable
that the Russian delegation has once again misused
the Assembly to make what seems to be a substantive
statement. I would say, however, that I take criticism
from Russia’s representatives as a badge of honour that
merely assures me that I am doing the right thing. For
the benefit of the Russian representative, I would now
like to switch to Russian.
(spoke in Russian)
I think it is essential to remind the Russian
delegation that 11 years ago, Vladimir Putin
condemned the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, calling it,
in his own words, amoral and a deal with the Nazis.
I regret that the Russian delegation has not complied
with the exhortation of its current President, then Prime
Minister, who at a ceremony in Poland demanded that
other countries “condemn the Pact at the level of political
decisions”. The Russian delegation’s inconsistency
with regard to the Hitler-Stalin Pact and its delegation’s
refusal to condemn and recognize it as a deal made with
the Nazis — as Vladimir Putin said — therefore simply
confirm Moscow’s retreat from democratic values and
of historical facts that Vladimir Putin acknowledged
and called on others to acknowledge quite recently.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union to make a statement after
the vote.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, North

A/75/PV.36

Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania; the European
Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member
of the European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
The European Union does not and will not
recognize the Russian Federation’s illegal annexation
of Ukraine’s Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol. The European Union remains
steadfast in its commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders.
Russia’s actions are in blatant breach of international
law and key principles of international order. They
are a violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
which prohibits the use of force against the sovereignty,
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State. Moreover, they violate Russia’s international
and bilateral commitments and the principles of
regional European security and stability, enshrined
in the Final Act of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Charter of Paris for a
New Europe — the foundations of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) — and the
Budapest Memorandum of 1994. As stated in resolution
68/262, supported by an overwhelming majority of the
General Assembly, the so-called referendum organized
by Russia on the peninsula in March 2014 had no legal
validity and was a breach of Ukraine’s Constitution,
and therefore could not form a basis for the alteration
of the status of Crimea and Sevastopol. The European
Union calls on all States Members of the United Nations
to remain steadfast in their policy of non-recognition
of Russia’s illegal annexation, in line with resolution
68/262.
Since the illegal annexation, Russia’s militarization
of the peninsula has had a negative impact on the
security situation in the Black Sea region as a whole.
The building of a bridge over the Kerch Strait without
Ukraine’s consent and the subsequent arbitrary
inspection regime instituted at the Kerch Strait limit
navigation to and from Ukrainian ports, as well as to
third countries, with negative economic consequences
for Ukraine’s economy. We are seriously concerned
about the Russian Federation’s transfers of highly
destabilizing weapon systems to Crimea and military
personnel to the territory of Ukraine. The Russian
armed forces have held multiple military exercises
in Crimea that undermine regional security and will

20-3440015/16

A/75/PV.36

have considerable long-term negative environmental
consequences in the region. As documented in
the relevant reports of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Russian citizenship
and compulsory conscription in Russia’s armed forces
have been imposed on Crimean residents, which is a
breach of international humanitarian law.
As the EU has repeatedly called for, and as was
also stated in resolution 74/17 of December 2019, it is
crucial that Russia withdraw its military forces from
Crimea and end its illegal annexation of Crimea without
delay. We call on all Member States to cooperate with
the United Nations in order to encourage and support
efforts to that end, and to refrain from any dealings
with the Russian Federation regarding Crimea that are
inconsistent with that aim or could be seen as an implicit
recognition of this violation of international law. In that
regard, we urge the Russian Federation to ensure safe,
secure, unconditional and unimpeded access to the
illegally annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol for all international monitoring
mechanisms, including the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine.
The European Union remains committed to fully
implementing its policy of non-recognition of the illegal
annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol, which is based
on the obligation to refrain from recognizing as lawful
a situation created by a serious breach of international
law, including through sanctions.

16/16

07/12/2020

The President: I call on the representative of the
Russian Federation, who has asked to speak in right
of reply.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will be brief, Mr. President. Judging by
everything he has said, Ambassador Kyslytsya is intent
on insulting his compatriots and the people of the
entire former Soviet Union with his false interpretation
of history. Our opinion of the Molotov-Ribbentrop
Pact has not changed, and there is no need for the
Ambassador to say things here that are not true. But
we consider the Pact solely as a historical event, the
last in a series of agreements that various States were
forced to make with Hitler. The Ambassador is well
aware of our position. His statement was not about
the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, but about equating the
so-called Soviet occupation with the Nazi occupation
in terms of consequences, the number of victims, the
damage to cities’ infrastructure and so forth. Therein
lies the blasphemy. He is trying to promote views in the
General Assembly that leave even ordinary Ukrainians
dumbfounded. That is what is deplorable, and that is
why I urge him to end this discussion, which may save
him from leaving an even deeper mark on history that
he will most likely regret one day.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in the debate on this item. The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 34.
The meeting rose at 11:35 a.m.

20-34400
