United Nations

S/PV.3980

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fourth Year

3980th Meeting
Monday, 22 February 1999, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fowler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Canada)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Petrella
Mr. Buallay
Mr. Valle
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Dejammet
Mr. Dangue Réwaka
Mr. Touray
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Fedotov
Mr. Türk
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Burleigh

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

99-85131 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Egypt,
El Salvador, Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, the
Republic of Korea, Togo, Ukraine, Uruguay and Zambia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
(spoke in English)
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 19 February 1999 from the
Chargé d’affaires of the Permanent Observer Mission of
Palestine to the United Nations, which has been issued as
document S/1999/175 and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the Security
Council invite Dr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, Ambassador
and Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, to participate in the upcoming meeting of
the Security Council, on Monday, 22 February 1999,
regarding the agenda item Protection of civilians in
armed conflict'.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the
current debate in accordance with the rules of procedure
and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Crighton
(Australia), Mr. Kouliev (Azerbaijan), Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso), Mr.
Niehaus (Costa Rica), Ms. Aguiar (Dominican
Republic), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. CastanedaCornejo (El Salvador), Mr. Kastrup (Germany), Mr.
Lavalle-Valdés (Guatemala), Mr. Lelong (Haiti), Mr.
Sharma (India,) Mr. Effendi (Indonesia), Miss Durrant
(Jamaica), Mr. Takasu (Japan), Mr. Powles (New
Zealand), Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Kamal (Pakistan),
Mr. Cho (Republic of Korea), Mr. Kpotsra (Togo),
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine), Mr. Pérez-Otermin
(Uruguay) and Mr. Kasanda (Zambia) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the understanding reached in the Council’s
prior consultations, if I hear no objection, I shall take it that
the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation to the
Permanent Observer of Switzerland to the United Nations
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Permanent Observer of Switzerland to the
United Nations to take a seat at the side of the Council
Chamber.

2

I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to take
a seat at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now resume its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.
If I might simply add a note, I am particularly
pleased to see so many countries participating in this
debate. It is a debate which, as everyone knows, follows
the meeting we had a few weeks ago, which allowed
Under-Secretary-General Vieira de Mello to present to us
an important statement on humanitarian activities relevant
to the Security Council. Ten days ago we had further
briefings from the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Cornelio Sommaruga; from
the Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund, Carol Bellamy; and from the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, speaking to
the issue of protection of civilians in armed conflict. At
that time, the members of the Council had a chance to
speak. We adopted a presidential statement which,
inter alia, asked the Secretary-General to prepare a report
by next September on the matter.
I am particularly pleased that so many non-members
of the Council have chosen to speak today to offer us in

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
the Council their views on how we should consider such
issues, especially any advice they might have to the
Secretary-General in the preparation of his report.
The President: The first speaker on my list is the
representative of Germany. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kastrup (Germany): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European
Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia
— and the associated country Cyprus, as well as the
European Free Trade Association countries members of the
European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein, align
themselves with this statement.
On behalf of the European Union, I would like to
underline my deep appreciation that the Security Council
has given the protection of civilians in armed conflict a
very high priority, which, as you mentioned, Mr. President,
is reflected in the three meetings held within only 30 days.
The Security Council has rightly done so. The EU believes
that the issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
deserves to figure high on the international political agenda.
While we recognize that the primary responsibility to
protect civilians under all circumstances rests with States
and parties to a conflict, we must also reinvigorate
international efforts to protect civilians in armed conflict.
The Security Council has an important responsibility in this
context. It is important that it properly coordinate its actions
with other relevant bodies.
Looking at the present global situation, one cannot but
feel profound concern. International Committee of the Red
Cross President Sommaruga asked this Council on 12
February 1999,
“Does this interest in humanitarian affairs not mask a
certain feeling of impotence at the magnitude of the
task that confronts us?” (S/PV.3977, p. 2)
He, as well as Under-Secretary-General Vieira de
Mello; the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund, Ms. Carol Bellamy; the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu; and my distinguished
colleagues who spoke during the recent Security Council
meetings agreed to a very large extent on the analysis of
the present, very sombre, situation. In this regard, we would
like in particular to mention the recent visit to Africa of the

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
European Commissioner for Humanitarian Affairs, Emma
Bonino, who described the situation in Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau as “hellish”. That visit underlines the
commitment of the European Union to a continent where
conflicts, especially internal, have a particularly severe
impact on civilian populations.
Not only is there still an alarming number of
conflicts, but also their nature has changed. Most of the
conflicts that now come before the Security Council are
internal armed conflicts. The important distinctions
between combatants and non-combatants, as well as
between humanitarian workers and peacekeepers, are
often being blurred. Today 90 per cent of victims in
conflicts are civilians. Civilians have thus become the
first and main target in armed conflict. Women, children,
the elderly, the sick, refugees and internally displaced
persons have been attacked in large numbers.
International humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law are often unknown to parties to the conflict,
or they are ignored or wilfully disrespected. The gulf
between existing international norms and respect for them
on the ground has never attracted so much concern.
Genocide, so-called ethnic cleansing, increasing attacks on
humanitarian personnel and the repudiation of the
principles of humanity have become an almost general
phenomenon in today’s conflicts.
While all civilians deserve and need the protection
of the international community, children deserve particular
attention. As Mr. Otunnu described in the Security
Council meeting of 12 February, in recent years more
than 2 million children have been killed in conflict
situations, more than 1 million have been orphaned, more
than 6 million have been permanently or seriously injured,
12 million have been made homeless, and more than 10
million are estimated to be suffering from grave
psychological and emotional trauma. More than 300,000
children in more than 30 conflict situations are serving as
child soldiers. These very numbers reflect the horror and
the suffering of probably the weakest group in armed
conflicts.
The collapse of law and the often anarchic nature of
contemporary conflict is a severe challenge for the state
community. It must not be a cause for gloom. What can
we do in order to improve the situation? I would like to
highlight some areas that the European Union considers
to be particularly important.
First, we have to bridge the widening gap between
existing international norms and respect for them through

3

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
full compliance with international law and fundamental
principles. While the existing, impressive body of
international human rights and humanitarian law might need
some elaboration, the main objective should be to ensure its
respect and full implementation. The dissemination, in clear
and simple terms, of knowledge of human rights obligations
and of international humanitarian law among security forces
and other participants in armed conflict is most important.
Second, we must ensure unimpeded access of
humanitarian workers to those in need. It is of utmost
importance to tackle the question of effective monitoring
and enforcement of human rights and humanitarian law.
The very presence of international personnel often helps
prevent the worst atrocities and contributes to implementing
international law.
Third, we need to consider what can be done to
enhance the safety of humanitarian personnel, particularly
in cases where there is limited consent from the parties to
the conflict and the security situation is unstable. The EU
welcomes the entry into force of the 1994 Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
Fourth, we have to consider more effective measures
to protect children in conflicts. We consider the raising of
the age limit for participation in armed conflicts from 15 to
18, as foreseen by the additional protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, an important step in this
direction. The United Nations has set a good example with
regard to the deployment of peacekeeping forces. We must
also ensure that children are always identified as a priority
in all efforts to build peace and resolve conflicts.
Fifthly, we must tackle the problems of anti-personnel
mines and of all small arms proliferation, since they impede
the repatriation of refugees, endanger both the dispensation
of humanitarian assistance and economic recovery and lead
to the return of violence. Sixthly, sanctions should be well
targeted on the leadership in order to have a real impact
without, as far as possible, leading to negative humanitarian
consequences for the population. Arms embargoes should
be strictly implemented so that illegal arms flows to
conflict areas can be stopped.
Seventh, we must put an end to impunity from war
crimes and crimes against humanity. The Yugoslavia and
the Rwanda Tribunals are important steps in the right
direction. The EU has warmly welcomed the adoption of
the Rome Statute and is working wholeheartedly towards an
early entry into operation of the International Criminal

4

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
Court. It is also essential for States to implement their
obligations to take action on the national level.
Eighth, we should do our utmost to prevent the
media from being used as a tool of conflict. Nationalist or
ethnic hate campaigns propagated through the mass media
prepared the way for genocide, and not only in Rwanda.
Ninth, the Security Council should as a matter of priority
seek to prevent conflicts. We must all do everything to
prevent such conflicts by promoting economic and social
development, good governance and respect for human
rights.
Tenth, coherent diplomatic, political and military
measures have to be complemented with measures related
to economic, humanitarian and development aspects of
conflict management. In that context it is important to
further develop the concept of a strategic framework to
guide the work of the various United Nations
organizations. The EU particularly welcomes the recent
Security Council decisions on the causes of conflict in
Africa and on the situation in the continent. In those
decisions the need was stressed for a comprehensive
strategy within the United Nations system, including the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
The EU is looking forward to the report requested from
the Secretary-General, which will provide a useful
framework for our future work on this important subject.
Let me conclude, Mr. President, by thanking you for
the organization of today’s meeting and for the open
briefing on 12 February, and encourage the Security
Council to struggle relentlessly for improved protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
Allow me to add, in my national capacity, that the
problems we are discussing today are of concern to all
members of the international community. They should,
therefore, wherever possible, be dealt with not behind
closed doors but in open meetings.
The President: I thank the representative of
Germany for his kind words addressed to me.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
I should have begun by apologizing, on behalf of the
Council, for keeping this impressive list of speakers waiting
for 45 minutes as we dealt with important procedural
issues. I do so now: I apologize for keeping them waiting.
I should like to inform the Council that I have just
received letters from the representatives of Iraq and Israel
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
Commissioner for Refugees is to be believed, 90 per cent
of the victims of such conflicts are civilians.
It is very distressing to say so, but in this gloomy
picture it is Africa that is paying the highest price, in the
first place because of the number of wars that are taking
place there. From north to south and east to west, passing
through Central Africa, the clash of arms and the sound
of bombs effectively beat out the rhythm of daily life in
that ailing continent. Furthermore, because of economic
problems, the populations that have become victims —
displaced persons, refugees, those who have been
repatriated, etc. — experience the difficulties of
reintegration, not to mention the torment of hunger, thirst,
separation and unspeakable suffering.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hasan (Iraq)
and Mr. Gold (Israel) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of Burkina
Faso. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (interpretation from
French): I should like at the outset to state that I am
speaking on behalf of the countries members of the
Organization of African Unity.
It is much to the credit of the Security Council that it
has taken the initiative to hold this debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. This step demonstrates the
importance that the United Nations attaches to, and its clear
awareness of, its mission, which unquestionably is to
guarantee international peace and security, and also, in
particular, to provide safe conduct and act as a shield for
civilian populations that fall victim to war and violence. It
also attests to the importance of the subject before us today,
a subject that has been under discussion in recent days.
Conflicts today are distinguished by the fact that they
no longer take place, as they did in centuries past, on
battlefields, where only the belligerents faced off. Because
of their sophisticated, ultra-rapid and devastating nature,
and also because of their sometimes anarchic or fragmented
character, present-day conflicts are no longer confined to
territory that is more or less delimited. War creeps into
cities, into homes and even into families. Unfortunately, it
therefore involves civilian populations, regardless of age
and sex. If the Office of the United Nations High

It also must not be forgotten that it is in Africa that
the large-scale and alarming development of the
phenomenon of child soldiers is taking place.
Furthermore, their recruitment is directly proportional to
the proliferation of light weapons.
In this regard, the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) — which, let us recall, has had a Convention on
refugees since 1969 — has taken to heart the problem of
the protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts
by putting forward a series of initiatives. Thus, with the
assistance of Member States, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
governmental and non-governmental organizations, it has
sent missions to several African countries to investigate
the overall situation of refugees and repatriated and
displaced persons. The resulting report is alarming: there
are approximately 6 million refugees and 20 million
displaced persons, the majority of whom are women and
children.
At the same time, the OAU secretariat has organized
regional meetings on this issue in order to make policies
more sensitive to this matter and to raise awareness
among African populations and the international
community. It should also be noted that since 1992 a
cooperation agreement has linked the ICRC and the OAU.
Finally, it must be stated that in December 1998, the
OAU Commission on Refugees met in Khartoum, in the
Sudan, and recommended a number of appropriate
measures and solutions.
However, we are not dismissing the issue. The
problem of the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
remains complex. It brings into play humanitarian

5

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

3980th meeting
22 February 1999

concerns and political considerations, and sometimes it even
brings sovereignties and vulnerabilities into conflict.

a code of conduct, as humanitarian assistance must
remain neutral and impartial.

The protection of victims in most cases implies the
duty of intervention, which many Governments often
associate with interference in their internal affairs.
Examples abound of cases in which humanitarian
organizations have been turned back on grounds of their
partiality or have even been victims of violence. In some
cases they have even suffered losses of life. Hence, there is
this other problem: how to protect humanitarian personnel
in their mission of assistance. Or, in other words, what
should be done to avoid the growing recurrence of
violations of international humanitarian law?

In conclusion, I would like simply to emphasize that
Africa is very aware of the actions carried out on the
continent by humanitarian assistance organizations,
including UNHCR, the ICRC and other non-governmental
organizations. Africa pays tribute to them for their
dedication to the service of victims of conflicts.

The following possible solutions, inter alia, have been
formulated by the OAU: taking into account humanitarian
aspects in drawing up policies for the settlement of
conflicts through a clear definition of appropriate measures
to ensure the security of humanitarian personnel and to
allow them to carry out their mandate; the need to teach,
publicize and implement international humanitarian law; the
ratification of or accession by all States to the Geneva
Convention of 12 August 1949 relating to the Protection of
victims of international armed conflicts, their Additional
Protocols of 8 June 1977 and the Geneva Convention of
1951 on refugees.
More generally, better protection of civilian
populations in armed conflicts hinges on a solution to the
situation of child soldiers. During the last decade, according
to Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, more than
2 million children have been killed and more than 6 million
have been wounded or maimed. Such a holocaust calls for
appropriate measures to be taken at the international level.
We therefore support and strongly encourage the efforts of
the United Nations Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, as well as the actions of a good number of
non-governmental organizations aimed at raising the
recruitment age to 18. Even then, the matter would not be
fully resolved, since it involves rebel groups, which, by
definition, are not subject to international law and are not
bound by any convention.
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts also
requires that States rapidly accede to the Convention on the
total prohibition of anti-personnel mines, given the
devastation caused by this treacherous and insidious
weapon. Let us also emphasize the urgent need to ensure
security for actions by humanitarian non-governmental
organizations and other bodies. These must always follow

6

The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Australia. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Crighton (Australia): On behalf of the
Australian delegation, I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and the delegation of Canada for bringing this important
question to the forefront of the Security Council’s agenda.
We also very much welcome the fact that the decision
was made to discuss this in an open meeting of the
Council.
The briefings provided to the Council on 12
February by the representatives of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict
highlighted the horrific toll that war has taken on civilian
populations, and particularly on women and children.
Of course, this is not a new problem. Nor is it a
diminishing problem. Last year we celebrated the fiftieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. This year is also the fiftieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions. Yet the sad fact is that ever larger
numbers of civilians are being affected by conflict across
the globe.
Conflict today is characterized by increased targeting
of non-combatant groups, increasing involvement of
non-State actors and a widening gulf between the
principle and the observance of humanitarian norms and
laws. The effect of this is to make civilian groups,
particularly women and children, even more vulnerable to
assault, abuse and displacement.
This presents the United Nations and the
international community as a whole with a complex and
difficult challenge, which must be addressed at a number
of levels. Many elements of our response will be beyond
the specific responsibilities of the Security Council. But
at the same time, as a number of speakers in the earlier

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Council discussion highlighted, breakdown in civil order
and human suffering can be both a consequence and a
cause of conflict, and to this extent it is very much an issue
for this Council.
Organizations like the ICRC, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
UNICEF and the United Nations itself have made a major
contribution over many years to assisting and protecting
civilians in conflict and post-conflict situations.
International humanitarian personnel must be allowed to
continue their work without threat or hindrance. Deliberate
obstruction of humanitarian workers, and incidents like the
recent shooting down of two planes carrying United Nations
personnel in Angola, must not be allowed to go unpunished.
A number of valuable suggestions about what the
Council and the United Nations can do to strengthen the
protection of civilians in conflict were made during the
debate on 12 February. I am sure that a lot more will be
made today, and we look forward to hearing them.
The role of international human rights and
humanitarian law is central. In particular, we should make
every effort to further strengthen those protections already
provided for in international law, not only in relation to
civilian women and children but also where, for example,
children may themselves become involved in armed
conflict. In this area, Australia strongly supports the
development of an optional protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. The optional protocol aims to
strengthen the existing international standard contained in
article 38 of the Convention by raising the minimum age
limits for recruitment into armed forces and participation in
armed conflict.
Work on strengthening the international legal
framework is important. That must go hand in hand with
efforts to strengthen the observance of human rights and
international humanitarian law. Ms. Bellamy and Mr.
Otunnu, among others, spoke of the need to improve
education about the obligations of soldiers under
international law. Many countries, including Australia, do
this as an integral part of the training of our soldiers and
our peacekeepers, and we support efforts to extend that
education.
It is vital that we have effective institutions to bring to
justice the perpetrators of crimes against humanity. In this
regard the International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia have made an important
contribution. The establishment of the International

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
Criminal Court, with which Australia has been closely
associated, is a major step forward.
My delegation agrees with many of the constructive
suggestions that have been made so far in this debate.
Arms embargoes aimed at limiting conflict must be better
implemented. The proliferation of small arms and light
weapons poses a particular threat to civilian populations
in conflict situations, and practical steps can be taken to
address this problem. Landmines exact an appalling
human price, and international cooperation to ban their
use and to remove the millions of mines that still threaten
civilian populations must continue.
In a statement to the Security Council in a similar
open debate on post-conflict peace-building held last
December, my delegation spoke of the need to take a
more integrated, holistic approach to the United Nations
role in responding to conflict. The protection of civilians
affected by conflict is an important element of this, both
as conflict continues and at the post-conflict peacebuilding stage.
Canada’s initiative in convening this debate will
greatly assist the Council, and all Member States, in
considering how to deal with this troubling issue. To this
end, my delegation welcomes the statement by the
President of the Council of 12 February 1999 and the
request to the Secretary-General to prepare a report with
specific recommendations for the Council on measures to
improve the physical and legal protection of civilians in
conflict. We look forward to the report, and we stand
ready to contribute further to the Council’s consideration
of this matter.
The President: I thank the representative of
Australia for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Norway. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): In many of today’s conflicts,
targeting civilians has become an integral part of war
tactics. While in the First World War 5 per cent of the
victims were civilian casualties, in today’s wars the figure
is close to 90 per cent, and children are among those
most affected by this development. The lack of adherence
to international norms in today’s conflicts leaves the
international community and the United Nations with a
special responsibility to mobilize against the increase in
civilian casualties. Today’s discussion on the protection

7

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
of civilians in armed conflict is a positive reflection of the
Security Council’s increased attention to the human
dimensions of security issues.
Norway greatly appreciates the opportunity to
participate in this debate. In this connection, I would like to
pay tribute to Canada, the current President of the Council,
for focusing on this important subject.
The well-being of individuals and their communities
should be a frame of reference in the Council’s efforts to
prevent and resolve conflict. Recent multifunctional
mandates from the Council and various consolidated
appeals clearly illustrate that the issue of human security is
global in character and universal in scope. We need to
develop this further by defining adequate internal follow-up
mechanisms. We should also continue efforts to develop
better-targeted and effective sanctions.
The international community is collaborating on a
number of issues related to the well-being and security of
individuals. Among these are initiatives in the area of small
arms, anti-personnel landmines and the protection of
vulnerable groups. For example, to combat the proliferation
of small arms through local, national and regional projects
in conflict-prone developing countries, Norway has
launched a United Nations trust fund. In the area of
anti-personnel landmines, the international community will
soon mark the entry into force of a legally binding
instrument that prohibits the use, stockpiling, transfer and
production of anti-personnel landmines, with emphasis
shifting from advocacy to implementation.
Children are often the most vulnerable victims in times
of war. The United Nations Charter clearly states the
determination of Member States “to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war”. This year we will
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. We should take this
opportunity to adopt further measures to protect children,
who are the least responsible yet most vulnerable in conflict
situations. Agreement on an additional protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, by which the age
limit for participation in armed conflict would be raised
from 15 to 18, would be a step in the right direction. In
addition to the provision of food and medicine for mere
survival, children in conflict situations need access to
educational activities. This can provide children with some
sense of normality and hope in the midst of despair as well
as being a way of preventing the recruitment of children
and bringing about the demobilization of child soldiers. We
call for a rights-based approach to children affected by war.

8

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
The principle of unimpeded access of humanitarian
personnel to those in need is being disregarded as never
before, and we are facing a rising number of attacks on
humanitarian personnel. Firm measures must be taken by
the international community against parties who
deliberately attack such people. To this end, Norway has
contributed $100,000 to the recently established Trust
Fund for the security of United Nations personnel for
training and enhanced security management. In this
connection, we welcome the entry into force of the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel.
We are deeply concerned with the spread of internal
conflicts that has contributed to an undermining of respect
for the core of humanitarian law and human rights
standards in situations of internal conflict and civil war.
There is thus a need for strengthened international
cooperation with a view to enhancing the legal protection
of vulnerable groups in internal conflict, to improve
international monitoring and to promote an active role of
the international community in protecting human rights
and fundamental humanitarian standards in such
situations. In order to enforce standards set in
international law, we have to put an end to impunity from
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. The
Yugoslavia Tribunal and the Rwanda Tribunal, as well as
efforts to establish an International Criminal Court, are
important steps in enhancing accountability to
international standards.
It is critical to focus on the improved protection of
civilians in armed conflict through a comprehensive and
coordinated approach by Member States and the
international organizations and agencies. Norway is
contributing its utmost to the efforts that are being made.
We look forward to the report requested of the SecretaryGeneral, which will identify areas in which the Security
Council can contribute more to improved physical and
legal protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The President: I thank the representative of Norway
for his kind words addressed to my country.
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): As this is the first time that
I am addressing the Council under your presidency, Sir,
allow me to congratulate you and to express our

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
admiration for the many initiatives that you are taking to
inject greater transparency into its work.
We also salute your predecessor, Ambassador
Amorim, for his own presidency and for the onerous duties
that he continues to perform.
Allow me to express our gratitude to you for arranging
today’s debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The open briefing on the same subject on 12
February 1999 by International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) President Cornelio Sommaruga; the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
Ms. Carol Bellamy; and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, was informative,
useful and thought-provoking.
It is a matter of grave concern for all of us that the
violence in situations of armed conflict has reached
dangerous proportions, directed in most cases against
civilians, especially women, children and other vulnerable
groups, including refugees and internally displaced persons.
The growing number of casualties of humanitarian workers
also remains a matter of serious concern. Civilian casualties
account for almost 80 per cent of the total number of
victims in armed conflict. Over a million people die each
year in armed conflicts around the world.
The figure for children’s casualties is particularly
agonizing. Special Representative Olara Otunnu shook us
all with a dismal piece of information that, during the past
decade, over 2 million children have lost their lives in
various armed conflicts, while 12 million have been made
homeless and 300,000 are serving as child soldiers in 30
conflict situations. Though most of these conflict situations
are in Africa, conflicts also persist in other parts of the
world, including in our own region, resulting in similar
problems of civilian victims and gross human rights
violations. Indian-occupied Kashmir is a case in point. The
international community cannot and must not remain
indifferent to such long-lasting situations.

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
international instruments concerning the protection of
refugees. We have a collective responsibility to ensure
effective adherence to these legal codes by the Members
of the United Nations.
In his report of 22 September 1998, the SecretaryGeneral indicated that the relevant norms, principles and
provisions of international law are particularly violated in
situations of internal conflicts where whole societies are
mobilized for war. There should be concerted efforts to
create awareness of the responsibility of State authorities
in protecting the civilians in armed conflicts. In this
connection, we welcome the establishment of the
International Criminal Court, having jurisdiction over
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and the
crime of aggression. Pakistan actively participated in the
deliberations of the United Nations Diplomatic
Conference at Rome. We hope the establishment of the
Court will usher in a new era of dispensing justice to
people, which would, in turn, help to establish a just
global society.
We support the idea, contained in the Security
Council presidential statement of 12 February 1999, that
there should be a comprehensive and coordinated
approach by the Member States and international
organizations and agencies to address the problem of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is our hope
that the Secretary-General, in his report to the Security
Council in September this year, will submit practicable
recommendations, particularly on measures to address the
root causes of conflict. The need to improve the
socio-economic conditions of conflict-prone societies must
also be accorded due emphasis in order to ensure
effective results. We support the views expressed by some
delegations that the Secretary-General’s report should not
only focus on the role of the Security Council in
improving the physical and legal protection of civilians in
armed conflict, but that it should also be comprehensive
in nature, identifying the role of all the concerned bodies
and agencies.

What is more frustrating is the fact that civilians are
subjected to such cruel treatment despite the existence of a
substantial body of international law and principles evolved
over a long period of time to protect civilians, refugees and
humanitarian personnel. The 1949 Geneva Conventions and
the Additional Protocols of 1977 are well-established norms
of international humanitarian law for the protection of
civilians and other persons who are not party to any
hostilities. Similarly, the 1951 Convention and 1967
Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees are the principal

9

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The President: I thank the representative of Pakistan
for his kinds words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Japan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I wish to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. My thanks go as well to your
predecessor, Ambassador Amorim, for his excellent
leadership of the work of the Council last month.
I should like to express my deep appreciation for the
opportunity to present Japan’s views on this important
issue. The protection of civilians in armed conflict is an
issue that transcends humanitarian concerns and
encompasses security and development problems.
As we approach the end of this century, which has
seen unprecedented levels of brutality, it is essential that the
international community strive to ensure that innocent men,
women and children are protected and do not become
victims of conflict. We must not allow ourselves to
succumb to resignation in the face of the enormity of the
problem.
The Council’s deliberations on the issue of protection
of civilians in conflict situations so far demonstrate clearly
the shared recognition that the nature of armed conflict is
changing. Conflicts are taking place increasingly within
States rather than between them; it is getting more and
more difficult to draw a line between military personnel
and
civilians; and more and more women and
children are becoming victims of hostilities. It is thus
imperative that effective and urgent action be taken.
My delegation listened with great interest to
suggestions made in the course of the Security Council’s
deliberations and found many of them to be worthy of
further consideration. Indeed, there was a broad
convergence of views on a number of measures to be taken:
on strengthening enforcement of international humanitarian
law; on policy measures against internally displaced persons
and child soldiers; on restricting small arms and light
weapons; effective measures on mine action; and on
protection of humanitarian personnel. Some of the measures
are already starting to be implemented, but much more
needs to be done.
Japan has been contributing actively and will continue
to do so in many of these areas. To cite some examples,

10

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
Japan was the second party to ratify the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,
which finally came into force last month. Japan is a party
to the Ottawa Convention and one of the most active
partners in mine action. Japan intends to contribute about
10 billion yen, around $80 million, in five years, starting
from 1998, for mine action around the world. Japan has
been playing an active role in collaborative efforts for the
restriction of small arms and light weapons, and also for
the early establishment of the International Criminal
Court.
The basic thinking behind this approach is the
importance that Japan attaches to human security
concerns. As Prime Minister Obuchi stated recently,
human security should be ensured against menaces that
threaten the survival, daily life and dignity of human
beings. Thus, measures to protect civilians in conflict
situations are important and integral elements of human
security concerns. Japan is about to make a financial
contribution to the United Nations to support activities in
this area.
Let me now refer to some of the particularly
important points which I believe should be highlighted.
My first point relates to the importance of preserving
traditional humanitarian norms of behaviour, together with
full compliance with relevant international humanitarian
and human rights instruments. Mr. Olara Otunnu
acknowledged that every civilization is grounded upon
certain humanitarian values, and that
”there are norms that have germinated in the local
soil, that speak to the protection of civilian
populations, and especially of women, children and
the elderly.“ (S/PV.3977, p. 10)
As we witness the breakdown of such traditional norms
of behaviour, which leads to unspeakable brutality against
vulnerable members of the population, it is essential that
we take pains to preserve and restore those norms to
avoid further tragedy and additional humanitarian
disasters.
In the face of proliferating and recurring conflicts, it
is also necessary to rethink our approach in dealing with
the linkage between conflicts and post-conflict situations.
As the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
has been stressing, it is necessary, even before a conflict
has been resolved, to consider providing not only
humanitarian assistance but also assistance for the

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

3980th meeting
22 February 1999

reconstruction of the society, giving people sufficient hope
for a stable and prosperous future. And, along with basic
necessities, from drinking water to mine-free lands, it is of
utmost importance that people waging conflicts, in
particular, will come to be convinced that lasting peace is
the only answer to their problems.

Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is a special
pleasure for me and my delegation, Sir, to see you preside
over the deliberations of the Security Council. We would
like express our deep admiration to you for the wise,
effective and, if I may add, proactive manner in which
you are performing this task.

In this respect, we agree with Ms. Carol Bellamy that
the importance of education cannot be exaggerated. The
description of her visits to classes held outdoors under the
trees in Tanzania’s refugee camps for children from
Rwanda, Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is an eloquent testimony to the efforts that are under
way to re-establish orderly life even in the midst of crisis.
Japan, as a top donor, intends to pursue the strengthening
of close linkage between humanitarian and development
assistance, and between conflict prevention and
development, while paying due respect to the intangible
values and traditions of the local peoples concerned.

Bangladesh welcomes the initiative taken by Canada
and you, Mr. President in convening this open meeting.
It gives the Member States of the United Nations in
general an opportunity to share their views and ideas on
how the international community can contribute to
ensuring the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. As
the world is commemorating this year the fiftieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, as well as the
centenary of the first International Peace Conference in
the Hague, it is fitting that the Security Council is holding
this open meeting to consider the important issue of
civilians in armed conflict.

Another point I should like to emphasize is the
importance of following up on decisions the Council
adopted on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa (S/1998/318).
The Security Council adopted last November two important
resolutions which are of special relevance to the issue of
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts: one on the
neutrality and security of refugee camps, and the other on
the question, in which my delegation played a coordinating
role, of illicit arms flows. The Council’s recent presidential
statement on children and armed conflict is also of great
importance.

As we look at the nature of conflicts and social strife
that the world is experiencing today, we notice that interState wars and foreign occupations have been on the
decline since the end of the cold war. This encouraging
development, we believe, is expected to contribute to the
lessening of global violence in the long run. However,
intra-State conflicts, social strife, deprivation, abuses of
human rights, ethnic exclusion and xenophobia continue
to pose problems that result in violence and impinge on
international peace and security.

Furthermore, the Council has this time requested the
Secretary-General to submit to it a report containing
concrete recommendations to the Council on ways the
Council, within its sphere of responsibility, can improve
physical and legal measures for the protection of civilians
in situations of conflict. Obviously, the responsibility to
carry out actual measures to protect civilians is not
confined to the Council. Japan strongly hopes that the
Security Council, in collaboration with other United Nations
bodies and organizations, will institute appropriate and
effective measures so that a safer and better world can be
our legacy for the new millennium.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Bangladesh. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

Most of the conflicts that the Security Council is
handling today are internal armed conflicts in which
civilians are the worst victims, taking the brunt of the
large-scale human suffering. They are being displaced.
They are being assaulted. They are being killed. All sorts
of atrocities are being perpetrated against civilians. It is
a matter of grave concern that in armed conflicts the
percentage of civilian casualties has gone up incredibly in
the recent decades. As we have heard before, in the First
World War civilians accounted for only 5 per cent of the
casualties. In the Second World War, the number went up
to 45 per cent. Now the number exceeds 90 per cent.
Such a sharp rise in civilian casualties is due, among
other causes, to deliberate targeting and indiscriminate
killing of civilians by the combatants. Recent
developments suggest that ethnic and/or religious
minorities are increasingly becoming targets of parties
involved in armed conflicts.

11

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Conflicts in many countries have their roots in
poverty, hunger, ignorance, deprivation and lack of
accountability in the use of political power. At the same
time, various forms and manifestations of colonial legacies
continue to prevent social and political assimilation and
equitable distribution of resources. This can only foment
tensions and conflicts within and among nations. We need
to address the root causes of conflicts in a comprehensive
and holistic manner. Poverty and social injustice constitute
a source of frustration and a possible cause of new
conflicts. Stability, security, democracy and peace are yet
to be consolidated on a global scale. This will require a
reversal of growing international inequities.
In wars and conflicts of today, parties involved quite
often take recourse to actions that constitute flagrant
violations of international laws, particularly humanitarian
and human rights laws. The weaker and vulnerable groups
of society become easy victims of conflicts. Abuses of the
rights of women and children are most common. The
statement of the President of the Security Council of 29
June last year is worth recalling in this regard. In this
context, we value the role being played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Olara Otunnu. We also reiterate strongly
Bangladesh’s endorsement of the idea that in a conflict
situation children should be treated as a “zone of peace”.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child, with its near
universal adherence, should be invoked more effectively
and be respected by all.
We have noted with concern that United Nations and
other humanitarian personnel are being threatened, abducted
and killed. It is outrageous that despite the existence of so
many international conventions and laws regarding
humanitarian activities, particularly in respect of conflict
situations, the protection and safe access of humanitarian
personnel cannot be ensured. We are concerned that
humanitarian personnel do not get sufficient security
coverage to smoothly conduct their activities. We must
address this problem more seriously and sincerely. Here we
pay tribute to the significant role being played by the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
Bangladesh believes that an important first step
towards ensuring protection of civilians is to take adequate
and effective measures to stop the supply of weapons to
parties in conflict. The supply and proliferation of small
arms, in particular, have contributed in a major way to
jeopardizing the security of civilians. We reiterate the need
for full compliance with Security Council resolution 1209
(1998) of 19 November 1998.

12

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
Bangladesh believes that international peace and
security can best be strengthened not by actions of States
alone, but through the inculcation of a culture of peace
and non-violence in every human being and in every
sphere of activity. The elements of a culture of peace are
drawn from age-old principles and values that are
respected and held in high esteem by all peoples and
societies. The objective of a culture of peace is the
empowerment of people. It contributes effectively to
overcoming authoritarian structures and exploitation
through democratic participation. It works against poverty
and inequities and promotes development. It celebrates
diversity, advances understanding and tolerance, and
reduces inequality between men and women. We regard
the culture of peace as an effective expedient for
minimizing and preventing violence and conflict in the
present-day world. My delegation strongly recommends
that the culture of peace be given due consideration in the
report of the Secretary-General, as called for in the
statement of the Security Council President of 12
February 1999, and that the Council devote its attention
to this issue when it deliberates on the report. We also
encourage the Secretary-General to consult the
Inter-Agency Committee in formulating his
recommendations.
In conclusion, let me say that Bangladesh is
committed to the cause of international peace and
development. We are a signatory to most of the
humanitarian conventions and laws. We have been a
major contributor to peacekeeping and peacemaking
efforts of the United Nations. Through our participation
in this debate, we reiterate our readiness to continue to
work constructively with the other Member States in
ensuring effective protection of civilians in armed
conflicts and, most importantly, in eliminating the root
causes of such conflicts.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Costa Rica. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): May I first of all congratulate you, Sir, on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council.
I would like to begin by expressing thanks to the
President for having convened this meeting, thus
addressing one of the issues of greatest interest to the
peoples of the world who wish, like the Costa Rican
people, to become active promoters of peace.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

3980th meeting
22 February 1999

I also take this opportunity to express my delegation’s
complete support for the initiatives being taken by the
United Nations under the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral in order to prevent and alleviate the regrettable
impact of armed conflicts on civilian populations, especially
on women and children, who, as has become clear, are the
most vulnerable sector of the population.

children disabled, 12 million homeless and 1 million
orphaned. Those statistics are a reflection of one of the
cruellest realities of our day and of the regrettable impact
of conflict on millions of children throughout the world,
who unjustly lose their innocence in conflicts that they
are not even capable of understanding, much less
explaining, and about which all they can do is cry.

As we know full well, current armed conflicts almost
always reflect historical accumulations of unsatisfied
demands, in most cases aggravated by inadequate social and
economic situations and by international political and
economic conditions. In other words, they constitute
responses to internal and international injustices. War is in
itself an injustice, an unlawful injustice to which, in many
cases, we can only be witnesses — indignant witnesses, but
incapable of intervening in the course of events.

The most tragic aspect of these events is well
expressed in paragraph 16 of document A/53/482,
prepared by Mr. Olara Otunnu and submitted to the Third
Committee in October last year, which states:

Central America has been no exception in this world
traumatized by violence. In recent years, the Central
American isthmus itself suffered the scourge of war. We
Costa Ricans, being Central Americans, were pained by the
bloody battles in which so many of our brothers and sisters
struggled. We were witnesses to the separation of families
and the death of civilians, especially women, the elderly
and children, dragged by harsh reality into armed conflicts
that they had simply and unwittingly inherited.
That is a reality that hurts us to the core, and it
confers a moral responsibility upon the whole of
international society, particularly when the victims of those
conflicts have silently appealed for intervention and
international action in defence of their innocent lives.
Undoubtedly, history will demand an explanation for our
passivity in the face of events.
The international community knows only too well the
tragedy experienced by civilian populations in the context
of armed conflict. We constantly see how innocent civilians
are dragged into violence that is not of their making and
from which they — innocent human beings who have
nothing to do with the conflict — also suffer, whether they
are men, women, the elderly or children.
As we said several months ago in this very forum,
when we were non-permanent members of the Security
Council, we are particularly disturbed by information
provided by the United Nations regarding the tragic reality
of children in armed conflict. In recent years, over a quarter
of a million children in the world have participated in 30
armed conflicts. Some 2 million children have died in those
wars, which have left between 4 million and 5 million

“Cessation of hostilities does not mean that war is
over, particularly for children who have been
extensively exposed to the culture of violence.”
Unfortunately, it is also possible that, when they
grow up, those children will repeat their present reality.
It is disturbing to know that that reality is dominated by
an indiscriminate struggle for power, in which there is a
profound absence of ethical values and anything is
allowed. International society is the constant witness to
the new modalities of war in which the distinction
between civilians and combatants has disappeared.
Children, as well as women and the elderly, have become
legitimate pawns in the harsh battle for power, fought to
attain supposed “ideals”. Children, women and the elderly
are innocent victims who deserve and demand vigorous
international protection. However, as children are the
most vulnerable, my country believes that we must first
and foremost focus our efforts on their protection and
defence.
It is imperative that we take effective international
action in defence of those young creatures, who represent
the future of humanity and whom we are allowing to be
killed or, at best, whose innocent lives we are exposing to
treatment as objects of hatred and violence.
First of all, it is essential to see the problem for
what it is and with full awareness of the fact that the
involvement of children in armed conflict constitutes a
violation of human rights and that therefore those
responsible must be punished. Costa Rica considers it
essential and urgent to enact international legislation
clearly prohibiting the recruitment of children under the
age of 18 by forces involved in a conflict. In this context,
my delegation fully supports the establishment, as soon as
possible, of an additional protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, and we welcome the intention
explicitly to incorporate in the rules of the International

13

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Criminal Court the principle that a child is a minor until the
age of 18. That is a small contribution that the States
Members of the Organization can make to humankind.
This Organization, which represents the greatest hope
of the human race for survival in the twenty-first century,
must move from words to deeds. This is the moment when
history calls for our intervention: our clear, firm and
vigorous action in defence of innocent human beings. The
time has come for our words and our thoughts today, which
are directed towards the effective protection of civilians in
armed conflicts — especially children — to be supported
by concrete action on the part of the international
community.
In spite of my comments, we must point out that
although international legislation is of enormous importance
in resolving this problem of the involvement of civilians,
especially children, in armed conflicts, such legislation in
itself is not enough to prevent the situations that put those
civilians, particularly children, at risk. That is why, in
addition to what has been proposed in the international
sphere, we need an appropriate legal framework at the
domestic level, within each of our societies and each of our
States, as well as clear and effective social action to make
it possible for the children of today to exercise their right
to be the men and women of the future, to protect their
right to become adults who are in charge of their own
development and who can thereby contribute to the
development of humankind and, in their own valuable way,
to the building of a better world of peace, justice and
liberty.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of New Zealand. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Powles (New Zealand): May I begin by saying
how grateful my delegation is to have this opportunity to
take part in an open debate of the Security Council on this
most important matter. I would also like to congratulate
you, Sir, as the representative of Canada, on your country’s
leading role at the present time in focusing the attention of
the international community on the need for an adequate
response. In addition, I would like to express my thanks to
the heads of the various agencies who have briefed the
Council in open meetings over recent weeks. The facts they
have laid before us emphasize the urgency of the task
before the Council.
I will not repeat what the experts and others have said
previously about the scale of the problem of protecting

14

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
civilians in the conflicts at present raging in Africa and
Europe in particular. No one disputes the appalling
statistics we have heard. Instead, I want to go straight to
how New Zealand thinks the United Nations should
address the issue. We see two key aspects to the issue:
the legal framework and the functioning of the Security
Council.
The distinction between combatants and those taking
no active part in the conflict is one of the oldest and most
fundamental principles of international law. I agree with
the observation made by the Permanent Representative of
Slovenia, at the briefing on 12 February, to the effect that
our basic premise should be that current humanitarian law
comprises all the necessary principles and basic rules.
We have the four Geneva Conventions of 1949,
especially the Fourth, and the two Protocols of 1977. The
Convention on the Rights of the Child also bears on the
problem. There are also new standards, such as the code
of conduct on displaced persons elaborated by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which need to
be implemented and incorporated into the body of
international humanitarian law.
A recent positive development has been the entry
into force of the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel. Its true effectiveness
will, of course, depend on its wide acceptance, and we
urge those Member States that have not yet signed the
Convention to do so. We are also interested in
suggestions made on several occasions during the two
briefings of the Council on the need to broaden the scope
and application of that Convention, in particular to cover
humanitarian workers, by means of a protocol. We would
welcome further discussion on this point.
The adoption of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court is an essential step forward in promoting
the protection of civilians. It holds the promise of an end
to impunity. The establishment of the Court will send the
strongest message to perpetrators of attacks on civilians
that they will be held accountable. What we have heard
in the briefings given to the Council and in today’s debate
so far only adds urgency to the need for early ratification
and the widest possible participation by the international
community. Obviously, we must together bring the work
being done in the Preparatory Commission, as we speak,
to an early and positive conclusion, so that the Court may
become a reality as soon as possible. Overall, we
welcome the growing acceptance of the fact that the
protection of individuals transcends the domestic affairs

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

3980th meeting
22 February 1999

of States. National sovereignty is not an absolute in this
context.

as failures. I believe nevertheless there is much to be
learned from them that could be highly relevant today.

With one or two exceptions the basic legal framework
is sound. The international community now needs to turn its
attention to the effective implementation of the law. A first
step is to achieve greater adherence, for example, to the
Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions. We need
also to generate greater understanding of the role of
customary international law in this area. Finally, and of
fundamental importance, the dissemination of international
humanitarian law needs our fullest support, so that the
knowledge of the basic rules governing armed conflict and
human rights spreads to all those who bear arms. The work
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is
often dangerous and thankless, but always vital, and I take
this opportunity to put on record my Government’s
gratitude for the tremendous job it does.

For example, let us look at the safe areas in Bosnia,
which were established as an emergency and temporary
measure in May 1993 after the Council sent a fact-finding
mission of its own members into the field. UNPROFOR
was subsequently given the task of deterring attacks upon
these areas, and the use of NATO air power to support
UNPROFOR was also authorized by the Council. These
areas were held for more than two years, sheltering
thousands of civilians, albeit in dire conditions and with
continuing problems regarding their demilitarization.
Disaster finally struck at Srebrenica in July 1995 when
the UNPROFOR positions were overrun. The appalling
extent of the atrocities committed is still being revealed
as new mass graves are exhumed.

It is appropriate that we address these issues in a year
which represents the centenary of the Hague Peace
Conference and the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions. The meetings in The Hague and St.
Petersburg, as well as the twenty-seventh International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent in
November, will provide further opportunities for the
international community to develop ideas and find practical
solutions to these problems.
I would like now to turn to the practical steps we
believe the Security Council should take towards the
protection of civilians in carrying out its mandate to
maintain or restore international peace and security.
Two of the largest peacekeeping operations ever
undertaken by the United Nations in fact had a strong
humanitarian purpose. In Somalia, for instance, the United
Nations peacekeeping operations began with efforts to
facilitate humanitarian aid to people trapped by civil war
and famine. In Bosnia the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) assisted in the provision of humanitarian aid
in the midst of a vicious war and sought to impose
constraints on the belligerents, including through the
establishment of such measures as safe areas for civilians.
In the first half of the 1990s and in the new spirit of
cooperation following the end of the cold war, the Council
showed it was ready to attempt solutions to humanitarian
problems in high-risk environments. Failure was a constant
prospect, and the two operations to which I have referred
are in the conventional wisdom these days indeed counted

Was the original decision to establish the safe areas
a mistake, even morally questionable, given the false
sense of security they may have engendered? I do not
believe so. There were many other contributing factors,
particularly the failure to provide the necessary numbers
of troops to sustain the deterrence role, which I will not
detail here.
The transfer of authority from UNPROFOR to the
Implementation Force (IFOR) in Bosnia on 20 December
1995 in my view marks a watershed in the Council’s
approach during this decade to its responsibilities. I still
recall reports of the handover occasion when, at the
appointed hour, troops designated to stay on with IFOR
put on their national headgear, some of them stamping
their blue berets into the ground. Such was the frustration
ordinary soldiers had felt at the ambiguities implicit in the
UNPROFOR operation.
Since that time it seems the Council has become
increasingly unsure of itself in the face of the
humanitarian disasters before it. As Mr. Sommaruga, the
head of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
asked at the beginning of his statement to the Council on
12 February, does the Council’s interest in humanitarian
affairs not perhaps mask a certain feeling of impotence at
the magnitude of the task that confronts us?
I believe we need a reassertion of leadership from
the Council, including a willingness to attempt innovative
solutions. This includes at the conflict prevention stage
where, for example, the United Nations can take pride in
the successful and critically important United Nations

15

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
If I may offer an example of an innovative approach
from my own region in which the United Nations now also
has an important role, I would like to talk very briefly
about Bougainville in Papua New Guinea. During a littlereported conflict which lasted nine years from 1989, it is
estimated that as many as 10,000 people, the vast majority
civilians, may have died. Following a series of peace talks
in New Zealand, a truce-monitoring group, and
subsequently a peace-monitoring group, including personnel
from my own country, Vanuatu, Fiji and Australia, were
deployed.
Stationed throughout the island, members of the trucemonitoring group and the peace-monitoring group have
literally had to trek through miles of mountainous jungle to
spread the message of peace and monitor the process. Their
job has not been easy. Language barriers, the heat and the
sheer ruggedness of the terrain have proved challenging.
But perhaps the most remarkable thing about the conduct of
this operation on an island where so many lives have been
taken is that our forces took the conscious decision to
deploy without any arms. This was to show that they meant
no harm and posed no threat to anyone. Indeed, there were
already enough guns on the island. So far the peace process
remains on track. New Zealand has welcomed the
establishment of the United Nations Political Office on
Bougainville and is encouraged by the positive role United
Nations officials are playing in support of the process.
Finally, the Security Council has perhaps the most
difficult job in the world. The matters it is called to deal
with include some of the longest-running and bloodiest
conflicts since the Second World War. Some of them, for
example Angola, are orphans, as Ambassador Amorim
recently put it, in that their former international sponsors
have no further use for them. The toll on civilians is
horrific. The Council must strive to identify solutions,
however, and, critically important, it must remain the
ultimate and essential source of authority for collective
security action. We look forward to a positive outcome
from this important initiative on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.
The President: I thank the representative of New
Zealand for his kind words addressed to my country.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of India. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

16

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
Mr. Sharma (India): Let me begin by thanking you,
Sir, for giving us the opportunity to speak on this subject.
I have read with interest the statements made by members
of the Council on 21 January and 12 February and by the
experts who addressed them. Most of those statements,
particularly of the experts, were marked by great emotion,
which is understandable. It is natural to be moved by
suffering. We also have deep concerns on the subject.
However, no matter how emotive an issue, solutions to
problems must be based on facts and on pragmatism.
This is why we are disturbed by some liberties taken
with history on which the discussions were premised. It
is simply not the case that the targeting of civilians in
armed conflict is an innovation of the 1990s or that its
frequency has increased. Throughout the colonial wars
that continued into our era, the main victims of the
imperial armies were civilians. It is worth recalling that
Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions, which
deals with wars of national liberation, was negotiated and
adopted only in 1977, after decolonization was almost
complete. When the colonial Powers fought each other, in
increasingly vicious conflict, ending in the two World
Wars of this century, the distinction between civilians and
those in uniform was lost. Concentration camps, carpet
bombing and total war are concepts which have been with
us throughout this century. The persecution of civilians in
armed conflict is not a recent, third-world malaise.
Any evolution in the situation has also been slow in
coming. Military doctrines based on the first use of
nuclear weapons would cause the wholesale slaughter of
civilians. Very few soldiers were among the hundreds of
thousands killed in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and very few
would be among the hundreds of millions killed in any
nuclear exchange. The report which the Secretary-General
has been asked to produce for the Security Council should
therefore make it clear that, if steps are being taken to
either ban or control weapons, such as landmines or small
arms, that cause civilian casualties, steps must also be
taken to outlaw the use of nuclear weapons. However, we
know that the report will not be able to say this, and that
even if it does, the Council will not act on any such
recommendation. In this matter as in others, politics
determines what is possible.
Once we accept that this issue is as deeply
politicized as any other, we will also understand why
many countries are troubled by the Council’s selective
activism. Even in countries affected by conflict that are
not fully functioning democracies, it is usually the case
that outrages against civilians are carried out by terrorists

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
or irregular elements owing no allegiance either to the
nation or to any concept of law. Unfortunately, many
Governments in more placid parts of the world are driven
primarily by what happens on television, and the media
feed on horror. Therefore, it is now known to ruthless and
ambitious men that if they commit atrocities sufficiently
spectacular, media attention will follow, and international
attention will come in its wake. Having created
humanitarian disasters, they are then quite willing to have
humanitarian agencies operate in the areas they have
devastated. This offers them several advantages: the de
facto acknowledgment that an area is under their control;
international attention to the causes they purport to
represent; the lifting of responsibility from their shoulders
for the maintenance of the populations they repress; and,
when they can, the appropriation of humanitarian assistance
to sustain their fighters.
These are advantages which Governments under siege
are naturally reluctant to concede those who kill and
terrorize their citizens and challenge their legitimate
authority. However, it is then the Governments concerned
that bear the brunt of philanthropic outrage if they do not
concede what is now claimed as the right of humanitarian
intervention. Humanitarian assistance becomes an issue
between the Governments concerned and the humanitarian
agencies and donor countries; the protection of civilians
becomes an excuse for the assertion of political will. In
these circumstances, humanitarian assistance becomes not
a part of the conflict but a tool, indeed a means of waging
conflict, for many who wish to undermine established
authority. This is not received wisdom, because it flies
against the interests of both philanthropy and realpolitik,
but Somalia is a sombre reminder that good intentions by
themselves do not prevent a debacle.
It also worries us that some of the experts who spoke
in the Council asked for its help in ensuring that
humanitarian agencies had access as a matter of right to
civilian populations affected by conflict. It is important that,
in promoting the rule of law, we should not stretch or
violate it. The Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War makes it
clear that, when military necessity so requires, access may
be denied. There is no automatic right of access, and to
press for it would violate both international humanitarian
law and the sovereignty of States. In practice, only strong
States that respect and can enforce the rule of law, within
their borders and internationally, will be capable of
ensuring the human rights of their citizens. Weakening
State authority, particularly that of Governments already
under violent internal stress, through claims of a right of

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
intervention not only violates international law, it works
against the objective of ensuring that civilians under
threat are protected as much as possible.
We are also disturbed by the recommendations made
by more than one expert that targeted sanctions should be
used both to ensure the protection of civilians and to
punish those who violate their rights. Sanctions are a
blunt instrument. Targeted sanctions have had two ends
in view: to streamline the process for countries and
agencies that impose sanctions, and to try to limit, not
human suffering in the countries targeted, but the effects
on the economic interests of those imposing sanctions.
This too is an unpleasant truth that must be faced. The
effect of sanctions on Iraq is a clear example of how
innocent civilians have suffered for years in the aftermath
of a conflict which they did nothing to provoke. As
against that, sanctions have not been implemented in other
parts of the world, for reasons on which introspection in
the Council might provide answers. We trust that the
Secretary-General’s report will examine these issues
objectively and in depth.
These issues were considered in depth by the
Twenty-sixth International Conference of the Red Cross
and Red Crescent in Geneva in 1995. Balancing the rights
of civilians to impartial humanitarian relief, the
Conference also laid down several important principles,
among them the need to build long-term developmental
perspectives into humanitarian assistance, the need for
independence of humanitarian action in times of crisis,
and the need to strengthen national capacities to provide
humanitarian and development assistance and protection
to the most vulnerable. It also expressed concern about
the humanitarian consequences of economic sanctions,
including those imposed by the United Nations. These are
principles which should be respected.
We have repeatedly heard that there are enough
international instruments for the protection of civilians
and that what we need to do is make sure that they are
honoured. What the Council needs to consider is how this
is to be done. By definition, international instruments are
signed by Governments, most of which honour them; if
they do not, they can be held accountable. But most
violations of human rights are committed by elements and
forces that are accountable to no one, who have no
interest in international humanitarian law or in being
educated in its niceties, and have signed no agreements to
respect it. However, when a country situation is under
discussion, blame is ascribed to the body that is at hand
and accountable — the Government — though it may not

17

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
be responsible for the outrages and be powerless to prevent
them. The Council is as impotent as any other body in
these situations, having very little influence over the actions
of irregular forces, terrorists and warlords. We wonder,
therefore, how, in practice, it will implement the elements
of the presidential statement issued on 12 February.
A fundamental issue is how to distinguish a civilian
from an armed adversary in conflicts where at least one of
the parties deliberately does not put its fighters in uniform.
Children, as we have repeatedly been told, are under arms,
but so are women. While some armed forces in the West
have recently conceded to women the right to go into
combat, this dubious privilege has existed in other parts of
the world for many years, particularly in irregular warfare.
When a civilian cannot be distinguished from a soldier and
neither sex nor age guarantee civilian status, the chances of
genuine civilians’ being killed in conflict increase sharply.
The alternative is for regular armed forces to expose
themselves to risks and casualties that can be unacceptably
high. This is a tragic but real operational conundrum and
cannot be ignored.
So, too, is the problem, addressed by others in this
debate, caused by the shift over the last decades in the
status of refugees. From Afghanistan in the 1980s to the
Great Lakes in the 1990s, refugees have been seen by
interested parties as an asset of war, fighting forces have
been recruited from refugee camps and the camps
themselves have been used as safe havens from which
cross-border raids are carried out. This blurring of the
distinction between combatants and civilians in distress has
created serious dilemmas, not least for the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.
We have heard repeatedly that the nature of war has
changed and that civilians are now targets as they have not
been before. As I said, this ignores historical reality, but,
even more, none of the many examples that have been
given have addressed a basic problem inherent in the nature
of war. During the Gulf War, it was believed that the
Government of Iraq had moved civilians, including
foreigners, into the vicinity of targets that would have been
attacked by the coalition. The Security Council, through
resolutions 664 (1990) and 674 (1990), condemned these
actions. If, however, the Iraqi Government had continued to
keep civilians near those targets, would the coalition have
desisted? Almost certainly not, because the Geneva
Conventions clearly lay down that the presence of civilians
cannot be invoked to seek protection for a legitimate
military objective.

18

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
Unfortunately, most Governments which have to
handle conflicts where armed elements regularly use
civilians as shields do not have the means of having the
Security Council adopt resolutions condemning the
practice of their enemies. State forces are asked to hold
their hand or — if they do not and civilian casualties
result — are condemned for not having acted according
to the highest standards of international humanitarian law.
Here again, unfortunately, there is a clear disparity of
treatment: The powerful can invoke the law and can get
away with actions, even when such actions are in breach
of the laws of war; the weak suffer opprobrium and
censure.
Irrespective of whether the nature of war has
changed or not, no war can be fought unless the
combatants have weapons and money to sustain conflict.
The manufacture of weapons, including the small arms
and light weapons with which the majority of conflicts
have been fought in the 1990s, is still largely the
prerogative of a few developed countries. Other
Governments have cynically or for political gain sent
arms across borders to sustain insurgencies. These
Governments must take the responsibility of controlling
or stopping the flow of arms that fuel or sustain conflict.
These are patterns of behaviour that must be checked; it
would be interesting to see what the Security Council
does to contain or prevent these practices.
There is a further point involved, brought up
courageously by Special Representative Otunnu, and that
is the role of major business interests in fomenting and
financing conflict. This has two aspects, the obverse of
the problems faced by Governments accused of human
rights violations committed by elements outside their
control. First, when business interests from the developed
world provoke or sustain conflicts, as is currently the case
in more than one ongoing conflagration, the Governments
concerned shrug off responsibility on the grounds that
they cannot be held responsible for the operation of
multinational business concerns. Secondly, the supply of
arms over which there are no national controls is justified
on the grounds that these are commercial operations,
subject only to the rules of the market place, which open
capitalist societies cannot curb. And, as a further twist,
some Governments believe and contend that the arms
industry is so significant a component of their economies
that their exports must necessarily be encouraged to
maintain the health of the industry and of the national
economy. In other words, lives in a distant continent are
a necessary sacrifice to ensure that economies in the
developed world continue to flourish.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Finally, two problems, neither of them new, but which
singly and together have given a new virulence to violence
against civilians: The first is racism and the other the
problem of mercenaries. The first problem has been hinted
at by several speakers in the debate; it needs to be faced
openly because it has surfaced, not only in conflicts, but in
several United Nations peacekeeping operations. It is
significant that no United Nations contingent from a
developing country has ever been accused of racist
violence; it is equally significant that very few soldiers
guilty of racist violence in the course of United Nations
operations have ever been seriously punished. If the United
Nations cannot uphold the highest standards, it can hardly
carry authority in prescribing good behaviour to others.
Related to this is the scourge of mercenarism. A very
large number of conflicts are now sustained by mercenaries.
Almost invariably, these are foreigners, often from distant
lands and therefore men without the slightest concern for
the lives of the civilians in the country where they fight for
gain. Some of the worst outrages against civilians have
been committed by mercenaries and, by definition, unless
this practice is curbed, violence against civilians will be
endemic wherever they operate. However, in the guise of
security agencies’ hiring personnel laid off by armed forces
that can now shed staff, their number is on the increase,
often encouraged clandestinely by agencies in the countries
concerned. We would be interested in seeing how the
Council deals with this problem.
I have spoken almost exclusively about the problems
that we see in the way this issue has been handled. This is
not to say that we underestimate the gravity of the problem
or belittle the efforts of those agencies and individuals who
have made enormous efforts, and sometimes supreme
sacrifices, to protect civilians in situations of armed
conflict. We honour their efforts and we salute the men and
women involved. As I have said, this has to be a matter of
the gravest concern to the entire membership and one to
which it would like to see improvements.
However, what we are discussing is an extremely
complex matter and, if we are not to cause problems
through misguided benevolence, it is necessary to address
the paradoxes and difficulties which face anyone who has
had to grapple with these issues, not in the comfort of this
Chamber, but on the ground. There are some questions to
which there are no easy answers; a simple answer might be
the wrong one and create more difficulties in the long run.
Our interest is in making sure that the international
community examines this complex and multifaceted issue
in depth, before the Council is authorized to take any action

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
on its behalf. It is in that spirit that we have spoken
today.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Ukraine. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Yel’Chenko (Ukraine): One could hardly
overestimate the importance and practical usefulness o f
the discussion that took place in this room 10 days ago.
We would like to thank the delegation of Canada for
initiating and organizing this open briefing that gave us
an excellent opportunity to see live debate in the Security
Council and to listen to a broad exchange of views and
proposals aimed at finding effective ways and means to
protect civilians in armed conflicts. We are also grateful
to the Canadian delegation for inviting non-members of
the Council to respond to the briefing and to provide
guidance on the content of the Secretary-General’s report
requested in the Presidential Statement of 12 February
1999.
It is indeed not easy to add something new to the
examination carried out and ideas expressed during the
meeting. In my statement I would like to emphasize a few
important points that, in our opinion, the report of the
Secretary-General should address specifically.
We believe that, before formulating the
recommendations to the Security Council, the report of
the Secretary-General should in the first place contain an
analysis of the causes of contemporary conflicts. As has
already been pointed out by a number of speakers,
present-day conflicts are in most cases civil or inter-ethnic
warfare of non-international character in which the main
purpose of the warring sides is not to subdue the rival
group but rather to eliminate or banish it. In such
conflicts, civilians are not simply collateral victims of
atrocities committed by one or both sides but a direct
target thereof. For the same reason, the efforts of
humanitarian organizations bringing desperately needed
help to those suffering from horrors of war — and even
their presence — are most unwelcome to the perpetrators
of mass killings and ethnic cleansing.
The growing number of armed conflicts, as well as
their brutal character, is to a large extent the result of
poverty and decreasing resources that bring about
extensive migrations of population, unemployment and
growth of crime. Sometimes a mere spark can kindle the
flame of long and bloody warfare, especially in the areas
with a population of mixed ethnic or religious

19

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
composition. In this connection, it is important not to
overlook the role of sustainable economic development,
preservation and strengthening of the fabric of societies’
and education in eliminating the causes of conflicts and in
their prevention.
During the discussion, several speakers touched upon
the issue of sanctions. Economic sanctions are a powerful
instrument which should be resorted to with great caution.
We strongly support the idea that they must be used
appropriately to target those responsible and not to increase
suffering of women, elderly and children who are the prime
victims in times of war. They also should not contribute to
the deepening of poverty which in many cases is the main
source of conflict. For this purpose, the Security Council
should, in our opinion, give careful consideration to the
potential social, economic and humanitarian impact of
sanctions on the population of the target State and in third
countries prior to the imposition of sanctions. Following the
imposition of sanctions, the Secretariat should be entrusted
with the task of monitoring their effects with a view to
providing the Council with possible options so that
appropriate adjustments and changes could be introduced to
the regime of sanctions in order to mitigate their adverse
collateral effects.
Another important aspect which should be addressed
in the report of the Secretary-General is the measures to
prevent illicit arms flows into the areas of armed conflict
and the role of the Security Council in enforcing such
measures. This study could also include proposals on the
reduction of legal arms trade in the areas where internal
instability and tension may easily turn into war if no
measures of restraint are exercised by the international
community.
My country supports the efforts of the international
community aimed at ensuring respect for the rules of
international humanitarian law. Ukraine is a party to the
two Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions and
recognized the competence of the International Fact-Finding
Commission. The Commission deserves a wider recognition
by States, for its primary task is not only that of factfinding but also to facilitate the restoration of respect for
the humanitarian law in general, as well as protection of the
legitimate rights and interests of the victims of armed
conflicts.
My country supported the initiative to establish an
international criminal court and was actively involved in
this process through participation in the work of the
Preparatory Committee and the Rome Diplomatic

20

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
Conference. In Rome, we witnessed a historic moment
when the idea of establishing an international criminal
court was finally accomplished, thus successfully fulfilling
the work that had been in progress over the past fifty
years. The establishment of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) will provide an indispensable element in
protection of victims of armed conflicts and in
strengthening international humanitarian law through an
effective judicial institution of universal character. We are
confident that it will receive a worldwide support through
the process of subsequent ICC Statute acceptance.
Of no less importance is the universal acceptance of
the Anti-personnel Mines Convention, which is about to
enter into force. Bearing in mind the significance of this
instrument for the protection of civilian populations in
armed conflicts, the Government of Ukraine decided to
sign the Convention before 1 March 1999.
The President: I thank the representative of Ukraine
for his kind words addressed to my delegation and invite
him to resume the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Cho Chang-Beom (Republic of Korea): I wish
first of all to express my delegation’s gratitude to you,
Sir, for your initiative to organize today’s open debate on
the important issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We applaud Canada’s firm commitment, both to
promoting the awareness of the international community
on the new challenges facing human security and to
enhancing the transparency of the work of the Security
Council. My thanks should also go to Mr. Sommaruga,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross; Ms. Bellamy, Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund; and Special Representative
Otunnu for their insightful briefing in this Chamber on 12
February 1999, as well as for their distinguished service
in the cause of humanity.
The end of the cold war did not end the plight of
civilian populations. In many parts of the world, armed
conflict and civilian suffering therein continue with
alarming intensity and growing frequency. In particular,
children, women and other vulnerable groups are
subjected to unlawful attacks and abuses in many
deplorable ways. Moroever, an ever-increasing number of
those who volunteer to help civilians in conflict situations

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
find their lives threatened or sacrificed. Overall, the
changing nature of intra-state conflicts seriously undermines
the respect for international humanitarian law, posing a
grave threat to human security.
My delegation believes that the time has come for the
international community to mobilize the collective will to
cope with these challenges. It was with this belief that my
Government, holding the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May 1997, took the initiative to organize
the first open debate on the related issue of protection of
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations. We are happy to note today that our initiative
has since been built upon by like-minded members of the
Council. We are confident that your initiative with a
broader focus, Sir, will further contribute to the discourse
on what the Security Council, and indeed international
community as a whole, can do to stem the large-scale
civilian suffering increasingly prevalent in conflict
situations.
Already, during the open briefing of 12 February,
many constructive suggestions were made by those
providing the briefing, as well as by members of the
Council, on how to promote the protection of civilian
populations affected by armed conflicts. While we believe
these suggestions deserve the broad support of the
international community, we wish to especially highlight
the following points, given the high priority we attach to
them.
My first point relates to the role and responsibility of
the Security Council. As the representative of Canada
mentioned in the previous open briefing, promoting the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts is central to the
Council’s mandate. In our view, the Council’s primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security should not be limited to its involvement in the
issues related to the traditional concept of States’ security.
Ultimately, the security of States cannot be fully ensured
without the security of the people living in those States
being properly protected. Therefore, the Council should be
encouraged to take a proactive approach to enhance its
active engagement in the issues of human security, such as
providing assistance to and protection for civilians in armed
conflicts.
My second comment concerns the strengthening of the
international legal-enforcement framework in order to
combat the culture of impunity. As we are all aware, this
year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions and the centenary of the first Hague Peace

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
Conference. It is indeed timely for the Council to take
stock of its unprecedented efforts to be directly involved
in punishment for war crimes and other violations of
international humanitarian law in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. Lessons learned from these efforts will be
instrumental in strengthening the future working of the
existing ad hoc tribunals. They will also shed useful light
on the ongoing preparatory work for the early entry into
operation of the new permanent International Criminal
Court. The Republic of Korea remains firmly committed
to the cause of the early establishment of the International
Criminal Court. We are sure that promoting this cause
will strengthen the principle of the rule of law and make
an enormous contribution to the cause of the protection of
civilian populations.
Thirdly, we believe that the Security Council should
pay greater attention to various root causes of civilian
suffering in armed conflicts, in particular to illicit armstrafficking and anti-personnel landmines. My delegation
has emphasized its view on various occasions that, with
well-established cross-border arms flows, country-specific
arms embargoes do not suffice to stem the illicit
trafficking of arms. In this regard, we join the recent
appeals of the Secretary-General for a regional approach
to finding practical ways to stem the illicit flow of arms
to and within given regions.
Mine clearance has now become a global agenda
requiring global action. In both conflicts and post-conflict
situations, demining is an urgent precondition for securing
the minimum safety of civilians. In this regard, we hope
that the United Nations Mine Action Service will
strengthen its role as a focal point within the United
Nations system. Since 1996 my country, as a donor to the
Mine Action Support Group, has actively participated in
mine-clearance activities in Cambodia, Tajikistan and
Ethiopia.
Fourthly, we would like to emphasize the obligation
of all States and non-State actors under international law
to ensure humanitarian access to all those in need. The
international community should consider more forceful
measures, such as the imposition of sanctions specifically
targeted against those that do not provide or who wilfully
obstruct access of humanitarian organizations.
In this connection, we would also like to draw the
attention of the Council, once again, to the need for
ensuring the security and safety of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. We welcome the entry into force
of the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and

21

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Associated Personnel in January of this year. We hope that
adequate follow-up measures will be taken to secure
universal adherence and to further expand the scope of this
Convention. As Under-Secretary-General De Mello aptly
pointed out in his open briefing to the Council last month,
ways and means should be explored to cover all situations
in which United Nations and associated personnel,
including national staff, are deployed, and to ensure its
implementation by non-State actors.
We believe that there are many other related areas the
Council can look into in order to improve the security and
safety of United Nations and humanitarian personnel. In
this connection, my delegation welcomes and hopes for the
early translation into action of the specific recommendation
contained in Council resolution 1208 (1998), to include in
the United Nations Stand-by Arrangements military and
police units and personnel trained for humanitarian
operations, together with related matériel.
Last but not least, we cannot fail to address the plight
of children in armed conflicts, as eloquently pointed out by
Ms. Bellamy and Mr. Otunnu. My delegation, through its
work as a member of the Security Council for two years,
learned with consternation the truth about the horrible
practice of using child soldiers in many conflict situations.
We deplore that this practice and other atrocities involving
children still continue unabated. It is very clear to all of us
that the international community should do everything in its
capacity to ensure that this awful practice ceases
immediately. In this context, my delegation wishes to see
an early adoption of the optional protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child regarding the involvement of
children in armed conflicts. Among other important issues,
we hope that consensus will soon emerge on the minimum
age of military recruitment.
The international community has to rise to the
daunting challenge of providing adequate security for all
those in need of protection and their protectors. The time
for action has come. We hope that the views expressed
today will be reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General as requested by the presidential statement
of 12 February 1999, as well as in the Council’s follow-up
action on this issue. We further hope that such action will
be taken in close collaboration with other United Nations
organs and agencies, as well as with the United Nations
membership as a whole.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that my
Government stands ready to continue to make contributions

22

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
in this regard and to work together with interested
members of the Council.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Republic of Korea for his kind words addressed to me
and to my country.
The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Effendi (Indonesia): Let me begin by extending
to you, Mr. President, our appreciation for convening this
open meeting on an issue of such great importance.
It is indeed disturbing, as the world moves towards
the twenty-first century and a new millennium of hope
and great expectation, that the international community
finds itself ever more frequently faced with civilian
casualties, including children, in armed conflicts — all the
more so as this year we observe the fiftieth anniversary
of the Geneva Convention.
Even more tragic is the fact that, while the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War is founded on the principle that the
humane treatment of inhabitants serves the values of
humanity and decency to which all sides may subscribe,
we find that in contemporary warfare combatants have
deliberately targeted civilians as a means of pursuing their
objectives.
Thus, while the international community has crafted
a rather comprehensive framework of international
humanitarian law, the rights of displaced persons and
refugees and the human rights of civilians in situations of
armed conflict are often neglected. Therefore, the stress
is and should be on their implementation. In this context,
as international law does not take precedence over
national law, a balance must be sought so as not to
violate national sovereignty or the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter. Experience shows that in
the long run, such violations will only exacerbate the
situation and worsen conditions.
Of equal concern to the international community is
the growing threat faced by humanitarian workers, who
risk their personal safety for the noble purpose of
alleviating suffering and hardship. Assaults on
humanitarian operations are particularly threatening in the
light of the fact that the vast majority of conflicts occur
within States. They are almost always accompanied by

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
large-scale internal displacement and refugee flows and call
for a United Nations presence and a rapid and effective
response by its various agencies and funds. We must secure
the protection of humanitarian personnel if this aspect of
the Organization’s work is to successfully continue.
In this regard, we concur with the assertion of the
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross
that the bottom line for any action by humanitarian
organizations is that it must have received the consent of
each and every party concerned.
Many have called for the root causes of conflicts to be
addressed and have clearly voiced their view that a link
exists between social and economic development and peace
and stability. Indonesia concurs that effective measures for
that purpose could be achieved through close cooperation
between the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council, and that none is
equipped to exclusively and comprehensively deal with
those issues.
When they met in Durban in September last year, the
heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries
stressed the need to differentiate between peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian assistance. Indeed, they are
two different kinds of responses to two different kinds of
situations. In the past few years we have witnessed that
peacekeeping operations have little chance of success when
addressing humanitarian situations. On the other hand, it is
very difficult for humanitarian organizations to maintain
their impartiality and neutrality if escorted by armed guards.
This dilemma is not new, as our predecessors would have
testified 50 years ago in Geneva. But the United Nations is
equipped to address this very difficult but very important
issue.
In concluding, I should like to reiterate Indonesia’s
strong support for the humanitarian operations of the United
Nations, as well as the need for the Organization to
strenuously work to uphold established international
humanitarian law. We will continue to contribute to that
effort.

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
initiative in organizing a public debate on such an
important subject, which, as current events are showing,
represents one of the major challenges facing the
international community today. This initiative alone
illustrates the steadfast dedication of your country,
Canada, to strengthening the protection and the promotion
of human rights and of international humanitarian law.
Just a few months before the advent of the third
millennium and on the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions — which also coincides with the centenary
of the first International Peace Conference of The
Hague — it is very distressing to note that civilians today
constitute the vast majority of victims of armed conflicts,
and that among those civilians, women, children and other
members of vulnerable groups are deliberately used as
priority targets by the combatants.
Given that state of affairs, it seems natural to us that
the Security Council should seek additional measures
likely to lead to an improvement of the physical and legal
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict.
In taking the floor at this stage of the debate, I will
limit myself to those aspects that in my view need to be
analysed and to which we need to attach priority if, as
Members of the United Nations, we want to improve the
plight of civilian populations in armed conflicts.
At the normative level, it is important to emphasize
that, despite the specific nature of today’s armed conflicts,
the international community seems to have at its disposal
a sufficient arsenal of legal instruments to protect civilian
populations. Aside from the lack of a framework, as has
been noted, to deal with displaced persons — a gap that
should be filled as quickly as possible — now seems to
be the time to stress the promotion of broad adhesion to
and the effective implementation of the rules that have
been laid down by existing instruments.

The President (interpretation from French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of Togo.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Kpotsra (Togo) (interpretation from French):
First of all, allow me to express to you, Mr. President, the
appreciation of the Group of African States for your

23

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Greater respect for the norms can be guaranteed only
if the parties to a conflict, whoever they are and regardless
of the nature of the conflict, can no longer enjoy impunity.
To that end, everything possible must be done to bring
those guilty of massive and systematic abuses to justice for
their crimes. In this context, the establishment of the
International Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda and the statute of the International Criminal Court
are definite steps in the right direction.
But the actors in conflicts, be they inter- or intra-State,
will not really feel bound to abide by limits in waging
hostilities unless they are aware that the end does not
always justify the means and that, at the end of the day,
their military victory, their revolution or the cause they
champion will not obtain the approval or the recognition of
the international community as a whole, if on the way to
achieving their goal, they have flouted humanitarian
principles and rules.
It is in this context that the idea of finalizing a code
of conduct for the business community seems worthy of
interest to us. It is clear that the swarming that takes place
in business circles, often seen during conflicts, contributes
in one way or another to fuelling the machine that makes
women and children victims of abuses. Often in the minds
of the actors in a conflict, the image to be cultivated and
proper conduct in operations are of little importance, once
these actors are certain that control of the timber sector, of
oil wells or of diamond mines guarantees them resources
and the acquisition of weapons.
Moreover, in particular regarding the situation of
children in armed conflicts, it is urgent that everything be
done to assure them greater protection. Children are the
future of any society, and therefore there can be no
hesitation in strengthening norms promoting protection of
children, in agreeing to put an end to the use of children in
conflict situations and in accepting that they cannot be used
in military operations before the age of 18.
The African Group, for its part, hopes that the report
expected from the Secretary-General will fully take into
account the essential points of the guidelines laid down on
12 February 1999 by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the protection of children in armed
conflict.
Finally, the promotion of the security of civilians,
including the personnel of humanitarian organizations, also
depends on concrete, decisive and courageous measures
designed to halt arms flows towards zones of instability and

24

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
conflict, be they light and small-calibre weapons, more
sophisticated and heavier weapons or anti-personnel
mines.
Here, too, there is a need to draw up a code of
conduct that the arms-producing countries should impose
on themselves and see that it is respected by their
industries and corporations working in this domain. Such
measures are not at all out of reach if they are based on
a genuine political will.
Likewise, when we are aware of the zeal with which
alleged terrorists are tracked down, in every corner of the
globe, it is difficult to understand why, despite the tireless
appeals launched by the overwhelming majority of States,
nothing significant has ever been carried out at the
national level to prevent the recruitment and use of
mercenaries, which, as has been proved, contributes to the
flouting of the rules of international humanitarian law.
These are the elements that, according to the Group
of African States, deserve to be taken into account in any
effort aimed at providing greater protection to civilians
during armed conflicts.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Togo for his kind words addressed
to me.
(spoke in English)
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Dominican Republic. I invite her to
take a seat at the Council table and to make her
statement.
Ms. Aguiar (Dominican Republic) (interpretation
from Spanish): Allow me to express the appreciation of
the delegation of the Dominican Republic for the
excellent initiative of holding this open meeting on the
Fourth Geneva Convention, whose objective is the
protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts, thus
offering non-members of the Council the opportunity to
participate in a matter that is so closely related to the
concern for collective security.
My delegation wishes in particular to acknowledge
the work being carried out by the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) on behalf of affected
populations and the clear and precise statement made by
Mr. Sommaruga before the Council at its meeting on 12
February 1999. We also welcome the determined and

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
energetic position of Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director
of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), who has
understood perfectly the magnitude of our responsibility to
future generations and the vital importance of protecting
children as one of the sectors whose vulnerability puts in
jeopardy the very existence of the human race on our blue
planet.
We also wish to recognize Mr. Olara Otunnu, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for his precise analysis of the
components of this complex problem.
The matter before us offers us a splendid platform for
philosophical reflection, on the eve of a new century and a
new millennium, on the role of our Organization in the
configuration of international relations within international
society, particularly through the action of its executive
organ, the Security Council.

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
everyday occurrence. The deterioration of the conditions
in which humanitarian action can be provided, a result of
the excesses of politicization, have increased the
vulnerability of those who are supposed to be served by
that action.
Nonetheless, we note also that international
humanitarian law is a body of well-defined norms whose
application does not, however, meet all the expectations
of its immediate beneficiaries. We all agree that resolving
the problem we are considering today — protection of
civilian populations in armed conflict — requires a
mechanism to punish non-compliance with the norms of
international humanitarian law, together with action aimed
at preventing violence and abuses.
The search for an effective solution brings us back
to our initial idea of philosophical reflection on the future
of world society and of the role of individuals within it.

In the preceding statements considerable concern has
been expressed for the difficult situation of children, the
future of any society, in armed conflicts. My delegation
invites the members of the Council to carefully study the
programme of peace and security for children advocated by
UNICEF. This would serve as a contribution to the problem
posed in the formulation of practical proposals for possible
solutions.

According to the information provided by some of
the speakers that have participated in this debate, most
armed conflicts of concern to us do not have the
characteristics of international conflicts in the strictest
sense, but rather of internal conflicts in which certain
warring parties are neither States nor armed forces
dependent on a State — although it is, of course,
impossible to generalize.

The effects of sanctions on children are also cause for
great concern. In proposing sanctions, we should consider
the effects that they can have on children and on other
vulnerable groups of society. It is unacceptable that, as a
result of poorly targeted sanctions, there has been a
dramatic increase in the infant mortality rate in some
countries.

Hence we have seen that conflicts caused by “ethnic
cleansing” are part of a State policy. Others are caused by
the actions of so-called liberation forces that are no longer
operating against a colonial State. Both of these variables
make the application of the different legal categories of
humanitarian law even more complex.

There is a common thread running through the
preceding statements that makes unequivocally clear one of
the characteristics of the recent armed conflicts that have
led to political or military action by this Organization: the
fact that their first and principal target has been the civilian
population, in particular its most vulnerable sectors —
children, women, the elderly, the sick, refugees and
internally displaced persons. These categories of people are
often the victims of conflicts in which all means are used,
even the most reprehensible.

But as was stated by the Permanent Representative
of Slovenia, the objective of United Nations humanitarian
activities should be human security, with the key being
physical, not just legal, protection. In order to make
headway in this direction, it is important that the political
and possibly the military action undertaken by the
Security Council complement and not compete with the
jurisdictional action of the system’s judicial organs.
No rule of law can be fully effective if noncompliance by States and by individuals does not result
in jurisdictional sanction.

We are also witnessing a growing disregard for the
application of the principles of humanity, independence and
impartiality. Attacks against the personnel of organizations
that provide humanitarian assistance have become an

25

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

3980th meeting
22 February 1999

The international community has done a great deal
recently to put an end to the related problem of impunity.
Examples are the establishment by the Security Council of
the International Tribunal for Rwanda and of the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, as well as
the recent adoption of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court. The adoption of that Statute on 17 July
1998, at the conclusion of the Rome Diplomatic
Conference, represents a concrete step towards the more
effective protection of civilian populations in armed
conflict.

complemented by concrete measures to provide assistance
to the neediest.

Above and beyond preventive action — through
education and training, the prohibition of the use of certain
types of weapons with indiscriminate effects and the
prohibition of the recruitment of child soldiers — the fight
against impunity, which is the basis for the creation of this
independent jurisdictional organ that is nonetheless related
to the United Nations system, gives rise to fresh hope for
the defenceless, whose demands for justice can no longer
be ignored. It is vital that all States provide their assistance
so that the Statute can enter into force as soon as possible.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Guatemala. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

Likewise, we believe that humanitarian action must be
distinct and separate from purely political action, so that it
can meet its goal of helping populations at risk,
independently of the actions of Governments. Humanitarian
action must be provided unconditionally so that it can
recover its legitimacy.
We believe that this is also an opportunity for our
Organization to reflect on how, as we face the new
millennium, we can establish mechanisms to harmonize the
various elements of the human family — individuals and
ordinary citizens. That is because the mandate of the
Charter of the United Nations begins with the principle of
saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
which has proliferated in this century and whose principal
victims are civilian populations. The organizational
structures of our political societies must not betray the
aspirations of the individuals of whom they are composed.
From the eloquent statements made during this
meeting, we can see that there is no easy way to tackle the
roots of this evil. The delegation of the Dominican
Republic wishes, in conclusion, to point to poverty as one
of the fundamental root causes of conflict. It is increasingly
clear that poverty has the potential of becoming the most
important threat to international peace and security. For this
reason, the delegation of the Dominican Republic believes
that experience has shown that resolutions and agreements
do not suffice. International legislation must be

26

It is important that ideas be accompanied by a
certain level of resolve, as a commendable way of finding
solutions to conflicts and disputes using all the peaceful
means at our disposal.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Dominican Republic for the kind words she addressed to
me.

Mr. Lavalle-Valdés (Guatemala) (interpretation
from Spanish): On behalf of the Government of
Guatemala, I wish to express my gratitude for this
opportunity to participate in this important meeting of the
Council. I wish also to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency and on your outstanding and
skilled leadership. We also express our appreciation to
your predecessor for the exemplary way in which he
discharged his mandate.
The issue now before us, so eminently humanitarian
in nature, is the legitimate source of deepest concern to
the international community. There are ample grounds for
any non-member of the Council to speak today in order
to associate its concerns with those so well expressed in
the two meetings that the Council has devoted to this
issue this year and in this meeting as well.
Unfortunately, however, Guatemala also has
powerful additional reasons to express today the profound
concern of its people and Government over the tragic
issues being discussed at this meeting.
As you know full well, Sir, and as I am certain all
of those present are also aware, it was only in late 1996
that we saw the definitive end to a 36-year period in
which Guatemala and its people suffered the horrors of a
fratricidal internal conflict. That year, our President,
Alvaro Arzú Irigoyen, described that confrontation to the
General Assembly as “a dirty war that crushed entire
villages and compelled many people to flee”. (A/51/PV.8,
p. 4)
The conclusion of that traumatic conflict, which was
as savage as it was unnecessary and futile, was brought
about through the painstaking efforts made, with the

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
inestimable assistance of the United Nations, by the parties
to the conflict. Those efforts led to a series of specific
agreements that concluded with the signing, in December
1996, of the Agreement on a Firm and Lasting Peace. My
country, with the assistance of the United Nations and the
rest of the international community, is now involved in the
process of implementing the accords.
One misfortune that we particularly deplore is the fact
that our long internal armed struggle was not an exception,
but rather a confirmation of a tragic characteristic of current
armed conflicts — in other words, a conflict in which the
number of civilian victims is much higher than that of
combatants. It is true that, to a great extent, we have
achieved the return to their homes of those who were
internally displaced by the armed conflict, as well as the
resettlement of those uprooted. Measures have also been
taken to stabilize and improve the situation of all civilians
affected by the confrontation. However, even if these and
the other problems afflicting the country are resolved, it
will of course be impossible to heal all the physical and
psychological wounds left by so many years of atrocious
violence. Nor will it be possible to erase from the collective
national memory the painful recollection of so much
suffering.
Guatemala therefore fully shares the concern expressed
by the Council, in its presidential statement of 12 February
1999, on “the widening gap between the rules of
international humanitarian law and their application”.
(S/PRST/1999/6, p. 2) We support the appeal made in that
statement for strict compliance with the norms of
international law by the countries affected by armed
conflicts. We are also pleased that the statement
underscored the importance of the historic Hague
Conventions, in which the relevant customary law is
reflected, as well as the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their Additional Protocols of 1977, treaties to which
Guatemala is a party, as it is to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the importance of
which is also emphasized in the statement.
The statement also stresses the harmful impact of the
proliferation of weapons, especially small arms, on the
security of civilians. This prompts me to mention with
satisfaction the cooperation between Guatemala and the
Department of Disarmament Affairs of the United Nations
Secretariat on the convening in our country of a seminar in
November last year on this important issue and a related a
problem.

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
We are all aware that there are differing opinions on
the perfectibility of human nature. The spread of a
phenomenon that has been commented on of late by the
media and in this meeting makes us believe not only that
human nature cannot be perfected, but that humankind
may in fact be in a state of clear moral degeneration. I
am referring to the recruitment of children to the ranks of
combatants, including in conflicts characterized by the
commission of atrocities. We hope that the report
requested of the Secretary-General in the statement to
which I have referred will give due and thorough
attention to the question of the participation of children in
armed conflicts.
Guatemala eagerly awaits that report and hopes that,
if it is not possible to bring about a definitive end to
armed conflicts of all types, there will at least be strict
respect for the international humanitarian law applicable
to them. We hope that the report will make an important
contribution to the achievement of that intermediate goal.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of El Salvador. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
M r . C a s t a n e d a - C o r n e j o (El Salvador)
(interpretation from Spanish): My delegation appreciates
the invitation to participate in this meeting of the Security
Council, which you, Sir, have wisely convened, to debate
the important humanitarian issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Canada has always
distinguished itself by an honourable, consistent and
outstanding involvement in United Nations efforts to
achieve international peace and security, in particular by
its humanitarian devotion to alleviating the suffering of
civilian populations in armed conflicts. Your own
diplomatic work, Sir, confirms this.
This meeting to discuss the subject of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict is of great significance to
the international community. It makes it possible to study
the mutual interrelationship between the political action of
the Security Council and the work of humanitarian
assistance personnel to protect and assist civilians in
armed conflict.
We support the valuable views expressed by Mr.
Cornelio Sommaruga, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross; Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund; and Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict

27

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
during the meeting held by the Security Council on 12
February 1999. We also endorse and support the important
presidential statement issued on behalf of the members of
the Security Council on that same date, which expresses the
political interest of the international community in adopting
concrete measures to put an end to the practice of
committing violence against civilians in armed conflict.
We note with concern a trend towards the targeting of
military action by parties to a conflict on the civilian
population, in particular its most vulnerable groups:
children, women, the elderly, the sick, refugees or displaced
persons. This constitutes a clear and intolerable violation of
basic human rights and freedoms and of the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law. It also
constitutes an obstacle to national and international efforts
to promote sustainable human development.
We consider it fundamental that all the parties
involved in an armed conflict ensure respect for the
principles and norms of international humanitarian law, a
prerequisite for the process of finding peaceful solutions to
armed conflicts.
In this respect, we believe it is appropriate to highlight
the following aspects derived from El Salvador’s
experience.
It is important that the parties to a conflict strictly
observe these principles and basic norms for the protection
of the civilian population.
The parties involved must have the political will to
recognize the need to respect and apply the provisions of
the 1949 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, as well of the Additional
Protocol II, adopted in 1977.
Agreements for the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms among the parties
directly involved in an armed conflict must be adopted, thus
ensuring respect for the non-combatant civilian population.
In the case of El Salvador, the signing of the San José
Agreement on Human Rights before the cessation of the
armed conflict by the Government of El Salvador and the
Farabundo Martí national liberation front on 26 July 1990
was respected by both parties. The adoption of ceasefire
agreements that were respected by the parties involved,
before the final Peace Accords were reached, made it
possible to conduct humanitarian relief activities to provide
support and care for the population, including in the zones

28

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
of conflict. In El Salvador the ceasefire agreements, made
it possible, for example, to develop infant vaccination
days conducted by the Government in cooperation with
the United Nations Children’s Fund. The success of these
programmes would not have been possible without the
respect for international humanitarian law and the direct
and indirect cooperation of the parties to the conflict,
which in practice shared common areas of mutual respect,
to the benefit of the civilian population and the national
and international non-governmental humanitarian
assistance organizations, particularly the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
Lastly, there was the signing of the Peace Accords
themselves, which complemented the initial agreements
and which were the real expression of the will of the
parties to the conflict to find a negotiated, lasting
permanent political solution to the Salvadoran crisis.
We also consider it important to promote a culture
of peace through education in all its dimensions and in all
of its scope as a strategic measure to complement national
and international efforts to promote a solution to armed
conflict through dialogue and negotiation. There is a need
for a concerted global effort of education and training,
which must be supported by the United Nations in order
to provide the population at all levels with a greater
capacity for dialogue, tolerance and respect for human
rights.
We also believe that in connection with the
protection of the civilian population, particularly children,
in an armed conflict, it is vital to see to it that the parties
to a conflict pledge to respect the provisions of
international humanitarian law and, more specifically,
those of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. They
must also take complementary actions, such as putting an
end to the practice of using children as soldiers,
promoting universal recognition of the minimum age of
18 for recruitment, and speeding the demobilization of
children that are now participating in armed conflicts.
The elimination of impunity for war crimes, in
particular as regards crimes committed against children
and the non-combatant civilian population, as established
in the Statute of the International Criminal Court adopted
at the 1998 Rome Diplomatic Conference, also deserves
our support on the subject before us.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
In conclusion, we consider it relevant to emphasize the
importance of integrating the efforts of the Security Council
in the protection of civilians in armed conflict with the
actions taken by the Economic and Social Council for the
promotion of sustainable human development, since the
latter actions are geared towards promoting the eradication
of the main causes of these conflicts, such as extreme
poverty, discrimination, displacement and marginalization.
Strengthening of cooperation and the coordination of these
principal organs of the United Nations with humanitarian
assistance personnel also makes it possible to develop more
effective, better coordinated action for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
The President: I thank the representative of El
Salvador for his kind words addressed to me and to my
country. I invite him to resume the seat reserved for him at
the side of the Chamber.

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
war situation, such as massive migrations of population
and violations of human rights, a population held hostage
and polarized and a ruined economy.
The international community responded through
political, diplomatic and humanitarian actions and through
coercive measures whose effectiveness was often called
into question, in particular the economic sanctions.
Perceived by the captive population as an expression of
the support of the international community, economic
sanctions as applied in Haiti turned out to be a burden for
the poor and an advantage for the de facto authorities and
their supporters, and thus did not yield the expected
results. There was an embargo on gasoline, but the streets
were full of vehicles; a suspension of commercial flights,
but heavy nighttime aviation activity. There came the
institutionalization of smuggling through a porous border,
a sharp rise in prices of commodities, a spiralling cost of
living and considerable enrichment of the economic elite.

(spoke in French)
The last speaker inscribed on my list for this morning
is the representative of Haiti. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lelong (Haiti): First of all, I would like to assure
you, Mr. President, that I will try to be brief and to respect
your time limits. I would like to congratulate you on having
convened this public meeting, which, by allowing for the
participation of countries that are not members of the
Security Council, enriches its work.
The question before us today is that of a search for
ways and means to protect civilians affected by armed
conflicts, to guarantee in the most effective manner possible
their security wherever it is threatened. This question has
been debated at length by previous speakers. I therefore do
not intend to make a speech, but rather to make a few brief
comments based on the recent experience of my country
and on the contribution of the international community, for
which we shall always be grateful.
The management of actions and initiatives aimed at
definitely resolving crises so that there is no possibility of
their resumption would be the optimal option for protecting
civilians. This is a pious wish and a challenge that is
difficult to address as a whole, and I shall therefore take up
certain aspects of the specific case of Haiti.
As all are aware, my country was not the victim of a
civil war, but rather the situation of crisis that it has faced
has numerous characteristics that are generally typical of a

These brief observations on economic sanctions
allow us specifically to make comments regarding the
nature of sanctions when it has been decided to apply
them. We believe that sanctions must be, and are
supposed to be, not against a society but against a group
of individuals; that is, that they must be carefully
targeted. They must be applied with better planning and
a reliable system of assessment. They must be properly
formulated, of limited duration and based on specific
criteria. They must take into account progress made. And
the United Nations system itself must have a reliable
source of information regarding the impact of sanctions
on each individual situation in which sanctions are
imposed.
Once again I emphasize that when a decision has
been taken to resort to economic sanctions, they must be
imposed firmly and transparently, strictly applied and
supported by a credible decision. In the case of Haiti at
least, such an approach, by all indications, would have
resulted in much less suffering.
A second group of comments relates to some of the
operational defects, which improved with time and as
measures were taken. I would emphasize here, without
wanting to be too critical, an occasional lack of
understanding in the implementation of adopted policies;
a pernicious role played by local personnel; supporters of
those in power being recruited by the international
organizations; a perceived lack of sensitivity on the part
of those who were in charge of certain political and
diplomatic aspects; and perhaps too frequent personnel

29

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
turnover. The result has sometimes been a lack of
coordination and of efficiency.
A third point would be the question of how to avoid
the massive flow of arms to the country despite all
prohibitions. Is it enough simply to protest these atrocities
fuelled by industries that are showing renewed vigour in the
international markets? Is it enough to condemn those who
— out of apparent madness, forever seeking either to take
power or maintain it — mutilate, rape or kill thousands of
innocent people, or cripple them either with machetes or —
as if this might be more modern — with modern weapons?
Should we not condemn all the links of the chain? Here is
a highly complex and challenging problem.
A fourth aspect is that the maintenance of peace and
security and the protection of civilians is based not only on
political and diplomatic initiatives and on the sometimes
opportune application of economic sanctions, but also on

3980th meeting
22 February 1999
sustained efforts for development. Although in Haiti one
can see an evolution towards the standard approach of
separation of activities, there is also a need to integrate
the work of the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and other international actors in order to
move action beyond humanitarian assistance towards the
areas of economic and social development.
Given these tragedies, the international community
has an obligation to make a firm commitment, avoiding
any kind of manipulation. The history of murders and of
massacres is doubtless also the history of silence and of
complicity. It is highly possible that several chapters of
modern history would have been different if certain
genocides had not benefited from so much complicity.
The President: I will suspend our meeting now. We
will begin again at 3 p.m. sharp.
The meeting was suspended at 1.55 p.m.

30
