S/2007/70

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 February 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 8 February 2007 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
With reference to Security Council resolution 1671 (2006), I have the honour
to convey to you the attached letter dated 22 January 2007, received from the
Secretary-General and High Representative for Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union, transmitting the report on the activities of the
European Union operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the period
from 27 April to 30 November 2006 and the subsequent redeployment of the force
(see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-23315 (E) 130207

*0723315*

S/2007/70

Annex
Letter dated 22 January 2007 from the Secretary-General and
High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations
In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolution 1671 (2006),
I attach a report on the European Union operation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo following its successful conclusion. The report covers the period from
27 April 2006 to the end of the operation on 30 November 2006 and the subsequent
redeployment of the force. I would be grateful if you would transmit this report to
the President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

07-23315

S/2007/70

Enclosure
Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative for the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union on
the European Union operation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
I.

Introduction
1.
In resolution 1671 (2006) the Security Council requested the European Union
to report to it on the implementation of the mandate of the EU operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This report covers the period from the adoption
of Council Joint Action 2006/319/CFSP on 27 April to the successful conclusion of
the operation on 30 November 2006 and subsequent redeployment of the force.

II.

Background
2.
On 27 December 2005 the United Nations requested the European Union to
support its mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) by
providing a visible and credible force, that could enhance MONUC quick reaction
capabilities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo during and immediately after
the electoral process. On 23 March the Council of the European Union agreed to
provide assistance to MONUC in addressing situations that might threaten the
electoral process and that were beyond the mission’s capabilities.
3.
In a letter dated 28 March, the European Union conveyed to the
Secretary-General its agreement to provide support to MONUC. Following the
adoption of resolution 1671 (2006), the Council of the European Union adopted
Joint Action 2006/319/CFSP on 27 April for the conduct of an EU military
operation. The objective of the military operation was to contribute to stability
during the electoral process by making available a visible advance element and an
over-the-horizon on-call force to provide reassurance and deterrence, indirectly
through support to the Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo and
the Congolese police; and directly through a decision to employ force in support of
MONUC if requested by the United Nations.

III.

Political context
4.
During the period of deployment of the EU military operation and the
reinforcement of the EU Kinshasa Police Mission, the first democratic and
transparent Congolese elections in more than 40 years were successfully concluded.
Key events remained within the electoral calendar, and the first round of elections
took place on 30 July in a relatively calm security environment.
5.
Following the announcement of the results of the first round of presidential
elections, there was a rise in tension and a number of violent incidents in Kinshasa
from 20 to 22 August. A strong and immediate international reaction by, inter alia,
the United Nations, the European Union and South Africa prevented further
escalation, in tandem with a rapid and robust response by MONUC and the
European force (EUFOR).
6.
Subsequently all parties agreed on measures to calm the situation in Kinshasa,
in which MONUC, EUFOR and the EU Police Mission were actively engaged. The

07-23315

3

S/2007/70

final round of elections was held as foreseen on 29 October and provisional results
were made public on 16 November. On 27 November the Supreme Court confirmed
the results of the elections, leading to the inauguration of President Kabila on
6 December.
7.
Throughout this process, at the political level a significant contributory factor
to the ability of EUFOR to support the election process has been the excellent
support received from the Congolese authorities, Gabon, and the Republic of the
Congo. Sustained political engagement by the United Nations and the European
Union (including by the EU Special Representative) has played a key role in
facilitating these relationships, contributing thereby to a coherent politico-military
response to security threats.
IV.

European Union operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
8.
The EU military operation in support of MONUC has focused on the provision
of a credible presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, providing
reassurance to the population of the country by the deterrence of potential “spoilers”
to the election process. This presence, based as a minimum on the force
headquarters and a force capable of immediate reaction in Kinshasa, could be
readily reinforced by force elements from over the horizon in Gabon as necessary.
9.
During the preparation phase, close coordination and cooperation with the
United Nations was essential in defining the area of operation, and potential
interventions and tasks, together with establishing the requirement for an over-thehorizon force in Gabon. Subsequent early insertion of enabling capabilities into
Gabon by operation headquarters, combined with coordination of multiple air and
sea movements by the EU Movement Control Cell, ensured a smooth deployment.
This in turn allowed full operational capability to be achieved prior to the start of
the election process as prescribed in the planning process.
10. During the mission execution phase, the deterrent effect of EUFOR presence
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was a significant factor in limiting the
number of incidents. Reinforcement by additional force elements from the over-thehorizon component in Gabon was undertaken on a number of occasions when the
security situation on the ground merited an increase in deterrent effect. In addition,
a number of deployment operations to the geographically agreed points of
application in the Democratic Republic of the Congo were undertaken, both to act as
rehearsals for potential situation-driven deployments and also to increase the
geographic spread of the force’s deterrent effect.
11. The incident with the greatest destabilizing potential occurred on 21 August
2006 with an attack on the residence of the Vice-President, Jean-Pierre Bemba.
EUFOR intervention, in close cooperation with MONUC, was deemed to have been
decisive in containing the potential spread of violence at a particularly sensitive
moment in the election process. This in turn proved to have wider effect for EUFOR
which, by its intervention, confirmed its position of neutrality in the eyes of the
Congolese population at large and thus reinforced its credibility.
12. The military operation terminated and the redeployment phase commenced as
foreseen on 30 November with the expiry of the United Nations mandate. The
security situation through the period of redeployment has remained calm, the
majority of force elements returning to their respective bases by the end of 2006.

4

07-23315

S/2007/70

13. Throughout the redeployment and all preceding phases, the degree of
cooperation with a wide variety of non-EU actors has been high and this has been
particularly noticeable with regard to relations with MONUC in theatre. The
establishment of liaison links between the two forces allowed for the development
of strong mutual understanding which was essential in maintaining a seamless
presence, adapted to the security situation on the ground, and contributing to a
successful operation. A further element contributing to success has been
transparency and information-sharing with African partners; the African Union, the
Southern African Development Community and the ECCAS were invited to deploy
liaison officers to facilitate this process.
V.

Police Mission and security sector reform mission activity
14. Since 30 June 2006, and within the same time frame set for the EU military
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the EU Police Mission in
Kinshasa has been reinforced with a 28-strong police coordination element in
support of the Kinshasa crowd-control units. This was to ensure an enhanced and
coordinated response of the Congolese police in Kinshasa in case of disturbances
during the electoral process. The EU police coordination support element has
operated in close cooperation with the EU military operation and MONUC, notably
sharing security-related information on a daily basis. It has also significantly
contributed to supporting the security arrangements in the capital, particularly
during a period of heightened tension in August.
15. In December, the Council of the European Union agreed to an extension of the
coordination support element of the EU Police Mission until June 2007. This will
enable the Mission to continue to provide support to the Congolese police in the
capital until the completion of the transition process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
16. During the deployment of the military operation, the EU Mission of Assistance
for Security Sector Reform has continued to provide advice and technical assistance
to the Congolese authorities on security sector reform, and there has been further
integration of combatants from former armed factions. In the coming months, a new
focus will be placed by that Mission on the reconstruction of the Congolese army.
Close cooperation with MONUC will remain essential to maximize the effects of
reform on the ground. More broadly the European Union is prepared to facilitate
overall coordination of security sector reform efforts undertaken by the international
community in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

VI.

Conclusion
17. In responding to the United Nations request under resolution 1671 (2006),
EUFOR has made a significant contribution to the successful outcome of the
election process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and wider stability within
the region, working closely with MONUC and the Congolese authorities. The
combination of the European Union political role (including through the EU Special
Representative) in conjunction with its military, police and security sector reform
instruments has been orchestrated coherently and to great effect. This operation has
further demonstrated the strength of the European Union as a crisis management
actor, the level of EU engagement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the

07-23315

5

S/2007/70

effectiveness of such interventions in conjunction with the United Nations and in
support of international partners under the European security and defence policy.
18. The European Union will continue to monitor the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and remains committed to supporting the transition process,
including through the EU Mission for Security Sector Reform and the EU Police
Mission in Kinshasa.

6

07-23315
