6

General Assembly-Eighth Session

4. Takes note of the report 2 of the United Nations
Good Offices Commission, and in particular its conclusion that "in view of the response of the Government of the Union of South Africa, it has been unable
to carry out its task to arrange and assist in negotiations between the Governments concerned" ;
5. Expresses its regret that the Government of the
Union of South Africa:
(a) Has refused to make use of the Commission's
good offices or to utilize any of the alternative procedures for the settlement of the problem recommended
by the four previous resolutions of the General Assembly;
( b) Has continued to implement the provisions of
the Group Areas Act in spite of the provisions of three
previous resolutions;
( c) Is proceeding with further legislation contrary
to the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, including the Immigrants Regulation Amendment Bill which seeks to prohibit the entry into South
Africa of wives and children of South African nationals
of Indian origin ;
6. Considers that these actions of the Government
of the Union of South Africa are not in keeping with
its obligations and responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations;
7. Decides to continue the United Nations Good
Offices Commission and urges the Government of the
Union of South Africa to co-operate with that Commission;
8. Requests the Commission to report to the General Assembly at its next regular session the extent
of progress achieved, together with its own views on
the problem and any proposals which, in its opinion,
may lead to a peaceful settlement of it;
9. Again calls upon the Government of the Union
of South Africa to refrain from implementing the
provisions of the Group Areas Act;
10. Decides to include this item in the provisional
agenda of the ninth session of the General Assembly.
457th plenary meeting,
11 November 1953.

720 (VIIl). Report of the Director of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

A
The General Assembly,
Recal,ling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, 393 (V)
of 2 December 1950, 513 (VI) of 26 January 1952 and
614 (VII) of 6 November 1952,
Having examined the report 3 of the Director of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the special report 4
of the Director and the Advisory Commission of that
Agency,
Noting that programme agreements envisaging the
commitment of approximately $120 million have been
signed by UNRWA with the governments of several
Near Eastern countries, pursuant to the plan endorsed
See document A/2473.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth
Session, Supplement No. 12.
4 See document A/2470/ Add. 1.
2

3

by the General Assembly in resolution 513 (VI), but
that expectations as regards the execution of the projects programme have not bee1:1 realized,
Noting also that the situation of the refugees continues to be a matter of grave concern,
I. Decides, without prejudice to the provisions of
paragraph 11 of resolution 194 (III), or to the provisions of paragraph 4 of resolution 393 (V), that the
mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East shall
be extended until 30 June 1955, and that its programme
shall be again subject to review at the ninth session
of the General Assembly;
2. Authorizes the Agency to adopt a budget for
relief amounting to $24.8 million for the fiscal year
ending 30 June 1954, subject to such adjustments as
may be attributable to refugee employment on projects,
or as may be necessary to maintain adequate standards,
and to adopt a provisional budget for relief of $18
million for the fiscal year ending 30 June 1955;
3. Considers that the projects fund previously authorized by the General Assembly in paragraph 2 of
resolution 513 (VI) should be maintained at $200 million until 30 June 1955, and urges UNRWA and the
governments of the Near Eastern countries concerned
to continue to seek acceptable projects to enable the
fund to be utilized for the purposes for which it is
intended;
4. Requests the Negotiating Committee for ExtraBudgetary Funds to seek the funds required to meet
the current needs of the relief programmes and to
invite governments to take into account the need for
the additional pledges which will be required to meet
the total programme now established at $292.8 million.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.

B
The General Assembly,
Having noted that the present memb~rship of the
Advisory Commission of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, established pursuant to paragraph 8 of General
Assembly resolution 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, is
composed of representatives of Egypt, France, Jordan,
Syria, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America,
Noting further that it is in the general interest that
other contributing countries join the Advisory Commission,
Authorizes the Advisory Commission to increase its
membership by not more than two additional members.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
721 (VIII). The· question of race conftict in
South Africa resulting from the policies of
apartheid of the Government of the Union of
South Africa

The General, Assembly,
Hooing considered the report 5 of the United Nations Commission on the Racial Situation in the Union
5
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 16, document A/2505.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the A.d Hoe Political Committee
of South Africa established by resolution 616 A (VII)
of 5 December 1952,
Noting with concern that the Commission, in its
study of the racial policies of the Government of the
Union of South Africa, has concluded that these palicies and their consequences are contrary to the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Noting that the Commission had also concluded
that:
(a) "It is highly unlikely, and indeed improbable,
that the policy of apartheid will ever be willingly accepted by the masses subjected to discrimination", and
( b) That the continuance of this policy would make
peaceful solutions increasingly difficult and endanger
friendly relations among nations,
Noting further that the Commission considers it desirable that the United Nations should request the
Government of the Union of South Africa to reconsider the components of its policy towards various
ethnic groups,
Considering that, in the Commission's own opinion
the time available was too short for a thorough study
of all the aspects of the problems assigned to it,
Considering also the Commission's view that one of
the difficulties encountered by it was the lack of cooperation
from
Af ·
d · the Government of the Union of South
nca an ' m particular, its refusal to permit the
Commission to enter its territory,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 103 (I) of 19 November 1946, 377 A (V), section E, of 3 November 1950
and 616 B (VII) of 5 December 1952, particularly
the passages in those resolutions which state respectively that "it is in the higher interests of humanity
to put an immediate end to religious and so-called
racial persecution and discrimination"· that "enduring peace will not be secured solely b; collective security arrangements against breaches of international
peace and ac.ts of aggression, but that a genuine and
lasting peace depends also upon the observance of all
the Principles and Purposes established in the Charter
of the United Nations, upon the implementation of the
resolutions of the Security Council, the General Assembly and other principal organs of the United Na-

7

tions intended to achieve the maintenance of international peace and security, and especially upon respect for an observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and on the establishment and
maintenance of conditions of economic and social wellbeing in all countries"; and that "in a multi-racial
society harmony and respect for human rights and
freedoms and the peaceful development of a unified
community are best assured when patterns of legislation and practice are directed towards ensuring the
equality before the law of all persons regardless of
race, creed or colour, and when economic, social, cultural and political participation of all racial groups
is on a basis of equality";
2. Expresses appreciation of the work of the
United Nations Commission on the Racial Situation
in th e Union of South Africa;
3. Decides that should any of the members of the
Commission be unable to continue their membership,
the member or members concerned shall, if the General Assembly is not sitting, be replaced by a person
or persons appointed by the present President of the
General Assembly in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral;
4. Requests the Commission:
(a) To continue its study of the development of the
racial situation in the Union of South Africa:
(i) With reference to the various implications of
( __) the situation for the populations affected;
11 In relation to the provisions of the Charter
and, in particular, to Article 14;
( b) To suggest measures which would help to alleviate the situation and promote a peaceful settlement;
5 I ·
. nv1tes the Government of the Union of South
Afri~a to extend its full co-operation to the Commlsswn;
6. Requests the Commission to report to the General Assembly at its ninth session.
469th plenary meeting,
8 December 1953.
