S/PRST/2005/6

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 February 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5126th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 February 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the Summit in Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt
on 8 February 2005, and the resumption of direct talks between the Prime
Minister of Israel Mr. Ariel Sharon and the President of the Palestinian
Authority Mr. Mahmoud Abbas. The Council expresses its appreciation to
President Hosni Mubarak of the Arab Republic of Egypt for the invitation to
both parties to the Summit, and to King Abdullah II bin Al Hussein of Jordan
for his participation.
“The Security Council underlines the understandings reached by the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority, in particular that all
Palestinians will stop all acts of violence against all Israelis everywhere and
that Israel will cease all its military activities against all Palestinians
everywhere. The Security Council calls for the full respect by the parties of
their commitments in this regard.
“The Security Council recognizes these understandings, along with other
recent positive developments, as primary steps towards restoring confidence
between the two parties and as a significant opportunity to enhance a new
spirit of cooperation and to promote an atmosphere conducive to the
establishment of peace and coexistence in the region.
“The Security Council commends the role being played by Egypt and
Jordan in facilitating a successful resumption of dialogue between the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority within the framework of
the Road Map.
“The Security Council welcomes the initiative of the United Kingdom
Government in convening an international meeting in London on 1 March to
support Palestinian efforts to prepare the ground for a viable Palestinian state.
The Security Council also welcomes the upcoming ‘Quartet’ meeting at the
ministerial level which will convene in the margins of the London meeting.
“The Council looks forward to further engagement by the ‘Quartet’ with
the two parties to ensure continued progress in the peace process and the full
implementation of the Road Map and relevant Security Council resolutions,
05-24151 (E) 160205

*0524151*

S/PRST/2005/6

including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), and 1515 (2003),
towards the creation of an independent, viable, democratic and sovereign
State of Palestine living side by side with Israel in peace and security.
“The Security Council looks forward to the establishment of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.”

2
