‘til

MEETING: 20 MARCH 1969

CONTENTS

s/w.

1464

F”OllRTGE:N XIXJNDRET) AND SIXTY-FOURTH

MEETING

arc convinced--and our expericnccsince the beginning of
this month has already shown-that your term as President
will be mostsuccessful,WCknow your qualities.To most of
us you arc not only acolleague,but a friend, and we thank
you in advancefor the way in which you will direct our
discussions,
I associatemyselffully with what you have said
about our colleague from Finland, AmbassadorJakobson,
who preceded both of us. We already knew his qualities
outside the Council; we appreciate them even more, now
that he is our colfeaguc.
S. Mr, JAKOBSON(Finland): I should like to thank you,
Mr. Prcsidcnt,for the very generouscommentsyou madein
your statement about my Presidency,which was a happy
OIIC in the sensethat WChad only one meeting, at which a
unanimous decision was taken-.-a decision that was instantly implemcntcdafter the meeting.I should r&o like to
say that we in this Council are confident that as IVcsident
you will direct the work of the Council with the distinction
and compctenccwhicft you have always shown in your
duties as PermanentRcprcscntativeof your country in this
Organiaition.
6. May I also asscrciatc
myself with the words you
addrcsscdto fast month”s President, the Ambassador of
France. I hardly need to add my comments to what you
fravcalreadysaidabout his eminent qualities.
7. ‘I’hc PRESt DENT (trartslatcd from Rwwlt~: I thank the
rcprcscntativcsof Franceand Finland for their friendly nnd
gcncrouswords about me,nnd I assuretfrem that I sinccrcly
rcciprocatctfrcir cordial feelings.
Adoption of the agenda

The situatian in Namibia

lsttsr dated 14 March 1tiBB addressed to the President af
the Security Council by the representatives of Afghanis
stan, Algeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Ceylon, Chad, Congo
(brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiapia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Ivory Coast, Libya, Madagascar, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, Sudan,
Syria, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab
Republic, United Republic af Tanzania, Yugoslavia and
Zambia (SlQOW and Add.1 -2)
8. The I~f?12XXC?NI’
(trarzslatcd Jhm IPremir):

This meet.
ing of tfro Security Council has been convened in response

to the urgent request addressed to the President of the
Council
on 14 March 1969 by the representatives of
forty-five Member States, which was circulated as document S/9090 and Add.1 and 2. I have just been informed
that the representative of Liberia [S/909O/Add.31 wishes
to add his name to this letter as the forty-sixth signatory.

15. Between 1946 and 1966, the General Assembly and
the Security Council took, by an increasingly nearunanimous majority, a number of decisions which the
regimes in southern Africa had an obligation to comply
with. None of those decisions was implemented.
16. Thus, during these past twenty years there has been a
crystallization of world public opinion on the olbjectives in
view, but no agreement has been reached on thle practical
means of achieving them.

9. I should like to inform the members of the Council that
a request to participate in the debate on the question which
is on the agenda has been made by the representative of the
United Arab Republic, in his capacity as President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia. If there is no
objection, I shall invite the representative of the United
Arab Republic to take a place at the Council table in order
to participate, without vote, in the Security Council’s
debate in accordance with the usual practice and with the
rules of procedure.

17. A second period opened between 1966 and 1967,
when the Security Council authorized the application of
measures against the Rhodesian regime under C.hapter VII
of the Charter and the General Assembly terminated the
Mandate exercised by South Africa over Namibia.
18. The hour of decision has struck for southtern Africa
and for our Organization. For the regimes in southern
Africa, the question is whether they will continue to defy
the world Organization; for the United Nations, the
question is whether effective measures to assert its authority and restore its prestige can be devised. The answersto
these questions will have profound implications for the
maintenance of world peace and stability.

the invitation of the President, Mr. M. El Kony
(United Arab Republic) took a seatat the Council table.
At

10. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
Council will now take up the item on its agenda. I should
like to remind you that the Council considered the item in
,March of last year under the title “The question of South
West Africa”, and that General Assembly resolution
2372 (XXII) of 12 June 1968 proclaimed that South West
Africa should thenceforth be known by the name “Namibia”, The agenda for this meeting has been worded to
conform to that decision of the General Assembly.

19. At its previous meetings on the question which is on
our’ agenda, the Security Council had to discuss problems
relating to the treatment of Namibian patriots by the South
African regime. In March 1968 it did not take up the
fundamental question that confronts us, namely, the
adoption of practical means for achieving the ends in view,
which continue to be the attainment of sovereignty by the
Namibian people and the independence of their country.

11. By letter of 23 December 1968 [S’/8943/,r the
Secretary-General transmitted to the Security Council the
text of General Assembly resolution 2403 (XXIII) on the
question of Namibia, drawing particular attention to
operative paragraphs 3 and 4, which refer to the Security
Council. I should also like to call attention to the letter
addressed to the President of the Security Council on 28
February 1969 by the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, which was circulated as document
S/9032.2

20. To be sure, the Security Council then recognized the
special responsibility towards the people and the Territory
of Namibia. Now, however, it is necessary to go beyond
recognition of the responsibility and to see that the
responsibility is shouldered. We must define our action and
decide on the means of imposing, the collective will for the
sake of the ends in view.

12. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (tranglated from French):
Allow me, first to all, Mr. President, to say to you that the

21. Why should we impose the collective will? First,
because for more than twenty years South Africa has not
complied with the decisions of the General Assembly and
the* Security Council. Secondly, because South Africa
continues, against the unanimous will of the States
Members of the United Nations and in defiance of all the
principles of international law, to occupy a Territory. This
is all the more serious, in that Namibia comes under the
legal authority of the United Nations, which must assume
direct responsibility for its administration until it attains
full sovereignty. In so doing, the United Nations is simply
performing its cardinal task of decolonization under the
terms of General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV); the tenth
anniversary of which we shall soon be commemorating.

Algerian delegation particularly welcomes your assumption
of the important functions of President of the Security
Council. It is a happy coincidence that as our Council
resumes the consideration of colonial problems it should
fall to you, the representative of an anti-colonialist,
, -country, to direct our proceedings,
13. I should also like to commend and thank your
predecessor, the representative of France, His Excellency
Mr. Berard, for all his discreet efforts last month.
14. Over the past twenty years, world public opinion has
become aware of what the political regimes in southern
Africa are based on and of the profound implications that
represents for the future of Africa and of world peace,
1 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-third

22. The continued. military occupation of Namibia by
South Africa is in itself a serious violation of the fundsmental principles of the Charter. It is a typical case of
direct armed aggression against a Territory and against s
people who are entitled to enjoy the natural and inalienable
right to freedom and self-determination.

Year,

Supplement fok October, Novimber and December, 1968, page 179.
2 Ibid,, Twenty-fourth Year, Supplement for January,
andMarch, 1969, p.92-93.

Febrwry

2

23. What is even worse is that the Pretoria regime aims not
only at the permanent occupation of Namibia but also at
the disintegration of the Territory and of the unity of the
Namibian people. This, it is true, is not a new policy; it goes
back to the European colonialists, who, in order to retain
what they had seized in Africa, artificially divided peoples
and territories.

improvement of the conditions for peace and security in
Africa, and therefore in the world.
30. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I wish to
thank the representative of Algeria for his kind words of
congratulation addressedto me,
31. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): I am greatly honoured to
be given the opportunity to address thesecurity Council on
the important question of Namibia. Before I proceed,
however, I should like to seize this opportunity, Mr. President, to congratulate you on your elevation to the
Presidency of this important Council. I have no doubt that,
given your calibre, your experience and your integrity, your
Presidency will facilitate our debates on this matter. I
humbly pledge the fullest co-operation of my delegation,

24. Today, in the age of national independence and of
unity, Pretoria is applying itself to destroy systematically
the unity of the Namibian people and the integrity of their
territory. That, we must recognize, is the gravest threat to
international peace and security.
25. Our action must be aimed at preserving the very
existence of the Namibian people.. It is a matter of survival
for them. Let there be no mistake, however; if our
action-peaceful action, we hope-is unacceptable to certain
Powers which base their policies on the exploitation of the
peoples of Africa, then the Namibian people and the
peoples of the Third World, and those who love freedom,
will not allow the racist regime to carry out its shameful
misdeed. A people cannot be destroyed. Have we not today
the example of the rebirth of the Palestinian people, who
for twenty years were thought of as a mass of refugees?

32. I also wish to extend my admiration, rather retroactively, to Ambassador Berard of France, who was last
month’s President of our Council. I regret that protracted
negotiations deprived us of the opportunity to hold this
meeting under his able leadership.
33. In regard to the businessbefore us, it is my privilege to
present .the following draft resolution, for the consideration
of the Council, on behalf of the delegations of Colombia,
Nepal, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal and Zambia. The draft
resolution reads as follows:

26. If the fight which the Narnibian people are carrying on
appears timid today, we are convinced that tomorrow,
thanks to their spirit of sacrifice and self-denial and the
effective support they* will receive from their brother
nations and from the Third World, it will take on another
dimension. Is there any other course for the African people
of Namibia, when the alternatives are to accept the status
quo where all power belongs to the whites or to oppose it
by methods that are likely to be violent? No compromise is
possible for these people. There is no middle course
between the retention of power and privileges in the hands
of a racist minority and the restoration of sovereignty.

“The Security Council,
“Taking
note of General Assembly resolutions
2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967; 2324 (XXII)
and
2325 (XXII) of 16 December 1967; 2372 (XXII) of 12
June 1968 and 2403 (XXIII) of 16 December 1968,
“Taking into account General Assembly resolutions
2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1968 by which the General
As:,embly of the United Nations terminated the Mandate
of South West Africa and assumed direct responsibility
for the territory until its independence,

27. The United Nations has terminated South Africa’s
Mandate over Namibia. It is our duty now to follow up that
decision and to consider practical measures for shouldering
that responsibility. Our reaction to South Africa’s defiance
must be to demand the withdrawal of the South African
authorities from Namibia.

-) “Recalling its resolution 24.5 (1968) of 25 January

1968 and 246 (1968) of 14 March 1968,
“Reaffirming the inalienable right of the people of
‘Namibia to freedom and independence in accordance
with the provisions of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,

28. This does not mean, however, that we should merely
appeal to South Africa. We already know what would be
the reaction to such an appeal. We must convince the
Pretoria authorities that withdrawal is inevitable, even if it
should have to be brought about by enforcement measures.
In this case, the Charter contains the measures to be taken
to remove the threat to peace resulting from South Africa’s
defiance. It cannot be denied that this defiance of our
Organization increases the erosion of the authority and
influence of the United Nations. It also jeopardizes the
attempts of the African States to promote policies of social
and economic development which require stability and
security for the whole of the African continent.

“Mindfui of the grave consequences of South Africa’s
continued occupation of Namibia,
“Reaffirming its special responsibility
people and the territory of Namibia,

toward the

“1. Recognizes that the United Nations General
Assembly terminated the mandate of South Africa over
Namibia and assumed direct responsibility for the territory until its independence;

29. Hence the importance of Security Council action. Any
evasiveness, any ambiguity, of the kind to be seen in the
policies of the major Western Powers, would only increase
suspicions and antagonisms that would not contribute to an

“2. Considers that the continued presence of South
Africa in Namibia is illegal and contrary to the principles
of the Charter and the previous decisions of the United

3

Nations and is detrimental to the interests of the
population of the territory and those of the international
community;
“3. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
immediately withdraw its administration from the territory;
“4. Declares that the actions of the Government of
South Africa designed to destroy the national unity and
territorial integrity of Namibia through the establishment
of Bantustans are contrary to the provisions of the United
Nations Charter;
“‘5. Declares that the Government of South Africa has
no right to enact the ‘South West Africa Affairs Bill’, as
such an enactment would be a violation of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
“6. Condemns the refusal of South Africa to comply
with
General Assembly resolutions
2145 (XXI);
2248 (S-V); 2324 (XXII); 232.5 (XXII); 2372 (XXII); and
2403 (XXIII) and Security Council resolutions 245 and
246 of 1968;
“7. Invites all States to exert their influence in order
to obtain compliance by the Government of South Africa
with the provisions of the present resolution;
“8. Decides that in the event of failure on the part of
the Government of South Africa to comply with the
provisions of the present resolution, the Security Council
will meet immediately to determine upon necessary steps
or measures in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations;
“9. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
the implementation
of the present resolution and to
report to the Security Council as soon as possible;
“10. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.”
34. We have called for this meeting because we feel that it
is incumbent upon this Council to examine this important
question seriously and be actively seized of it, in view of
the two recommendations that have been made by the
General Assembly and also in fulfilment of the decisions of
the Organization of African Unity. The draft resolution I
have just submitted falls far short of our demands, but it
contains some positive elements which advance the question a little further than has been done before. We have had
to draw a sharp and painful distinction between what we
want and what is possible to achieve, given the delicate
balance of power in this Council. This draft resolution is
what we have been able to achieve. I wish to thank all the
delegations who have rendered their advice and support in
the preparation and submission of the draft resolution.
35. Members of the Council will agree that the very fact
that it has been possible to convene this meeting is
indicative of the seriousness with which the rape of
Namibia by South Africa is viewed by the Council.
36, Let me now turn briefly to some of the main elements
of the draft resolution. It is not my intention to dwell on

the parts of the preamble as their import has been spelt cut
in the formulation of previous resolutions and (decisions,l
am, however, convinced that this Council would have failed
in its duty if it did not impress upon South Africa that w
shall not tolerate any longer its extremely regrettable
attitude that the Council is a mere talking chamber. 11ia
necessary for us to indicate in no uncertain ter,ms that \VI?
intend to honour the Council’s previous resolutions en
Namibia, towards which the Council has a special rcspcrr&
bility; for unless South Africa understands that, I fai1 to see
how it could be expected to treat any future decisions ol’
this Council with the seriousnessthat they deserve.
37. Paragraph 1 of the operative part of the draft rcsolu.
tion is important and necessary if the Council is to en&
the confidence of the General Assembly and the world
community as a whole. Such a recognition, in our view.
would also serve to emphasize to South Africa that it haa
no right to administer Namibia. Besides, it would be
complementary to previous resolutions of this Council OR
Namibia.
38, Paragraph 2 is a logical sequel. We should have liked IU
have stated categorically the truth that South Afrirsf
continued stay in Namibia is an act of aggression and.
therefore, a threat to international peace and security.
While we have had to accommodate the feelings of cettnin
members who are averse to the idea of an inevitable
confrontation with South Africa, we found it necessarylo
try to advance on such little progress as we have been able
to achieve previously.
39. Paragraph 3 introduces no new elements 1:o the qu
tion, the call having already been made by .the General
Assembly. We are aware that South Africa has alrcedy
embarked on a divisive programme of creating Bantustnnsr
in Namibia. We feel that such a programme, apart frsaz
being illegal, is fraught with danger, It is designed lc
weaken the national unity and the detemrination el
Namibians who have ranged themselves against the forcesaxB
occupation,
40. We attach great importance to paragraph 5. In d&
ante of the General Assembly and the Security Council, the
South African Government, on 5 February 1969, tablcrt 1
bill in Parliament the purpose of which is the fonnJ
annexation of Namibia, The bill, when enacted, will divc%l
the present illegal Legislative Assembly in Windhoek Or iL%
authority to legislate in African affairs, including Afric
education, justice and prisons, companies, mining, agdcd
ture and forestry, labour, and several other fields.
levying of taxes has also been affected. Thus, a fo
country, South Africa, through its own Parliame
deciding to wrest even the vestiges of authority which lhs
representative Legislative Assembly .of what was fOrf?I&
known as South West Africa has hitherto enjoyed. It rrlu:l
sound ironical that we should make this call while WCsE
asking South Africa to get out, but it will be ai measure 5
our concern that we should ensure that South Africa d
not introduce any further legislation designed to a
the economic and political situation in that inter
Territory, This piratical action on the part of Sout
is tantamount to a sack of Namibia and sho
condemned vigorously.

41. The invitation in paragraph,7 should raise no diffculties and should be seen as consistent with this Council’s
attitude on previous resolutions on Namibia.

Rights, then we have a duty to take these measures and
take them now.
46. It is a matter of grave concern that while the United
Nations is trying to lay the foundation for the ultimate
independence of Namibia, South Africa not only continues
to occupy the Territory illegally but also embarks on a wild
legislative programme whose obvious end would be the
annexation of Namibia. Reports reaching us have already
indicated that the illegal act of annexation is contemplated
for April 1969. Members of this Council will readily agree
that such an action would be illegal even in the context of
the former Mandate,

42. The remaining paragraphs are designed to ensure that
the Council, having regard to South Africa’s defiance so far,
and in view of the seriousness of the situation, has a course
of action to take in the event of further refusal by South
Africa to comply with Security Council decisions.
43. I wish to emphasize that, in our view, paragraph 8
does not entirely exclude the application of Chapter VII.
The demands of compromise have militated against the
definition of such action, but it is readily accepted that this
was a question of having the art of the possible.

47. To my mind there are very few situations which
demand more immediate attention than that of Namibia
today. For while we drift from one resolution to another,
the racist minority oppressors in Pretoria have balkanized
Namibia into tribal confederations on the Bantustan
pattern. Whole populations have been moved from their
ancestral homes into semi-desert parts of the Territory,
exclusively in the interests of the alien white minority. As
one would expect, brute force has been used to achieve
these inhuman objectives. The result is that already within a
few weeks there are 2,000 refugees in Zambia who have
fled Namibia following this external aggression by South
Africa. The last wave of refugees-men, women and
children-is, of course, in addition to the many thousands
who have been fleeing over the years. A turbulent population movement has therefore taken place, the social and
political consequences of which will immensely exacerbate
the difficulties in the way of the Council for Namibia, the
United Nations and the Security Council itself.

44. It will be recalled that by its resolution 2145 (XXI),
the General Assembly of the United Nations terminated the
Mandate of South Africa and assumed direct responsibility
until that country attained its independence. That momen‘tous decision was not reached out of spite towards the
Government of South Africa, nor was it taken out of a
mere desire by the United Nations to exercise its rights over
Namibia for the sake of it; rather, the international
community as represented in the United Nations arrived at
that decision upon the sad realization that South Africa had
violated all the provisions of the Mandate in its administration-or, to be more precise, its maladministration-of
what
is now Namibia. I do not have to remind the Council of the
innumerable and exhaustive efforts, going back to 1946,
made by the United Nations and designed to remind South
Africa of its obligations. Year in and year out South Africa
has not only defied world opinion, but has also steadily
increased and tightened its repressive regime of laws on the
Territory. It has denied the indigenous people of the known
freedoms, including the right to self-determination, by
applying its obnoxious policy of apartheid. It has turned
them into second-rate citizens, a class outside the pale of
political and social justice. It was under these circumstances
that the General Assembly acted on 27 October 1966
[resolution 2145 (XXI)J. The following year, the Council for
Namibia was established to discharge the responsibility of
the United Nations over Namibia. That Council took up the
challenge’immediately,
but, as its reports of the last two
years show, the Council has been prevented from discharg
ing its functions in the Territory by the refusal of the
Government of South Africa to comply with the terms of
resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-V) of the General
Assembly. The recalcitrant posture of the Pretoria regime
over this question has been reflected by South Africa’s
performance in and reactions to the decisions of the
General Assembly, its refusal to co-operate with the
Council for Namibia and its rejection of the decisions of the
Security Council. The racists of South Africa have turned
the decisions of the. United Nations and the Security
Council into the most gigantic and hilarious’bluff of our
time. We here have a responsibility to take appropriate,
corrective and meaningful measures to arrest this disgraceful trend,

48. There is another grave aspect of this matter to which I
should like to refer, which further strengthens the casefor
immediate action by the Security Council, It will be
recalled that even before 1966 the oppressed peoples of
Namibia, like their counterparts in South Africa itself
decided to embark on a struggle of liberation for their
motherland. That struggle has become intense and will
continue to grow until the goal of independence is
achieved. The South African regime, in the face of this
dangerous situation’ of its own creation, has consistently
refused to recognize the absurdity and futility of its policy;
instead, it has embarked on a hugr. programme of military
preparedness.
49. During the period 1966-1968, South Africa’s military
expenditure of $406 million was as large as my country’s
total budget. That figure was almost seven times that of its
military expenditure during the year 1960-1961. In addition, South Africa continues to spend colossal sums, of
money on its police force. These preparations have, been
made with a view to continuing its occupation and soon to
defending its illegal annexation of Namibia. South Africa’s
military ventures have already split beyond the borders of
Namibia, for within this decade we saw that country
shamelessly. recruiting and helping finance mercenaries who
went to attack the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Of
late, it has committed aggression against the State and
people of Zimbabwe without provocation whatsoever.
South African soldiers have crossed into Zambia from
Namibia, terrorizing unarmed civilians while South African
air force planes have deliberately violated our air space.

45. If we believe in democracy, if we cherish social justice
and equality, if we indeed lend our support to the principle
of self-determination, if we believe in the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human
5

50. Thus, in this unfolding situation, Namibia has already
been used as a launching pad for South Africa’s acts of
aggression against Zambia. The Pretoria rkgime has made
serious threats of aggression against my country, and
saboteurs financed from Pretoria are desperately trying to
harm our national economy.
51. It is unrealistic to talk of peace and stability in the
African continent unless the major problem of race is
resolved. Race and its twin sister colour threaten the peace
and stability of the African continent. Confrontation based
on colour will be the major factor in international
unsettlement
in the rest of the twentieth century as
ideology and the cold war have been in its first half. The
spectre of a racial conflict on a global scale and the
consequences for the world, cannot be but frightening for
all peace-loving nations. Yet this is what South Africa and
the white totalitarian regimes present in Namibia, South
Africa, Rhodesia, Angola and Mozambique, where millions
of peace-Iovirig human beings are still the subject of rule by
force against their will, exercised by racist minorities for
their own ends, but to the detriment of the majority. The
process of decolonization and democratization which has
brought about the indepenqence of hundreds of millions of
Africans has now run into a full gale of racialism and
economic self-interest in Africa, south of the Zambesi river.
52. What is the nature of the conflict in southern Africa,
one may ask? In our view, first of all, it is one of colour, A
few thousand white immigrants found themselves in the
midst of a black inhabited country; different in culture and
feeling different from the indigenous race, they could not
look elsewhere for the defence of their interests but within
their social cultural group for strength-their
would-be
protective umbrella, the country of origin not being
prsctically within reach. Secondly, religious fanaticism
based on certain miscoficeptions about the nature of man
became a unifying force within the white community, a
community of the chosen with a destiny which only the
white people are privileged to have. An appeal to race
superiority, to the concepts of master and slave, of the
Christian and the heathen, to Western civilization and its
undefined opposite-all
these form rallying points in the
maintenance of the status quo in that area; it is a source of
unity which feeds the undercurrent of fear of competition
from the majority for economic and political control if
principles of democracy and the fundamental human rights
are to be respected, This is the third aspect of the conflict,
it is the factor which has made the struggle brutish, severe,
prolonged and complex. What began as a very severe form
of discrimination, segregation and separation is now official
apartheid which through a variety of d&ices has enabled
the three million bloodthirsty whites of South Africa to bar
by every possible means including brutal force the economic, social and political advancement of the people of
Namibia.
53. Fear of competition from the majority, the fate of the
poor white-was partly the main reason for the discrimination and apartheid; but since then, it has also turned into a
ruthless struggle for the survival of the white race. The
result is a chain reaction of fear breeding fear, suspicion,
prejudice, hatred, and then as the screw of apartheid is
tightened, the inevitable racial explosion must occur which

will make Viet-Nam look like a child’s picnic. Through a
blind obsession, the South African authorities have defied
and prevented all moral, legal and scientific argumen,ts to
sanction white superiority.
54. Apartheid is thus a dangerous rationalization of an
instrument protectionist in purpose, but defeatist in fact
and destructive in the final analysis. This is the nature of
the counter force met by decolonization to which we as
members of the Security Council have a special and direct
responsibility; this is the counter force over which the
United Nations must prevail if only to reduce the area of
tension, I should like to state categorically that the
accelerating fanaticism ofapartheid would not have been as
successful as it has been, were it not for the overt and open.
support and the confidence which the white totalitarian
rdgime has received mainly from the Western Powers which
have poured in investment capital in thousands of millions
of pounds, as well as expanded their trade with the racist
r6gime.
55. How many resolutions have been adopted by the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the Trusteeship Council in our effort to correct the present course in
South Africa’s political, social and economic development?
How many draft resolutions have failed to go througlh as a
result of opposition, open or covert, by Western :major
Powers? The attribute of the Western major Powers can
best be described as one of prohibitive procrastination in
the interests of white majority rkgirnes.
56. The situation in Namibia is so terrible, so inhuman,
that ordinary Europeans and Americans would recoil in
horror if they learned the truth of what is being perpe.trated
against African men and women-against ordinary people
like themselves-who have the same hopes, fears, tensions
and needs.
57. It is not enough for those with cosmopolitan interests
simply to declare their commitment to the principles of
democracy; it is not enough for those possessingthe power
and the means to resolve situations and reduce world
tensions simply-and I quote the Preamble to the IJnited
Nations Charter-“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and woith of’the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large and
small.” The major Powers must be committed to principles,
both by verbal declarations and by deeds. There is need to
demonstrate such commitment in practice.
58. Those in positions of leadership of this generation
must have the courage to exercise not only paramount but
responsible authority over the affairs of their fellow men.
Leadership, to be worth exercising and asserting, must be
genuine, responsible, and in the interest of those over
whom it is being exercised. Leadership without wider
morality is brutal leadership, and is not worthy of the
human society. Those who lead our world must be told, in
no uncertain terms, that succ&sful leadership does not call
only for political ingenuity and clever manipulation of
awkward situations, nor the scoring of diplomatic victories
and the inflicting of defeats; it calls, above all, for the
mustering of all moral stamina, courage, honesty, and a
dedication to face the truth and to shape and steer the ship

-

of humanity perpetually on its proper course to safety,
stability ‘and -peace .for the progress and happiness of all.
Never before in history have these qualities of leadership
been more in demand than today when the world is so
delicately balanced between survival and destruction.

forum with blustering, and unfortunately hollow, statements?
64. Of course, Mr. Ambassador, our two delegations do
maintain close and cordial relations by reason of the special
ties which have linked our two countries for centuries past.
Adding a personal note, however, I would say that since I
came to the United Nations, you have always shown me the
greatest consideration, which has touched me deeply, and it
is a pleasure for me today to pay a personal tribute to your
candour, courtesy and kindness. I trust that the efforts you
are still pursuing within the framework of the Council will
soon result in a peaceful settlement of the problem which is
of concern to us all,

59. I am sorry to have spoken at such length on this
matter, but the gravity of this whole question demands that
while we debate the aggravating situation in Namibia I
should warn the Council of this obvious threat to intemational peace and security, We, like several other Members,
have time and again pointed out that the Security Council
should energetically address itself to the whole question by
summoning all the resources and power at its command. So
far, we have moved at a snail’s pace. The draft before us
carries us only a little further; and after what I have said,
and given South Africa’s almost traditional defiance, we
should have liked the provisions of Chapter VII to come
into immediate play. But we are realistic enough to
recognize the social, political and economic structure of the
international community. Desirous to maintain a wider
measure of agreement, and in the hope that this Council
will move with unanimity, as was the case during its last
meeting early this year, we have decided to give full support
to the present draft resolution, despite its inadequacies. The
just struggle of the people of Namibia must and will go on
to the bitter end. My country is irrevocably committed to
this cause, and will continue to render moral and material
support to the people of Namibia in their just struggle for
independence,

65. Yet, however urgent and explosive this problem may
be, we ‘must not on that account forget another problem
which will, in due course, become explosive unIess we
shoulder our responsibilities now. You see, certain dramatic
international developments are now teaching us how
important it is to shoulder one’s responsibilities-and all
one’s responsibilities-as soon as a serious situation affecting the freedom and the inalienable rights of man arises.
66. The question which we are considering today brings
into prominence a series of violations of human rights and a
denial of human dignity.
67. Let us remember that the prime cause of nearly all
wars, and particularly of the Second World War, has been
violations of human rights and, subsequently, of the right
of peoples to self-determination.

60. I formally present the draft resolution I have just read
out on behalf of the Afro-Asian and Latin American
delegations of Paraguay, Colombia, Senegal, Pakistan, Nepal
and Zambia.

68. What is involved in the caseof Namibia?
69. Quite simply the outright annexation of the Territory
of Namibia, by South Africa, despite the relevant decisions
of the United Nations. The component elements of this act
of annexation are to be found in a whole series of laws and
regulations adopted by South Africa. What are we to do
now? For our part, we should have liked the great Powers
to bring pressure to bear on the Government of South
Africa, with a view to inducing it to respect the most
elementary rules of international ethics. It seems, however,
first, that South Africa will not listen to reason, and,
secondly, knowing that it is economically powerful, particularly in monetary matters, that it ignores the wealth of
advice offered to it. We are therefore forced to come before
the Security Council to denounce the illegal acts of the
Pretoria authorities and their scornful defiance of the entire
international community.

61. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I thank
the representative of Zambia for his good wishes to me, I
have also noted that a draft resolution has been submitted
to the Security Council for its consideration and that it will
shortly be circulated as a document.3
62. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated j?om l+ench):
Mr. President, just as you were nearing the end of your
term as President of the Security Council during what was
apparently a fairly uneventful month, we are now obliged
to impose on you public meetings, and perhaps numerous
private consultations, However, being well acquainted with
your courtesy, kindness and sense of responsibility, we
know in advance that, even if there is disagreement with
you on some points, you will direct our debates impartially
and with fairness. We are gratified to see you presiding over
this Council.

70. Who are these authorities and what are they doing?

63. Last month, our distinguished colleague Ambassador
Armand Berard presided over the Council with his legendary discretion and vigour. Although there were no public
meetings, we all know how active Ambassador Berard was
in a matter which is commanding the full attention of all
the leading figures in our Organization. Is it not better,
after all, in many circumstances, to engage in private
consultations, exchanges of views and a dialogue in order to
arrive at practical results than to stage a display in a public

71. We know that during the Second World War the
present Prime Minister of South Africa was a member of a
branch of the Nazi Party in the Union’ of South Africa. He
was placed under house arrest at that time because of his
Nazi ideas. It is, therefore, no surprise that the people of
Namibia are daily subjected to the most humiliating and
degrading treatment.
72. These are not gratuitous accusations; for I like to have
a factual basis before making any final judgements. The sad

3 Later circulated as document S/9100,

7

merit, of a society on a ,biologically motivated cc
ethics. Such an approa&Kis contrary to our univer:
outlook. For that reason, we find it natural thai,
conscious of their human attributes, should rise
Namibia, as in South Africa, against the Afrikane
theoreticians of racist doctrine.

realities of SOI,& Africa and Namibia have been brought
home to me in other United Nations bodies. I have been to
the areas bordering on those countries; I have listened to
men, freedom fighters, who succeeded, at the’ risks of their
lives, in escaping from those concentration camps. Therefore I feel bound to say that it is time for the entire
international community-and
particularly the permanent
members of the Security Council-to shoulder its responsibilities, because the situation in Namibia, as in South
Africa, is dally becoming more serious. The system of
apartheid is being progressively introduced there and some
South African laws, such as the Terrorism Act and the
Suppression of Communism Act, are being applied there.

77. The situation now existing in that southern J
Africa is, we affirm, a serious threat to international
and security.
78. The Security Council must unequivocally dernti
unconditional and immediate withdrawal of South
from the Territory of Namibia, if we are to avoid ell
race warfare that could be disastrous to the WJI
mankind. We call on the United Nations, and parti
the Security Council and its permanent members, f
shoulder the responsibilities conferred on them
Charter, and to call on South Africa to dischs
obligations as a State Member of our Organization.

73. Yesterday a press report from Capetbwri informed US
that the South African Senate had approved a new law
transferring to the Government of SoutJ~Africa most of the
administrative and financial responsibilities hitherto vested
in the Legislative Assembly of South West Africa.
74. The most serious endemic diseases are allowed to
spread among the indigenous population. Immoral practices
are forced on them in the prisons. The family unit is
disrupted, heads of families being separated from their
wives and children, Those who, in Namibia as in South
Africa, have taken up arms in a desperate attempt at
self-defence in order to save their race from total annibilation are imprisoned, usually without trial, and executed en
masse in the central prison at Pretoria, We learnt recently
from the official statistics of the South African Department
of the Interior that 119 persons had been executed at
Pretoria in 1968 and about 100 in 1967, These figures,
huge as they are, are actually far below the total number of
persons executed in the central prison at Pretoria. As you
know, even in the countries with the highest crime rates, so
many people have never been executed in a single year. The
truth of the matter is that South Africa, whose wealth, we
should remember, is built on the sweat of the indigenous
inhabitants, is trying, if not to exterminate, ai least to
eliminate a good part of an entire race, after having debased
it and reduced it to the level of beasts of burden. In South
Africa, the indigenous inhabitants, who occupy only 13 per
cent of the total area of that State-and the poorest
part-are the ones who work in the’ gold-mines, We felt
compelled to mention these the most striking facts, so that
world public opinion might know of the tragedy of the
indigenous inhabitants of South Africa and Namibia,

79. If the United Nations is to continue to be the J
the peoples, if it is to guarantee world peace and secl
the Charter of the United Nations is to remain the F
States in their relations, then it is high time 1
international community to apply to this distressin
lem the solution which the peace-loving and freedon
peoples are awaiting.
80. The PRESIDENT (translated jimn Fknch):
the representative of Senegal for his over-generous :I
to the President.
81. Mr. KI-IATRI (Nepal): Mr. President, may I bl
expressing the appreciation of my delegation 1
distinguished predecessors in the Chair, Ambassador
son of Finland and Ambassador BBrard of France, a:
our full confidence in your leadership as the Pres:i
the Security Council for this month.
82, It is indeed gratifying that, for the first tJmc#
request of African-Asian Member States of the
Nations, the Security Council is taking up discussiam
substantive political question of Namibia. It was h.i
that the Council did so.
83, So far as my delegation is concerned, it ha:’
remainpd our contention that the possibilities
Security Council as the organ primarily responsible
maintenance of international peace and security s1
utilized with a view to giving effect to the
Assembly’s historic resolution 2145 (XXI) and sul
resolutions on the question of Namibia. It may be
that by resolution 2145 (XXI) the General A
terminated the Mandate of SO&J-I Africa over Sol
Africa, declared that South Africa had no other rig
Territory and decided that thenceforth South We!
came under the direct responsibility of the United

75. All this is an affront to our conscience and our beliefs;
for we would have liked to have seen a multiracial society,
based on respect for human dignity, existing in perfect
harmony in that part of the world. To us, the human
person is still the supreme moral value, in the hierarchy of
values. Human dignity is indivisible. It cannot be recognized
in one place and denied in another, because all men,
regardless of the colour of their skins, share one and the
same nature-human nature. It is clear that the Pretoria
authorities, disciples of that theoretician racist, Gobineau,
have made race the supreme value and that, to them,
biological qualities are worth more than any other values.

84. Nearly as important as this fundamental rest
resolution 2248 (S-V) by which the General j
constituted the United Nations Council for Namib
view to discharging the Organization’s obligations
the Territory. This was clearly a most logical folh
the decision to terminate the Mandate.

76. My country, which is headed by one of the greatest
humanists of our times, who has portrayed man in noble
terms, cannot accept the existence, in this age of enlighten8

85. However, the Government of South Africa, with its
usual arrogance, has refused to withdraw from the Territory. It has indicated no sign of desire to abide by the
resolutions of the General Assembly. As a member of the
Special Committee on Apartheid, my delegation is particularly and painfully familiar with the abject contempt and
ridicule in which the Government of South Africa holds our
Organization and all its decisions.

United Nations responsibility, it is our considered view that
because of its refusal to vacate the Territory, the Govemment of South Africa is guilty of committing acts of
aggression. This would bring the question of Namibia
strictly within the purview of the Council, and for that
matter, under Chapter VII of the Charter. If occupation of
a territory under direct United Nations responsibility does
not constitute a threat to international peace and security,
it would indeed be difficult to conceive of any situation
that would.

86. The Government of South Africa has not only not
withdrawn from Namibia, but it has introduced the
much-hated policies of apartheid in the Territory. It is
seeking, by means of oppressive legislation, to destroy the
national unity and territorial integrity ,of Namibia through
the establishment of Bantustans, and subjecting the indigenous population to inhuman atrocities, terror and imprisonment.

90, It is with this understanding of this question that the
delegation of Nepal hasjoined other Asian-African member
States in requesting an urgent meeting of the Security
Council. After drawing the attention of the Council to the
grave threat to international peace and security resulting
from South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of
Namibia, the letter from the African-Asian countries
requests it to take appropriate measures and actions to
enable the people of Namibia to exercise their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence.

87. One may wonder how the Government of South
Africa, isolated and condemned as it is by world public
opinion, can defy the decisions of,,the United Nations and
violate the intem,ational status of Namibia with impunity.
It is an ironic situation that while South Africa has proved
to be a chronic delinquent in the international community,
it has been receiving the treatment of a foster child from
major industrial, military and developed Powers, Member
States of the Organization. Champions and pioneers of the
cause of justice, liberty and freedom in their own respective
countries, those Powers appear to have failed signally to
lend their active support to the cause of freedom and
independence in southern Africa. This becomes apparent
when one examines the causes of failure of United Nations
endeavours in those parts of the world. The total lack of
interest shown by those Powers in serving in and co-operating with two important United Nations bodies actively
related to the problems in southern Africa, namely the
Committee on Apartheid and the Council for Namibia, is
also very significant.

91. It is up to the Security Council now to face the
problem squarely.
92. The representative of Zambia has submitted a sixPower draft resolution, of which my delegation has the
honour to be a co-sponsor. My delegation has given a great
deal of thought to this draft resolution. May I say at the
outset that my delegation is not entirely satisfied with its
provisions, in so far as the draft resolution fails to
determine the reality of the situation, namely, the continued, illegal occupation of the Territory, which constitutes
a threat to international peace and security, and wards off
any hint or suggestion of enforcement actions under
Chapter VII in the event of failure on the psrt of South
Africa to comply with the resolution? Secondly, the
operative part of the draft resolution evades resolution
2248 (S-V)-an important resolution, under which the
General Assembly decided to give effect to the Organization’s obligations by taking practical steps to transfer power
to the people of the Territory.

88. However well-meaning the motives of those Powers
may be, it is plain for all to see that their action-or lack of
action-is helping compound a situation which is already
tense and dangerous. Portuguese colonialism, the illegal
racist regime of Southern Rhodesia, the inhuman policies
based on racial discrimination in South Africa and continued violation of the international status of the Territory
of Namibia-these factors combine to turn southern Africa
into a hot-bed of tension. Conflicts in other areas of the
world may induce one to minimize the dangers of this
situation, but the Security Council, as the guardian of
international peace and security, cannot afford to close its
eyes on the strong possibility of the situation deteriorating
into a violent, long and bitter racial conflict which, once
started, may engulf a wider world.

93. In spite of these shortcomings, however, the resolution
does provide a cause for some satisfaction. It marks a vast
improvement on Security Council resolutions 245 (1968)
and 246 (1968), which formed the subject-matter of the
illegal trial of Namibian freedom fighters in Pretoria, and
which touched upon the substantive political aspect of the
question in their preambular parts only. Under the present
draft resolution, the Security Council would significantly,
for the first time in its history, reinforce the historic
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) by recognizing
the termination of the Mandate and the assumption by the
Organization of direct responsibility for the Territory until
its independence. Under this draft resolution, the Security
Council would, again for the first time, call upon the
Government of South Africa to withdraw from the Territory.

89. The situation calls for strong and resolute action on
the part of the Security Council, in particular its four
permanent members. The views of my delegation on the
role of the Security Council with regard to Namibia have
been made known at every session of the General Assembly
since 1966. Our position is based on our unqualified
support for the original resolution 2145 (XXI). Since under
that resolution South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia has
been terminated and the Territory has come under direct

94. For these reasons, believing as we do in politics as
being an art of the possible, my delegation has co-sponsored
the present draft resolution, in the hope that its adoption as
a starting-point will make it possible for the Security
9

102. It is true that the almost universal condemnation

Council to take further effective and logical measures, if
necessary under Chapter VII of the Charter, to give effect
to its own independent decision.
95,

The ~REXIDENT

(translated

from French):

expressedin numerous resolutions has resounded in Pre-

toria; that unwearying efforts have been lavished on the
search for ways of putting an end to this intolerable
oppression; that both the Secretariat and the successive
bodies charged with translating the will of the majority into ;
deeds have shown praiseworthy ‘zeal and sincerity; and that :
so many debates, so many votes, so many objurgations, 1
while raising in the hearts of black Africans hopes that were i
sometimes perhaps too high, at the same time cannot have
left unmoved those segments of a white majority whose
growing awareness must finally, we believe, triumph over
selfish prejudice. Nevertheless, all these efforts have produced only meagre results. The Organization’s actions have
thus far proved to be a poor response to a harsh and, I
might add, a complex reality. The debates at our last
General Assembly showed that the great majority of States
were becoming increasingly aware of these shortcomings
and wished to leave to our Council the task of seeking an
end to a problem the solution of which seemed as remote as
ever.

1 thank

be representative of Nepal for his kind words to the
President.
96. ML BERARD (France) (translated from fienchl:
Mr. presjdent, before I turn to the subject before us, may I
very simply but very sincerely thank the speakers who
precededme for the over-generousremarks they addressed
to me, particularly Ambassador Boye, whose words were
inspired by sentiments of friendship which moved me
deeply.
97. The requestfor this meeting of the Council, submitted
by forty-five countries, came as no surprise to the French
delegation.
98. When voting in favour of resolution 246 (1968), on 14
March 1968, my delegation indicated [1397th meeting]
that our country could not remain unmoved by an appeal
made in the name of humanity. Somewhat later, in its
statement of 27 May 1968 in the General Assembly, my
delegation stated4 that, if such were the will of the
majority, “we would be in favour of the Security Council
being seized of the problem of South West Africa”.

103. It is not, I believe, a secret to anyone that many
delegations have for months been considering calling for a
Council meeting. The reason why they did not carry out
this plan until this week is no doubt that thhsy were
understandably apprehensive about the kind of remedy we
might be asked to opt for. Their misgivings are justified by
the disappointments of the past, The lengthy debates which
resulted in the unanimous adoption of resolution
246 (1968) of 14 March 1968; the difficult negotiations
which preceded its adoption; the explanations of vote given
at that time, including those of the delegations that are still
participating in our work-all these clearly show the bounds
within which the Council can set its course of action if it
means to achieve unanimity among its members, or at least
obtain the significant majority that is essential in order to
bring pressure to bear on Pretoria.

99. It is natural that the Council should be concerning
itself with the situation in this Territory, especially as the
past year has unfortunately brought forth more discriminatory and repressiveschemesof the kind to which France
has always objected. The actions of the Pretoria Govemment with regard to the establishment of six so-called
separate homelands, the setting-up of an Executive Council
and a Legislative Council in Ovamboland, the removal of
indigenous people against their will, the continuation of
annexationist designs, particularly the introduction of a
“South West Africa Affairs Bill”, which the pressdescribes
as a major and perhaps decisive step in the process of
integrating the Territory into the South African governmental machinery-all these measures indicate the acceleration of an anachronistic policy which my delegation has
repeatedly and unequivocally condemned as contrary to the
obligations arising out of the spirit of the Mandate,

104. I for one have no doubt that unanimity can be
achieved if our Council, learning from experience, displays
a sense of realism and does not allow itself to be carried
away by propagandist considerations.
105. Are we not all even now at one in desiring an end to
the humiliation unjustly inflicted on so many Africans and
in wanting to restore our Organization’s prestige, which is
at stake in this matter? Are we not all even now convinced
at heart that the adoption of impractical resolutions and
the utterance of empty threats can only carry us further
from these goals?

100. The obstinacy with which the Pretoria Government,
far from promoting the legitimate evolution of the Territory towards self-determination and independence, is attempting to secureits domination over the people entrusted
to its charge by the League of Nations can only provoke in
them reactions of despair that cannot be stifled either by
the sentences of South African courts or by the police
repression which our colleague of Senegal, with great
lability of mind and heart, has just described so movingly.

106. More specifically, do we not feel that, confronted
with Pretoria’s machinations, we should reaffirm the
international status of the Territory? We all know that that
status did not terminate with the demise of the League of
Nations, that it cannot be modified unilaterally by the
administering Power, and that only the exercise by the
inhabitants of their right to self-determination can bring it
to an end. We also know that its continuance imposes on
South Africa obligations both towards the inhabitants,
whosematerial and moral well-being and social progress it is
bound to promote, and towards the United Nations to
which it is bound to render annual reports and to transmit
petitions from the Territory.

31. We must unfortunately admit that the United
ations, confronted almost from the day of its foundation
with a situation so contrary to the spirit of the Charter, has
lot fulfilled the hopes which the international community,
nd in particular the new African States, placed in it.
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
‘ssion, Plenary Meetings, 1663rd meeting, paa. 58.
10

1
i

momentous issues involved in the situation in the Middle
East. The satisfactory outcome of those consultations to all
concerned was in no small measure Influenced by the
judgement and skill which were brought to bear on the
situation by Mr, Berard, both as President of the Security
Council and as Ambassador of France.

107. It is clear that the Government of South Africa has
deviated from those obligations and that the new measures
it is imposing or planning to impose at Windhook are a
Violation of the commitments resulting from Article 22 Of
the Covenant of the League of Nations and from the
Agreement signed at Geneva on 17 December 1920. The
Security Council must most earnestly draw the attention of
the Prqtoria authorities to those defaults and call on them
to desist from such malpractices.

115. The Council is meeting today to deal with the
substantive aspects of the question of Namibia. The
groundwork for our deliberations was laid down by
resolution 246 (1968) adopted by the Council on 14 March
1968, and also by General Assembly resolution
2403 (XXIII) of 16 December 1968. Action by the Council
on this question. has been rendered imperative by the
developments which have since taken place.

108. If, however, we went much further than that, might
we not shatter the unanimity ‘mat seems highly desirable,
and might we not ourselves be deviating from the legal
propriety of which we should be the guardians?
109. The United Nations, as heir to the League of Nations,
cannot exercise powers in respect of the Mandate handed
down from the League, greater than those vested in the
Geneva organization, and it is doubtful whether the latter
could unilaterally have deprived South Africa
of its
Mandate over South West Africa.

116. What is South Africa’s response to General Assembly
resolution 2403 (XXIII)? Although the applicable descriptive terms have been exhausted, the truth remains that this
response is one of total defiance. Not only has the Pretoria
regime refused to relax its policies towards South West
Africa, but it has gone even further on its reckless course.

110. Moreover, one cannot but note the melancholic fact
that the action taken by the General Assembly in this
matter, far from having the effects expected by those who
advocated it, has done nothing but to precipitate what is no
doubt the very turn of events which they hoped to avert,
and that the efforts made to translate resolution
2145 (XXI) into deeds have been unsuccessful.

117. Once again ignoring the authority of the United
Nations, South Africa has embarked on illegal actions
which are clearly designed to divide the people of Namibia
into Bantustans and destroy the integrity of their Territory.
South Africa has forcibly removed Africans from their
homes in Windhoek to the segregated area of Katutura. The
sense of outrage felt by the entire membership of the
United Nations at this flouting not only of the authority of
the United Nations, but also of all norms of international
conduct, wasmanifest in the consideration of this question
by the General Assembly at its last session.

111. It will be recalled that the French delegation did not
vote for that resolution and has on several occasions
expressed its reservations concerning it. My delegation
would not be able to go along with the Council if it decided
to embark on a course that would obviously lead nowhere.

118. Not possessingthe necessaryauthority to enforce the
decisions of the United Nations, the General Assembly
could not but turn, as it did in resolution 2403 (XXIII), to
the Security Council to take urgently all effective measures,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter,
to effect the immediate withdrawal of South African
authorities from Namibia in order to enable Namibia to
attain independence, This was the voice of the overwhelming majority of the United Nations. It is to this voice
that the Council has now to hearken.

112. The lesson of past failures, and also, of course, the
inclusion in the Council of new delegations, especially those
which for reasons of geography, shared hopes and courage
in the face of other injustices have a feeling of kinship with
the victims of apartheid, give us occasion for reflection,
which we trust will be fruitful. My delegation hopes that
the points it has just made may provide the basis for such
reflection.
113, Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. Presi.dent, I should first
of all like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
Presidency of the Council. My delegation finds it appropriate that the question of Namibia should be considered by
the Security Council under your leadership. Having had the
pleasure of working with you since the beginning of last
year, I cannot but express my admiration for the courage
and eloquence with which you have consistently upheld the
cause of justice for Asian and African peoples. Your great
ability and skill and your formidable linguistic accomplishments have impressed all your colleagues. We are confident
that, under your guidance, our present deliberations will be
both harmonious and fruitful.

119. What can the Council do in this situation which holds
the latent danger of racial war, which is a challenge to the
authority of the United Nations and which clearly subverts
the fundamental principles on which alone rest our hopes
of easing tensions in Southern Africa? If we look for an
answer in the Charter of the United Nations, we shall find it
unmistakably in the provisions of Chapter VII.
120. But it is a basic limitation of the United Nations that
decisions can be meaningful only when they are taken in
agreement and harmony. Too often the imperatives of
consensus eclipse the demands of the situation. As all
members of the Council are aware, there have been
intensive consultations on the question for the last few
weeks. As a result, the draft resolution so ably introduced
by my friend and colleague, Ambassador Mwaanga of
Zambia, on behalf of his delegation and five other
co-sponsoring delegations, including Pakistan, is now before
the Security Council,

114. I should also like to take this opportunity to place on
record our deep appreciation of the wisdom and dignity
with which Mr. Berard discharged his duties as President of
the Council during February. Although the Council did not
meet last month, important consultations took place on the
1

121. In commending the six-Power draft resolution, 1
should, however, like to draw attention equally to its merits
and its shortcomings. It is clear that the draft text is a
considerable advance on the Council’s resolution
246 (1968) inasmuch as it addresses itself not to any
particular actions of South African authorities in Namibia,
but to the basic issue of the unlawful presence of South
Africa in the Territory. It considers that this presence is
detrimental to the interests of the population of the
Territory and of those of the world community. It calls
upon the Government of South Africa to withdraw its
administration from the Territory. It declares that the
actions of the Government of South Africa designed to
destroy the national unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia are contrary to the provisions of the United
Nations Charter.
122. The crux of the draft resolution lies, however, in
operative paragraph 8. We are disappointed that in that
paragraph the Council merely repeats the language of
operative paragraph 5 of resolution 246 (1968) instead of
going further. In this respect the present draft resolution
clearly falls short of the requirements of this situation.

Those words are even truer today. It is not that we refuse
to understand the hesitancies of the three permanent
members of the Security Council in this respect. But we
cannot see how this situation in the entire southern region
of the continent of Africa can be improved unless they
show themselves willing to do what is required and
expectedof them by the international community.
125. We appeal to the three members to act in accordance
with the human, moral and political imperatives of the
situation. This appeal is not based on any racial viewpoint.
Could anything be more demeaning to western civilization
itself than that a racist minority regime which boasts of
representing that civilization should continue its illegal
occupation of a territory whose international status is
unquestioned? Could anything be more anachronistic than
that this occupation should continue in a day and age when
respect for the right of peoples to self-determination is a
basic norm of international conduct for all civilized States?
126, I wish I could cite here reliable economic figures in
regard to Namibia. As we know, these are not being
released by the Pretoria r&me. But two facts are beyond
dispute. First, that regime disposes of enormous economic
resourcesin South Africa. Second, the Territory of Namibia
remains among those which are the least developed. And
yet South Africa’s acquisitive instincts are so insatiable that
it must forcibly appropriate the small portion of an
impoverished people to further enrich itself. It is not only
unjust and deserving of the world’s condemnation that
South Africa should rule and divide Namibia, that it should
fasten the yoke of the odious apartheid system on its
people: it is indecent, and indecencies have no place in the
order of the United Nations.

123. A warning was given last year. The warning was not
heeded. Surely it must now be followed by effective action
and not by yet another warning. But as I said before, in
such situations we can only move in unison if we are to
move at all. It is well known that three permanent members
are not willing to proceed to take the necessarymeasures to
compel South Africa to withdraw its unlawful authority
from the ‘Territory. The only redeeming feature of the
provisions of operative paragraph 8 is that action under
Chapter VII of the Charter is not foreclosed by the text.
Whether or not the Council commits itself to such action
now, we have no doubt that only sanctions can convince
South Africa that the United Nations has the will and the
capability to meet the challenge to its competence to
decolonize the Territory.

127. The PRESIDENT (translated ji-om I;Fench/: I thank
the representative of Pakistan for his friendly congratulations and his offer of co-operation with the Chair,
12% In view of the lateness of the hour, and after
informal consultations with the members of the Council, I
suggest that we should adjourn this meeting and reconvene
this afternoon at 3 p.m.

124. At the time we adopted resolution 246 (1968) I said
that in order to induce the South African Government to
respect the decisions of the United Nations, the role of
those permanent members that are in a position to bring to
bear decisive influence on South Africa would be crucial.

The meeting role at 1 p.m.

12
