80

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

pensionable remuneration of professional staff from
1 January 1956 onwards; all computati?ns necessary
to establish such percentage shall be earned out to the
nearest integer ;
( d) Benefits shall not, in terms of sub-paragraph ( c)
above, be decreased below the amounts established
without the application of this resolution, nor shall any
increase which may become due on or after 1 January
1967 be applied without the prior approval of the
General Assembly ;
II
AMENDMENTS TO THE REGULATIONS OF THE UNITED
NATIONS JOINT STAFF PENSION FUND

Resolves that articles III, IV, VI and paragraphs
3 and 7 of article VII of the Regulations of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund shall, with effect
from 1 March 1965, be amended in accordance with
annex V to the report of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board to the General Assembly and to member
organizations of the Fund for 1964 ;38 the amended
texts are annexed to the present resolution.
1407th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
ANl"'iEX
Amendments to the Regulations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pemion Fund, cffccthc I l\iarch 1965

Article III
(Validation of non-peusionable service)
Renumber the present paragraph 4 as 4 (a) aml add a new
sub-paragraph as follows:

"(b) If, during the period within which a participant i,
entitled to an option as provided herein, payment of a benefit
under articles V, VII, VII bis or VIII becomes due to him
or on his account without such option having been exercised,
he or a survivor on bis behalf shall be entitled to do so
under the same conditions as if he were still a participant."

Article JI'
(Retirement licnefits)
Replace the present text of paragraph 1 (b) by the following:

"( b) This retirement benefit shall be not less than whichever is the smaller of:
"(i) 150 dollars multiplied by the number of years of his
contributory senicc not exceeding ten; or
"(ii) One thirtieth of his final average remuneration multiplied by the number of years of his contributory
service not exceeding ten."

Article VI
(Commencement, suspension and discontinuance of disability
benefits)
Replace the present text of paragraph 7 by the following:

"7. When the disability benefit is discontinued and the
recipient is not re-employed by a member organization, the
recipient shall be entitled to the withdrawal settlement to
which he would have been entitled if he had withdrawn under
the provisions of article X at the date the disability benefit
began."

Article VII
( \ \ idow's (or disabled widower's) benefit)
Replace the present text of paragraphs 3 and 7 by the
following:
"'3. Gpon ceasing to he entitled tu a wid"w's lirndit by
reason of remarriage, the widow shall, nnkss the bcnctii
has lieen divided in accorclancc with par;igraph 7 below. lll'
entitled to a lump-s11111 payme11t equal to twice the annual
amount of her widow's bcnclit."

"7. Ii a deceased male participant or recipient of a
retirement or disabilitv benefit leaves more than 011c widow.
the benefit payable · under the present article shall he
divided equally among the widows. Upon the death ,,r
remarriage of one such widow, her share shall lie divided
among the remainder."

2123 (XX). United Nations lnternalional School
The General Assembly,

!-! avin,lJ runsidcrcd the report of the SecretaryGeneral41 and the report of the Advisory Committee on
.\drninistrative and Budgetary Questions on the United
~ations International School, 42
Noting the generous action of the City of New York
in agreeing to make available an appropr!ate site. for
the School, by a long-term lease to the Umted Nations
at a nominal rate, and of the Rockefeller family 111
making a gift of $1 million to develop that site,
Noting that the Ford Foundation has confirm_ed its
generous offer of $7.5 million to build and eqmp the
School on the new site, provided that the Development
Fund of $3 million is raised,
Noting that thirty-four Governments have joined
with private donors in pledging an amount of $1,237,700
to date,
1. Aut!tori:::es the Secretary-General to accept the
offer of the City of New York to provid~ the !Jn_itell
Nations with a suitable ~ile for the Umted Nations
International School ;
2. [lrfJCS :Member States which haYe not )'.et done
so to contribute promptly to the Development l•und for
the School under the terms of General Assembly
resolution 1982 (XVIII) of 17 December 1963;
3. Expresses again its appreciation to the Ford
Foundation and to other private donors who have contributed so generously to the realization of plans for
the School;
4. Decides to contribute $57,000 to the International
School Fund in 1966 to cover the operatiug deficit
foreseen for the current school year;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
text of the present resolution to the Mayor of the City
of New York, the Ford Foundation and other donors
and to the Board of Trnstees of the School as an expression of gratitude for the progress made in furthering the plans for the new School.
1407th plfnary meetin.r,,
21 December 1965.
1 1 !/>id .. T,l'e11ticth S,ssio11, Annexes, agenda item 86, documr11t A/6079.
1c lhd., document :\/6113.
