UNITED
NATIONS

A

General Assem bly
Distr.
GEHERAL
A/RES/45/60
15 December 1990

Forty-fifth session
Agenda item 58

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/45/7B0)]

45/60.

Scientific and technological developments and their impact

pn jnterngtiopgj sgcvrity
The General Assembly.
Recalling that at its tenth special session, the first special session devoted
to disarmament, it unanimously stressed the importance of both qualitative and
quantitative measures in the process of disarmament.
Noting with concern the potential in technological advances for application to
military purposes, which could lead to more sophisticated weapons and new weapon
systems.
Recognising that scientific and technological developments can have both
civilian and military applications and that progress in science and technology for
civilian applications needs to be maintained and encouraged.
Stressing the interests of the international community in the subject and the
need to follow closely the scientific and technological developments that may have
a negative impact on the security environment and on the process of arms limitation
and disarmament and to channel scientific and technological developments for
beneficial purposes.
Emphasizing that the proposal contained in its resolution 43/77 A of
7 December 1988 is without prejudice to research and development efforts being
undertaken for peaceful purposes.
Noting the results of the United Nations conference on New Trends in Science
and Technology: Implications for International Peace and Security, held at Sendai,

90-35903

2960Z (E)

/...

A/RES/45/бО
Page 2

Japan, from 16 to 19 April 1990, 1/ and recognizing, in this regard, the need for
the scientific and policy communities to work together in dealing with the complex
implications of technological change,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled "Scientific
and technological developments and their impact on international security"; 2/
2.

fwlly ggrggg that;

(£) The international community needs to position itself better to follow the
nature and direction of technological change;
(ti) The United Nations can serve as a catalyst and a clearing-house for ideas
for this purpose;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to follow scientific and
technological developments in order to make an assessment of emerging "new
technologies" and to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-seventh session a
framework for technology assessment guided, inter alia, by the criteria suggested
in his report;
4.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh session
the item entitled "Scientific and technological developments and their impact on
international security”.
54th P^gnary wggting
4 pgggwher i99Q

1/

See A/45/568.

2/

A/45/568.
