160

General Assembly-Forty-sec:ond Session
ANNEX

l. GUIDELINES FOR NA TIONAL ACTION
1. Ali Governments that have not airead y done so should endeavour
to prepare national shelter strategies at appropriate levels as an integral
part of their development strategies.
2. The national shelter strategies should take into account the multidimensional nature of the problem and fulfil and reflect the wide socioeconomic benefits of shelter development.
3. The national shelter strategies should also reflect the criteria of affordability and replicability, particularly for shelter for low-income
population groups; special attention should be paid to improving the access of the poor to land with secure tenure and appropriate building
materials, as well as to developing housing finance institutions that will
mobilize household savings and are responsive to the needs of lowincome groups.
4. Ali efforts should be made to involve, in full partnership, ali concerned governmental, non-governmental, public-sector and privatesector bodies, agencies and institutions at all levels and, in particular, the
communities and people concerned, in the planning and implementation
of national shelter strategies.
5. In the national shelter strategies, special attention should be paid
to the problems faced and capacities represented by marginalized groups
such as women and youth and disadvantaged groups such as the aged
and the disabled.
6. Governments should report biennially at the session of the Commission on Human Settlements on the progress made in implementing
the measures mentioned above.

11.

GUIDELINES FOR INTERNATIONAL ACTION

Ali United Nations bodies, specialized agencies and institutions
should support, as necessary, the Commission on Human Settlements
and the Executive Director ofthe United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habita!) in the formulation and implementation of the Global
Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000 and ensure that their relevan! country-specific activities are supportive of and co-ordinated with national
shelter strategies.
l.

2. The regional commissions of the United Nations should encourage and assist in the formulation of shelter strategies in their respective
regions and the exchange of information thereon, and the Executive Director is invited to make ful] use of contacts with Governments through
the regional commissions and their subsidiary bodies.
3. Ali countries in a position to do so and international funding agencies should give ali possible support to Governments in their efforts to
plan and implement national shelter strategies for the attainment of the
goals of the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000 and, within the
framework of an enabling shelter strategy, their endeavours to achieve
improvement in the shelter situation of their inhabitants, in particular
the poor and disadvantaged, and they should report to the Executive Director ofthe United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habita!) on
their actions in this respect.

42/192.

Tenth anniversary ofthe adoption ofthe Vienna
Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the continuing importance of the Vienna
Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development 76 in providing comprehensive guidance for the
work of the United Nations system in the field of science
and technology for development,
Having considered the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee on Science and Technology for Development
on its ninth session,77

76
Report of the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology
for Development, Vienna, 20--31 August 1979 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda), chap. VII.
77
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session.
Supplement No. 37 (A/42/37 and Corr. l).

Noting that 1989 will mark the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action on Science
and Technology for Development, and taking note of the
recommendation of the Intergovernmental Committee
that the General Assembly observe the anniversary at its
forty-fourth session, at a commemorative plenary meeting,'1 8
Recalling that the Intergovernmental Committee, at its
tenth session, will carry out an end-of-decade review ofthe
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action,
Conscious of the need to enhance the endogenous scientific and technological capabilities of the developing countries, and aware of the impact of new and emerging areas
of science and technology on the development of the developing countries,
Bearing in mind that the multi-faceted preparation of
the end-of-decade review of the implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action constitutes a challenge and
an opportunity to contribute to a forward-looking strategy
for incorporating science and technology in the development process,
1. Endorses the resolutions and decisions adopted by
the lntergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development at its ninth session; 79
2. Also endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1987/79 of 8 July 1987;
3. Emphasizes the need for careful and comprehensive
preparation of the end-of-decade review of the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action on Science and
Technology for Development, in 1989, taking into account the important role that science and technology play
in the development process, in particular in developing
countries;
4. Reaffirms the crucial role of the United Nations in
promoting and catalyzing international co-operation in
the field of science and technology for development, in
particular in developing countries, and in helping solve
global scientific and technological problems;
5. Decides to observe at its forty-fourth session, at a
commemorative plenary meeting, the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action on
Science and Technology for Development, and encourages the participation of distinguished professionals in the
field of science and technology;
6. Also decides that, in the light ofthe importance and
priority accorded to science and technology for development, the general debate on the question will be conducted
at its forty-fourth session in plenary meeting.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/193.

Preparation of the new international development strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter ofEconomic Rights and Du-

78 /bid., sect. II.A, resolution 1 (IX), sect. II.
79 /bid., sect. II.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the Intemational Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, and its decision 40/438 of 17 December 1985
conceming the review and appraisal of the implementation of the Strategy,
Concerned that the goals and objectives of the Strategy
remain largely to be fulfilled,
Recognizingthe crucial and urgent need for the reactivation of the economic and social developmen t process of the
developing countries,

1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with all the concemed organs and organizations of the
United Nations system, to provide information which
would be appropriate for the preparation and elaboration
of an intemational development strategy for the fourth
United Nations development decade (1991-2000), including that which would be relevant for the assessment of the
International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade, taking into account the
above-mentioned resolutions;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the information requested above;
3. Decides to consider, at its forty-third session, appropriate further action for the assessment of the Intemational Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade and the preparation and elaboration
of an international development strategy for the fourth
United Nations development decade.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/194.

Raúl Prebisch Foundation

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the important and valuable contribution of
Raúl Prebisch, first Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and former
Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for
Latin America, to the United Nations system, in particular to development and intemational economic cooperation,
l. Warmly welcomes the establishment in Argentina of
the Raúl Prebisch Foundation to promote the study of development issues, especially those which affect the developing countries;

2. Invites ali States and relevant agencies, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to support
the activities undertaken by the Raúl Prebisch Foundation
in the cause of development.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/195.

161

Consequences of the recent sharp ftuctuations
in the international financia} and stock markets
and the implications of those ftuctuations for
the development of the developing countries

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the recent sharp fluctuations in the
international financia! and stock markets and the possible
negative impact of those fluctuations on world economic
stability, growth and trade and on the development process of t he developing countries,
Convinced that strengthened multilateral co-operation
has a central role to play in preventing such a possible
negative impact and in promoting growth and development,
1. Decides to consider this question further in the light
of the relevant discussions of the Trade and Development
Board and other appropriate intemational organs and organizations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the appropriate bodies, to analyse in the
World Economic Survey 1988 the effects of these sharp
fluctuations on growth and development, in particular in
developing countries, and to draw this issue to the attention of the General Assembly at its forty-third session.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
42/196.

Operational activities for development

The General Assemb/y,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New Intemational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter ofEconomic Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/ 197 of 20 December
1977 on the restructuring of the economic and social sectors ofthe United Nations system and 41/171 of 5 December 1986 on operational activities for development,
Recalling further its resolution 2688 (XXV) of
11 December 1970 on the capacity of the United Nations
development system,
Reaffirming that the operational activities for development of the United Nations system are carried out for the
benefit of developing countries, at their request and in accordance with their own policies and priorities for development,
Emphasizing the need to keep under periodic review the
structures and modus operandi of the organizations of the
United Nations system in relation to their operational activities so as to ensure efficiency and responsiveness to the
needs and priorities of the developing countries,
Deeply concerned that the targets for official development assistance spelt out in the Intemational Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade27 have not been met, and stressing the urgent need
to strengthen multilateral co-operation for development
through, in ter alia, increased voluntary contributions to
the operational activities for development of the United
Nations system,
Emphasizing also the need for a significant, continuous,
predictable and real increase in resources for operational
activities for development to meet the growing require-
