VI.

231

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

----------------------------------- ------------------------B

I. Each of the crimes enumerated in article 3 and part A. paragraph 2,
of the present article shall be deemed to be included among the extraditable offences covered by any extradition treaty which has been or may hereafter be concluded between the States Parties.
2. If a State Party which makes extradition contingent on the existence
ofa treaty receives a request for extradition from another State Party with
which it has no treaty, it may, should it so choose, consider the present
Convention as the necessary legal basis for extradition in respect of the
crimes enumerated in article 3 and in part A, paragraph 2, of the present
article. Extradition shall be subject to any other conditions laid down by
the law of the State Party to which the application is made_
3. States Parties which do not make extradition contingent on the existence of a treaty shall recognize the crimes enumerated in article 3 and in
part A, paragraph 2, of the present article as extraditable offences as
between them, subject to any conditions laid down by the law of the State
Party to which the application for extradition is made.
4. The provisions of the present article shall not affect the principle that
the crimes in question must be prosecuted and punished in accordance
with the national law of each State Party.
Article 11

COURTS HAVING JURISDICTION IN SUCH CASES
Anyone involved in any of the activities enumerated in the present Convention may be tried by a competent tribunal in any of the States in whose
territory an act or acts to which the present Convention applies was or were
committed, or by such international criminal tribunal as ma} have Jurisdiction under the applicable legal rules.

Dl'RATION
The nrcsent Convention shall remain in effe,·t for a period of fifty years
folio~ 1,1g its ,·ntry into force_

39/142.

Declaration on the Control of Drug Trafficking and Drug Abuse

The (ieneral Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 33/ l 68 of 20 December 1978,
35/195 of 15 December 1980, 36/132 of 14 December
198 L 36/168 of 16 December I 981, 37/168 of 17 December 1982, 3 7/ 198 of 18 December 1982, 38/93, 38/98 and
38/122 of 16 December 1983 and other relevant
prov1s10ns,
Recognizing the concern that prevails in the international community about the problem of the illegal production of, illicit trafficking in and abuse of drugs,
Adopts the Declaration set forth in the annex to the present resolution.

IOI st plenary meeting
14 December 1984
ANNEX

Article I 2

Declaration on the Control of Dru11 Traffickin11 and Dru11 Abuse
ASSISTANCE FUND
A fund shall be established to assist developing countries affected by the
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances with a view to
combating and overcoming the causes of those phenomena and providing
them with adequate means of combating such illicit activities. The fund
shall be constituted by contributions from States which are Parties to the
present Convention on the basis of the method of assessment used by the
United Nations and by voluntary contributions.

l he General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the purposes and principles of the Charter of the

United Nations reaffirm faith in the dignity and worth of the human person
and promote social progress and hetter standards of life in larger freedom
and internat10nal co-operation in solving problems ofan economic, social.
cultural or humanitarian character,

Article lJ

( ·ons1dering that Member States have undertaken in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 209 to promote social progress and better standards of life for the peoples of the world,

GOVERNING BOARD
The fund shall be administered by a Governing Board composed of an
equal number of representatives from each of the States Parties.

Considering that the international community has expressed grave concern at the fact that trafficking in narcotics and drug abuse constitute an
obstacle to the physical and moral well-being of peoples and of youth in
particular,

Article 14

CONTROL
The States Parties agree to entrust the task of overseeing the activities
and obligations set out in the present Convention to the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs and the International Narcotics Control Board of the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations
Article 15

SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
Disputes relating to the interpretation, application or fulfilment of the
present Convention shall be submitted to the International Court of Justice
at the request of one of the States Parties to the dispute.
Article 16

SIGNATURE OR ACCESSION
The present Convention shall be open for signature or accession by all
States, whether they are Members or non-members of the United Nations.
without limitation as to time; it shall be subject to ratification and the
respective instruments shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.

Dewing to heighten the awareness of the international community of the
urgency of preventing and punishing the illicit demand for, abuse of and
illicit production of and traffic in drugs,
C·ons1derrng that the Quito Declaration against Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
of 11 August 1984 205 and the New York Declaration against Drug Trafficking and the Illicit Use of Drugs of I October 1984206 recognize the
international nature of this problem and emphasize that it should be solved
with the firm support of the entire international community,
( 'ons1derinx that the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the International
Narcotics Control Board and the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse
Control have made valuable contributions to the control and elimination
of drug trafficking and drug abuse,

Recognizing that existing international instruments, including the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961. as amended by the 1972 Protocol
Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic Dru~s of 1961, 207 and the
Convenuon on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, 2 8 have created a legal
framework for combating trafficking in narcotic drugs and drug abuse in
their specialized fields.
Declares that:

Article 17

I. Drug trafficking and drug abuse are extremely serious problems
which. owing to their magnitude, scope and widespread pernicious effects,
have become an international criminal activity demanding urgent attention
and maximum priority.

ENTRY INTO FORCE
The present Convention shall enter into force on the tenth day following
the date on which the twentieth instrument of ratification or accession is
deposited.

2. The illegal production of, illicit demand for, abuse of and illicit trafficking m drugs impede economic and social progress, constitute a grave
threat to the security and development of many countries and peoples and
should be combated b} all moral, legal and institutional means, at the
nallonal. regional and international levels_

209 Resolution 217 A (IJI).

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

232

3. The eradication of trafficking in narcotic drugs is the collective
responsibility of all States, especially those affected by problems relating to
illicit production, trafficking or abuse.
4. States Members shall utilize the legal instruments against the illicit
production of and demand for_ abuse of and illicit traffic in drugs and
adopt additional measures to counter new manifestations of this shameful
and heinous crime.
5. States Members undertake to intensify efforts and to co-ordinate
strategies aimed at the control and eradication of the complex problem of
drug trafficking and drug abuse through programmes including economic.
social and cultural alternatives.

39/143.

International campaign against traffic in
drugs

The General Assembl_v,
Recalling its resolutions 35/195 of 15 December 1980,
36/ 168 of 16 December 1981, in which it adopted the
International Drug Abuse Control Strategy, 210 37/168 of
17 December 1982, 37/198 of 18 December 1982, 38/98
and 38/122 of 16 December 1983 and other relevant
general provisions,
Recalling also its resolutions 36/132 of 14 December
1981 and 38/93 of 16 December 1983, in which it specifically acknowledged the economic and technical constraints
impeding many developing countries from combating the
illegal production of and illicit traffic in drugs and drug
abuse,
Noting the concern expressed by the Secretary-General
in his report on the work of the Organization,2 11 in which
he recognized the need for greater efforts to reduce the traffic in and illicit use of drugs,
Taking note of the Quito Declaration against Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs of 11 August 1984 212 and the New York
Declaration against Drug Trafficking and the Illicit Use of
Drugs of I October 1984 213 signed by a number of Latin
American countries, in which drug trafficking was considered to be a crime against humanity and integrated, effective and urgent regional and international action was
demanded, to be supported by the resources necessary for
successfully overcoming the problem,
Considering the activities of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the International Narcotics Control Board,
Appreciating the action being taken by the United
Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control in providing financial resources and support for integrated development programmes, including the replacement of illicit crops in
affected areas,
Reaffirming the need to improve and maintain regional
and interregional co-operation and co-ordination, particularly in law enforcement, in order to eliminate drug trafficking and drug abuse, and noting the growing interest in
regional and interregional co-ordination,
Concerned that, despite the significant national efforts
deployed for this purpose, including those of a number of
Latin American and Caribbean and Asian countries, the
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances
has increased noticeably,
Aware of the serious impact on the life and health of
peoples and on the stability of democratic institutions
resulting from the illicit production, marketing, distribution and use of drugs,
21 0 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1981, Supplement No. 4 (E/1981/24), annex II.
2 I I O.fficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. l (A/39/1).

Recognizing that. to root out this evil. integrated action
is required for simultaneously reducing and controlling
illicit demand, production, distribution and marketing,
Aware that action to eliminate the illegal cultivation of
and traffic in drugs must be accompanied by economic and
social development programmes for the affected areas,
Bearing in mind the desirability of programming activities for replacing illegal crops in such a manner as to conserve the environment and improve the quality of life of
the social sectors concerned,
Recognizing the dilemma of transit States which arc
seriously affected, both domestically and internationally,
by drug trafficking, stimulated by demand for and production and use of illicit drugs and psychotropic substances in
other countries,
Aware of the need to mobilize a co-ordinated strategy at
the national, regional and international levels, which
would cover countries with illegal users and producers and
countries used for transit in the world-wide distribution
and marketing circuit, in order to eliminate drug trafficking and drug abuse,
Recognizing the importance of ratifying and acceding to
the international drug contro) treaties,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 214
2. Reiterates that urgent attention and highest priority
should be given to the struggle against the illicit production of, demand for, use of and traffic in drugs;
3. Calls upon Member States that have not yet done so
to ratify the international drug control treaties and, in the
meantime, to make serious efforts to comply with the provisions thereof;
4. Reiterates the importance of integrated action, coordinated at the regional and international levels, and, for
this purpose, requests the Secretary-General and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to step up efforts and initiatives designed to establish, on a continuing basis, co-ordinating machinery for law enforcement in regions where
this does not yet exist;
5. Recommends that the highest priority be given to
the preparation of specific technical and economic cooperation programmes for the countries most affected by
the illicit production of and traffic in drugs and drug abuse;
6. Also recommends that appropriate priority be given
to the adoption of measures designed to solve the specific
problems of transit States through joint regional and interregional efforts;
7. Urges Member States with available resources and
experience to increase their contributions for combating
the illegal production of and illicit traffic in drugs and drug
abuse, in particular in the countries most affected and
where the problem is most serious;
8. Encourages Member States to contribute or to continue contributing to the United Nations Fund for Drug
Abuse Control so as to enable it to increase its support of
drug abuse control programmes;
9. Requests the Economic and Social Council, through
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, to consider the legal.
institutional and social elements relevant to all aspects of
combating drug trafficking, including the possibility of
convening a specialized conference;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
appropriate steps are taken to implement paragraph 5 (c)
212 A/39/407, annex
21 3A/39!551 and C\,rr.l and 2, annex.
214 A/39/194.
