S/PV.8802

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8802

nd meeting
Wednesday, 23 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jürgenson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2021/571)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-16489 (E)
*2116489*

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2021/571)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Angola, the Central African Republic,
Chad and Congo to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, President of the
Republic of Angola, and I request the Protocol Officer
to escort him to his seat at the Council table.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Central African Republic and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic; Mr. Bankole
Adeoye, African Union Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security; and Ms. Rita Laranjinha,
European Union Managing Director for Africa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/571, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ndiaye.
Mr. Ndiaye (spoke in French): It is a great pleasure
to be at this meeting to present to the Security Council
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
the Central African Republic (S/2021/571).

23/06/2021

President João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenco,
President of Angola and Acting President of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region;
the Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security of the African Union; the representative of
the current President of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS); and the Managing
Director for Africa of the European Union, as well as
the representatives of the Central African Republic
and Chad.
President Touadera and the signatories of the
political process have made a commitment to conclude
the electoral process by holding local elections at the
beginning of 2022, which should contribute significantly
to decentralized governance, local development and
the participation of all citizens in political life in the
interest of their respective localities.
I therefore urge Member States to continue to
support the Central African Republic in holding those
local elections, the last of which was held in 1988, by
contributing to the basket fund of the United Nations
Development Programme in order to cover the financial
shortfall, estimated at $10 million, and with the support
of MINUSCA. That will require maintaining electoral
support in the framework of the mandate that the
Council has entrusted to MINUSCA.
I remain concerned nonetheless about the negative
consequences of the military counter-offensive carried
out by the defence and security forces, bilateral forces
and other security personnel to eliminate the guerrilla
forces of the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement
(CPC). In central and north-western Central African
Republic, there is an asymmetrical war, with CPC
armed groups largely responsible for serious human
rights violations. That has resulted in an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis, with new waves of displaced
persons and 57 per cent of the national population in
dire need of humanitarian assistance.

I would like to begin by thanking Council members
for their continued attention and unanimous support
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). The Council meeting of 7 June (see
S/PV.8787) and the subsequent press statement
(SC/14542) attest to that.

It is regrettable to note that the extension of State
control over its territory through the strengthening
of the presence of defence and security forces and
the deployment of bilateral forces and other security
personnel, who are legitimately perceived by the
population as a rapid and effective response to the
threats caused by the CPC, have not had the desired
effect in terms of protecting civilians.

I also welcome the presence of the international
partners of the Central African Republic, including

Indeed, never in the past have violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, allegedly

2/30

21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

committed by the Armed Forces of the Central African
Republic, bilateral forces and other security personnel
and which were documented in detail in the areas under
their control, equalled the level of those documented
by MINUSCA and brought to the attention of national
authorities. That undermines any chance of building
social cohesion and establishing a relationship of trust
between the Government and its citizens; exacerbates
the marginalization of some communities; and leads
to the radicalization of armed groups given that those
same factors led to the unprecedented institutional crisis
of 2013. That is a new trend. If we do not pay attention
to it, it could destroy the meagre, hard-won progress
that was achieved in the quest for social cohesion and
national reconciliation.
The deployment of bilateral forces will be useful
and legitimate only if it contributes to protecting
civilians from the atrocities committed by armed
groups, enhancing the professionalism and effectiveness
of the defence and security forces in the framework of
security-sector reform, and ultimately putting an end
to the violence. The goal is to free women, children
and the civilian population as a whole from the terror
they are experiencing in order to create an environment
conducive to finding a lasting political solution to the
crisis in the Central African Republic.
It is regrettable to see that the number of incidents
of conflict-related sexual violence recorded in the
first quarter of 2021 is five times higher than in the
last quarter of 2020. The establishment on 4 May of
a special commission of inquiry to investigate the
allegations of violations of international humanitarian
law committed by the armed forces of the Central
African Republic, their allies and other security forces,
which MINUSCA had brought to the attention of the
Government, has certainly led to heightened interest.
However, the commission must be able to establish
specific responsibilities in an impartial manner and
draw the necessary legal and political consequences.
MINUSCA intends to continue to document
violations of human rights, which will be the subject of
public reports in order to preserve a frank, transparent
and constructive framework for dialogue with the
authorities of the Central African Republic. The
ineffectiveness of the chain of command and control
of the defence and security forces, as well as the
lack of credible interlocutors among certain bilateral
forces in a context where military operations continue
against the CPC, has led to some confusion, resulting

S/PV. 8802

in an unprecedented increase in and a continuation of
violations — which are not being responded to — of the
status-of-forces agreement. Indeed, there were 39 such
violations from February to June.
MINUSCA has often been confronted with
restrictions on its movement, searches of its vehicles,
harassment of and threats against its personnel and
violations of its bases by the national defence and
security forces. An example is the recent invasion of
our Bria operations base, in Haute-Kotto prefecture,
by the armed forces of the Central African Republic,
who arrived with the goal of forcibly taking gasoline
from our bases. The violations of the status-offorces agreement expose peacekeeping personnel to
unjustified dangers and jeopardize the security and
safety of the Blue Helmets.
Nor has the security context spared humanitarian
actors, who are working to alleviate a crisis exacerbated
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the violence
committed by the CPC and the operations under way to
counter it. The number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) has reached levels unprecedented since 2014.
Forced evictions of IDPs took place in early June in
the cattle-grazing area of Bambari, which is an area
protected by international humanitarian law.
While 57 per cent of the population requires
assistance and protection and 700,000 people are at
risk of famine, humanitarian workers were the targets
of attack 225 times during the first five months of 2021.
Looting and the militarization of civilian infrastructure
such as schools and hospitals hinder access, which
is already inadequate to ensure basic services. In
addition to compromising the protection of civilians
and humanitarian assistance, the current situation
is shredding the social fabric and harming efforts to
achieve peace and stability.
In an environment that is among the most dangerous
in the world, the humanitarian community provided
multisectoral assistance to more than 1.2 million
people in the first quarter of 2021, in particular thanks
to a civilian-military coordination that has been very
effective. However, the humanitarian response plan for
2021 had been financed only up to around 35 per cent as
of 20 June. Additional funding is necessary to continue
to support the humanitarian response throughout the
territory of the Central African Republic.
The frequent and deplorable use of explosive
devices also raises concerns and deserves the attention

21-164893/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

23/06/2021

of the Security Council. The situation is particularly
appalling because it restricts the people’s freedom of
circulation, hinders economic activities, including
agriculture, commerce and animal breeding, and
reduces the mobility of MINUSCA and humanitarian
actors. We have shared our concerns with the relevant
national authorities and encouraged the ratification
of the relevant international conventions that make it
possible to establish a system of prevention and combat
against this scourge.

We will continue to protect the civilian population,
support humanitarian assistance and maintain access
throughout the extent of the territory of the country. That
also applies to MINUSCA’s freedom of movement. On
that point, I would like to thank the Council for having
provided MINUSCA, through resolution 2566 (2021),
the additional resources necessary for the effective
implementation of its mandate, in an environment that
has become increasingly more complex, and ensuring
the security and safety of the Blue Helmets.

In this regard, it will be impossible for the
international forces to continue to operate alongside
MINUSCA
without
reducing
the
Mission’s
effectiveness. It is in that context that we are determined
to implement our mandate despite the challenges.
We hope that with the support of all the members of
the Council, appropriate measures will immediately
be taken to create optimal conditions to ensure the
effectiveness, efficiency and enhanced performance
of MINUSCA. That requires better cooperation among
the conventional forces deployed in the Central African
Republic and MINUSCA, with strict respect by all
actors on the ground of resolution 2552 (2020), which
related to its mandate.

Currently 40 additional elements of the Rwandese
formed police unit have already been deployed, and we
expect 300 soldiers from the Rwandan armed forces
to be deployed by the end of June or the beginning of
July. The Mission has readjusted its capacity to provide
shelter, and all sites are in the process of being finalized.
That reinforcement will make it possible, inter alia, to
enhance the presence of the Mission on the territory of
the country and strengthen the protection of civilians,
as requested by the people, and to ensure the safety and
security of the Blue Helmets in the face of emerging
threats.

MINUSCA received assurances from President
Touadera, who on 22 June convened a meeting on the
coexistence of internationally deployed forces and
instructed his military hierarchy to explore with all
actors possibilities relating to a modus vivendi and a
better coordination. We count on all members of the
Council so that this dialogue can lead to concrete results
with respect to the mandate and peaceful coexistence
with the deployed conventional forces.
MINUSCA is resolved to implement its mandate
and maintains a strategic high-level dialogue with
President Touadera, the new Prime Minister and the
relevant authorities to create conditions favourable to
the implementation of MINUSCA’s mandate. However,
the security of the troops and United Nations personnel
remains an imperative. I would like to recall that in the
north-west part of the Central African Republic, an area
particularly marked by the operations being carried out
against the CPC, a delegation led by my deputy, who
is present here, was fired at on 30 May. That incident
cannot remain uninvestigated, and it will not stop us
from discharging our mandate in that area.
A humanitarian team visited Bang, near the border
with Chad, on 19 June to deliver humanitarian assistance.
4/30

I wish here to condemn the campaigns under
way aimed at disinformation and at inciting physical
violence against the Mission’s leadership and the
personnel and property of the United Nations and of
certain international partners that have already been
stigmatized, with unpredictable consequences.
In addition to the revamping of the legislative
branch in early May, President Touadera initiated that
of the executive following the resignation of the Prime
Minister on 10 June. The efforts of the executive branch
of the Central African Republic in terms of bilateral
engagement have already led to positive results — for
example, in easing tensions with Chad following the
incident that took place on the border between Chad
and the Central African Republic on 30 May, and
averting a deterioration of diplomatic relations between
the two countries.
I welcome the announcement by President
Touadera on 10 June of the holding in the near future
of a republican dialogue in the country. In order to be
decisive and productive, the dialogue must be inclusive
in order to allow for the effective participation of all the
segments of society of the Central African Republic.
It should be noted that the national consultations have
already made it possible to consolidate the terms of
reference of the republican dialogue by proposing
21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

a nine-point agenda. In a constructive manner, the
recommendations made by the stakeholders during
those preliminary consultations have already helped to
ease political tensions, with the lifting on 31 May of the
ban on some democratic opposition leaders leaving the
country. The participation of the Coalition démocratique
de l’opposition 2020 in the national dialogue remains
possible despite its refusal to take part in the national
consultations. Its meeting on 16 June with the Prime
Minister is evidence of that.
The implementation of a peace agreement often
experiences setbacks. The efforts undertaken over
the past period to revitalize the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic bear witness to the viability of that instrument
for peace and stability in the country despite the
questions over its future that the formation of the CPC
has legitimately raised. The framework for dialogue
that it continues to provide must serve to implement
the commitments of the signatory parties. I see that as
a renewed opportunity to expedite the disbanding of
armed groups and the re-engagement in the Agreement
of those elements willing to disassociate themselves
from the CPC and renounce violence.
MINUSCA will continue to support the
Government, in conjunction with other international
partners, in implementing the Agreement, as well as
in its efforts to restore State authority, particularly
with regard to the capacity-building of the defence and
security forces. The assessment of the implementation
of the national security sector reform strategy has
identified priorities that will require the full attention
and involvement of the Government and coordinated
and clear support from international partners. Those
priorities include supporting the good governance of the
security sector, promoting democratic accountability,
restoring the chains of command within the defence
and security forces and improving coordination, at
both the national and the international levels. The same
assessment also points to the need to extend reform to
all security sectors, particularly water, forestry and
customs, which contribute to the protection of natural
resources and the generation of revenue for the State.
As reported to the Security Council a fortnight
ago (see S/PV.8787), the visit by the United Nations,
African Union (AU), ECCAS and European Union
(EU) delegation to the Central African Republic from
2 to 5 June highlighted a call for the normalization
of relations with international partners. President

S/PV. 8802

Touadera’s statement committing to take steps to
enable partners to fulfil their role to the best of their
ability must now be acted upon without further delay.
By meeting the Ambassador of the European Union
delegation and the Ambassador representing ECCAS
on 16 and 17 June, respectively, the new Prime Minister
gave a positive impetus to the new Government, which
should be in place within the next few hours, to continue
working with all partners.
Military operations against the armed groups of
the CPC will not be enough to restore peace, safety
and security. We therefore welcome the new impetus
that President Touadera is giving to the political and
peace processes. Such impetus is in line with his will,
as expressed to the joint AU-United Nations-ECCASEU mission. We must seize this new opportunity to
harmonize regional initiatives and encourage the
future Government to mobilize the support of all
international partners for the success of the inclusive
political dialogue and for the ownership and effective
implementation of any road map that may emerge from
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and ECCAS, with the assistance of the African Union.
I would like to welcome the important steps taken
by President Lourenço, who convened two summits on
the Central African Republic and who is also overseeing
the work done by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Angola and Rwanda to finalize the road map for the
settlement of the crisis in the Central African Republic.
That initiative has the full support of the United Nations
and MINUSCA.
Now more than ever, we need the Security Council’s
support. The conditions for implementing our mandate
have changed with new threats. In general, United
Nations peacekeepers and personnel are at greater
risk. Hate speech and incitement to violence against
MINUSCA, its personnel and the Central African
Republic’s partners have multiplied in recent months,
constantly fuelled and exploited by actors close to the
presidential majority. President Touadera has pledged
to put an end to that and to ensure respect for the
status-of-forces agreement. We await the fulfilment
of that commitment by the new Government, which is
already giving rise to great hope. Despite the numerous
challenges, there is an opportunity, supported by the
new future Government, in particular within the
framework of the Political Agreement, to restore lasting
stability, peace and development to the Central African

21-164895/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

Republic. For its part, MINUSCA stands ready to
uphold the principles and values of the United Nations.
The President: I thank Mr. Ndiaye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Adeoye.
Mr. Adeoye: I am currently attending the Berlin
Conference on Libya, and I deeply appreciate this
opportunity given to the African Union. I will be very
brief.
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. I would also like to emphasize that
this is my first time addressing the Council since my
election as African Union Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security, and I feel very honoured
and privileged to do so.
It is also important to know that the African Union
illustrates once again its commitment to the strategic
partnership between the African Union and the
United Nations in peacemaking and peacebuilding on
the continent.
As guarantors of peace in the Central African
Republic, we are ready to continue to work with
all stakeholders, including the United Nations, the
European Union and all bilateral and multilateral
partners to make peace a permanent feature in the
context of the Central African Republic.
Let me also use this opportunity to emphasize that
the African Union values the strong cooperation and
action by the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. In that regard, we highly commend
the able and resourceful leadership of the President of
Angola, His Excellency Mr. Lourenço, in his capacity
as Chairperson of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region. In particular, we wish to
bring the attention of the Council to the diplomatic
initiatives spearheaded by the Angolan President to
promote national reconciliation, peace and stability in
the Central African Republic. The actions taken by the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
are indeed complementary to the strengthening of the
African Union’s strategy of finding African solutions
to African problems.
As members are aware, I undertook a joint visit
to the Central African Republic with Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, earlier this month. We were able to do so
6/30

23/06/2021

in the company of the European Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
the United Nations. That made it a very important visit
because we were able to engage the leading players
and actors in the Central African Republic, including
the President himself, women’s groups, young people,
members of the majority and other political parties and
the mayors at the provincial level.
In the light of that event, it is important for me to
re-emphasize a number of factors and outcomes detailed
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/571).
First, we note the legitimacy of His Excellency
President Touadera following his re-election. We are
very pleased with him for appointing a Prime Minister
and for the ongoing process of the formation of a
new Government.
Secondly, our visit demonstrated the commitment
of the international community to the outcomes of
ensuring that the Central African Republic remains on
track towards peace and stability, knowing full well
that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) continues to play an important role in
stabilizing the situation in the Central African Republic.
We therefore stand ready to continue supporting
MINUSCA, along with ECCAS, the European Union
and the United Nations.
It is essential to condemn all actions by armed
groups, including the Coalition des patriotes pour le
changement, in the Central African Republic and we have
called on all those who have returned to fighting after
losing the elections to renounce violence and instead
move towards inclusive dialogue and reconciliation.
It is also important that the African Union
demonstrate the need to move forward on revitalizing
the peace process. We are committed to the full
and unconditional implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and denounce all violations of its
provisions. Moreover, the ceasefire must continue
to hold, and the good people of the Central African
Republic must remain engaged in the process of
achieving and consolidating democracy.
On the external front, we are committed to helping
the Central African Republic and its neighbours,
particularly Chad, to reach a compromise with regard
to the recent skirmishes along their shared border. We
21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

are very pleased that President Touadera dispatched
three of his former ministers to N’Djamena. We are now
beginning to see signs that the two sides will choose an
amicable way of settling their border dispute and issues
related to cross-border security and movement.
We must remain seized of the issue of peace in
the Central African Republic. As a guarantor, the
African Union stands ready. We have deployed military
observers to Bangui and we call on the Council to provide
logistical support to them, through MINUSCA, in order
to ensure that the ceasefire is fully monitored and that
the security situation remains stable in order to protect
the innocent people of the Central African Republic.
I am also pleased to inform Council members that
the African Union Peace and Security Council will be
undertaking a field mission to Bangui next week, with
the support of MINUSCA. We heartily congratulate
our brother Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye for facilitating that
visit, which will be a very important opportunity for us.
We must not forget to push to open up more space for
the political participation of civil society in the Central
African Republic, especially women’s groups and
young people, so that democracy and good governance
become entrenched in the long term.
Finally, allow me to conclude by once again stressing
the strategic importance of the United Nations-African
Union partnership for a positive impact on peace and
security on the continent in general.
The President: I thank Mr. Adeoye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Laranjinha.
Ms. Laranjinha (spoke in French): After my most
recent statement in February (see S/2021/187, annex III),
I am honoured to be here once again on behalf of the
European Union (EU), which, as the Security Council
knows, has been particularly involved in the Central
African Republic for years.
I would like to share our assessment of both the
progress made since then and the major challenges still
facing the country. Moreover, I had the opportunity
to talk directly with the Central African authorities
during the recent joint visit of the United Nations, the
African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS). Those messages were
also conveyed bilaterally by the EU.
Despite the threats posed by armed groups,
constitutional order has been maintained, the

S/PV. 8802

electoral process has been able to proceed, leading
to the re-election of President Touadera, and a new
Prime Minister has been appointed. However, many
challenges remain and the high expectations of the
population, including the minority communities, must
be met immediately. Urgent reforms should be rapidly
implemented. We look forward to close cooperation
with international partners and remain ready to provide
our support.
We also welcome the announcement that a credible
and inclusive national dialogue will soon be held.
That is the only way to find a lasting solution to the
crisis. The authorities must create the conditions for
the political opposition to find its rightful place in that
dialogue. The participation of Central African society
in all its diversity is also essential. The European Union
is available to provide advice, support and expertise as
part of its mediation assistance.
Lastly, we welcome President Touadera’s
commitment to the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
which is the only common and viable framework. The
effective implementation of the recommendations made
during its evaluation must be ensured by involving
all the signatories and in close coordination with the
guarantors, facilitators and partners.
A lasting solution to the crisis cannot be solely
military. Dialogue among the parties and the
re-engagement of all — the Government and the armed
groups willing to remain in or return to the process
after renouncing violence — is also necessary. It should
be accompanied by greater inclusion and a larger role
for civil society, especially women and young people,
and political parties. In that regard, we support the
renewed efforts of our partners in the region, the AU,
ECCAS and the International Conference of the Great
Lakes Region, and we encourage the harmonization of
the initiatives under way.
Despite these developments, I would like to
highlight several elements of particular concern that
continue to weigh on the current political situation.
Disinformation campaigns, pressure on the opposition
and the media, hate speech and incitement to violence
against partners such as the EU, France and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
must stop.

21-164897/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

23/06/2021

We welcome the public condemnation of
disinformation by President Touadera and the President
of the National Assembly, as well as the reaffirmation
of their attachment to cooperation with international
partners. But strong and visible measures are now
expected to bring that disinformation to an end
definitively and build mutual trust.

with the United Nations, the African Union and
ECCAS, as well as with all partners concerned,
including neighbouring countries. Out actions will be
taken in full transparency and we expect the same from
all friends of the Central African Republic. It is up to
the authorities to ensure that all actors are engaged in
the same spirit and to the same ends.

We are also deeply concerned about the excessive
use of force, which jeopardizes the authorities’
investment in promoting social cohesion and expanding
State authority, as well as the reported violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law, not
only by armed groups but also by the Central African
armed forces and some of their allies. Such actions
are unacceptable. We have noted the authorities’
decision to establish a commission to investigate those
violations and expect full transparency from them.
Those responsible for serious human rights violations
must be brought to justice.

The President: I thank Ms. Laranjinha for her
briefing.

We take this opportunity to express our full support
for MINUSCA, in particular in the face of the attacks
and access restrictions that it has faced in discharging
its mandate.
Those profound concerns and significant
expectations were expressed in a clear, strong and
united manner by the partners during our joint visit to
Bangui. Concrete actions and tangible gestures are now
expected from the authorities.
The Central African Republic remains an extremely
fragile country, facing an acute humanitarian crisis. The
entire international community must therefore remain
mobilized and united and continue to provide an urgent
and appropriate response to the pressing humanitarian
needs of the Central African populations.
The EU has been, is and will remain one of Central
African Republic’s closest partners, working for peace
and reconciliation, democracy and recovery. We have
recently demonstrated that by providing decisive
support for the elections. With all its tools and through
its multidimensional action, the EU is committed to
supporting the country on the difficult path of reform.
We will do so in the service of the Central African
population, through a respectful and demanding
dialogue based on trust with the Central African
authorities and on the basis of reciprocal commitments.
In all those efforts, we are more determined than
ever to continue close cooperation and coordination
8/30

I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of note by the President of the Security
Council S/2017/507, which encourages all participants
in Council meetings to deliver their statements in five
minutes or less, in line with the Security Council’s
commitment to making more effective use of open
meetings.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. João
Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, President of the Republic
of Angola.
President Lourenço (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): Allow
me to congratulate the distinguished Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Estonia to the United
Nations, Mr. Sven Jürgenson, on his assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June.
On 20 November 2020, the Republic of Angola was
elected as Chair of the International Conference of the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). During the two years of
its term, Angola intends to dynamize and strengthen
the ICGLR to face the challenges of maintaining peace,
security, stability and development in the region,
with the support of bilateral and multilateral partners
namely, the African Union, the European Union and the
United Nations.
The strategic plan of Angola’s chairmanship
is enshrined in the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region of 15 December
2006 and is guided by the principles of international law,
namely the Charter of the United Nations Organization
and the Constitutive Act of the African Union.
The security situation in the Great Lakes Region,
particularly in the Central African Republic, is
characterized by the active presence of armed groups,
of which 14 groups are signatories of the 6 February
2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

in the Central African Republic, six of them having
denounced the Agreement.
The Government of Angola recognizes that
international support is now increasingly important to
contribute to the Central African Government’s efforts
to ensure peace and stability in the Central African
Republic.
On 29 January, in Luanda, capital of the Republic of
Angola, we held an ICGLR Summit in reduced format
on the political and security situation in the Central
African Republic. In addition to Angola, the Summit
was attended by His Excellency Mr. Denis Sassou
Nguesso, President of the Republic of the Congo; His
Excellency Mr. Mahamat Idriss Deby Itno, President of
the Republic of Chad and Chairperson of the Community
of Sahel-Saharan States, as a special guest; His
Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President
of the Central African Republic; senior representatives
of the Heads of State of Rwanda and of the Sudan; as
well as the Chairperson of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) Commission and the
Executive Secretary of the ICGLR.
The Heads of State and Government renewed
their commitment to promote dialogue and continuous
consultation among political actors and civil society
with a view to bringing the Central African Republic
out of the current crisis. They called on the rebel groups
to observe an immediate and unilateral ceasefire and
to abandon the siege of the city of Bangui and return
to their initial positions, as well as to open the DualaBangui corridor to allow the free movement of people
and goods. They also tasked the current Chairs of ICGLR
and ECCAS to take the necessary steps, together with
the Security Council, in order to lift the arms embargo
imposed on the Central African Republic.
The Republic of Angola, in its capacity as
Chair of the ICGLR and in continuous consultation
with the Central African authorities, has brokered
political-diplomatic consultations with Cameroon, the
Congo, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Sudan with a view to collecting and sharing
the information needed to facilitate the process of
contacting key political and military actors.
On 20 April, the second Summit on the political and
security situation in the Central African Republic was
held in Luanda, which, in addition to the Heads of State
mentioned above, was also attended by President Paul
Kagame of Rwanda and representatives of the Heads

S/PV. 8802

of State of the Sudan, Cameroon and the Democratic
Republic of Congo. This summit was marred by the sad
news — received during the meeting — of the death in
battle of the President of the Republic, Marshal Idriss
Deby Itno.
During the proceedings, the Heads of State and
Government were briefed on the results of the political
and diplomatic consultations carried out with the
Republic of Angola on the political and security situation
in the Central African Republic that led the main armed
groups to commit to abandoning the armed struggle
and to joining the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme. It is fair to
acknowledge the role played throughout this process
by the Chadian authorities who contributed greatly to
the success of this mission. Political leaders welcomed
the results obtained and mandated the Government
of the Central African Republic to carry out the
implementation of the conclusions of the Heads of State
through a ceasefire so as to allow the establishment of a
favourable climate for peace and national reconciliation.
On the same occasion, the Heads of State and
Government urged the armed groups not to carry out
actions that might jeopardize the ceasefire, and they
called on the international community, in particular
the United Nations, to encourage the regional efforts
aimed at revitalizing the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation. The Heads of State and
Government further decided to establish a task
force led by the Ministries for Foreign Affairs of the
Republics of Angola and Rwanda to work to implement,
in collaboration with the Central African authorities,
the recommendations resulting from the consultations
with the armed groups. The summit also committed the
Heads of State and Government and other international
partners to achieving peace and stability in Central
African Republic within the spirit of the Republican
Dialogue road map.
It is in this framework that Angola immediately
sent its Minister for Foreign Affairs to Paris to brief
President Emmanuel Macron on the progress achieved
at the April summit, and, with the same purpose, the
Minister was sent to Addis Ababa, where he also briefed
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Moussa Faki Mahamat. In May and June, the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic, the
Republic of Angola and the Republic of Rwanda met
on three occasions in Bangui to adopt a proposed joint

21-164899/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

road map for peace in Central African Republic, which
defines the main activities to be developed.
All States have the inalienable right to create the
capacity to defend themselves against internal and
external threats by equipping their armed forces with
personnel, weapons and equipment that meet their
needs and capabilities, unless there are strong, objective
reasons that may lead the international community
through the Security Council to curtail that right. The
arms embargo authorized by the Security Council,
which makes it impossible for the Central African
Government to acquire weapons, was a measure taken
at a particular juncture, and it was appropriate and
necessary at that time, but the context is different today.
Years have gone by, and the picture has changed. It is
therefore unrealistic to believe that the justifications
for such measures in the past should continue to prevail
in the current situation. If we take into account the fact
that the current Government was legitimately elected
in the last general elections, and this was recognized by
the international community.
The Council would be sending a wrong message
if the international community that is working
towards disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation of members of armed groups is also
impeding the building of legitimate armed forces
capable of meeting the challenges of a troubled country
and a troubled region at a time when international
terrorism has moved its epicentre from the Middle
East to Africa. The situation is aggravated by the fact
that world Powers have decided to expel mercenaries
and foreign fighters from Libya without disarming,
assisting or repatriating them — a situation that can
exacerbate the proliferation of terrorism and increase
the threat to peace and stability in the Sahel region
and the countries of Central and Southern Africa. It is
imperative that States acquire the capacity to defend
themselves against this very real threat.
The army of heavily equipped mercenaries, which
travelled thousands of kilometres towards N’Djamena,
would have continued its destructive path had Chad not
invested in its armed forces. This confirms the idea of
the need for States to be strong in the fields of defence
and security. While the country counts on the presence
of personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and other forces on the ground to help the
Central African Republic train its troops and equip
them with weapons and equipment, the national forces
10/30

23/06/2021

must learn to stand on their own feet and be in position
to ensure their own defence and security when the
foreign forces finish their mission and withdraw. At
the same time, we consider it important that Central
African authorities work towards neutralizing the
negative forces that invest in weakening its relations
with the United Nations and influential members of the
Security Council with whom they have to work in the
spirit of partnership and mutual respect in the defence
of peace and security for our countries.
Based on all the foregoing underlying reasons,
the Luanda summit mandated the Heads of State of
Angola and Congo, the current Chairpersons of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
the Economic Community for Central African States,
respectively, to address the Security Council on behalf
of the States and the peoples of the two subregions
and request the lifting of the arms embargo that still
exists against the legitimate Government of the Central
African Republic. We hope that the Security Council
will start looking at this case with a new mindset and
offer greater justice to a country that is shackled by
a measure that is not in harmony with the prevailing
situation today.
The President: I now give the floor now to the
representative of the Congo.
Mr. Mouanda (Congo) (spoke in French): His
Excellency Mr. Denis Sassou Nguesso, President of
the Republic of Congo and Chairperson-in-Office
of the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), would have liked to have personally
joined his friend and brother, His Excellency João
Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, President of Angola and
Chairperson-in-Office of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), to give voice to
the strong concerns of the countries of the subregion
represented by these two organizations on the situation
in Central African Republic. Unfortunately, previous
commitments are retaining him at home, and I have
been asked to deliver his message to the Council on this
situation in the Central African Republic, to which he
remains personally committed.
“I would like to begin by expressing my sincere
thanks to the President of the Security Council
as well as to the members of the Council for the
opportunity afforded us to share with the Council
the strong concern of the States members of our
two geopolitical organizations — the Economic
21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR) — about the latest developments
in the situation in the Central African Republic,
a brotherly country, which has been shaken and
destabilized by decades of armed conflict.
“I would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the presence in New York of His
Excellency President João Manuel Gonçalves
Lourenço, with whom I am working on the issue on
a regular basis. His presence in New York during
the coronavirus disease pandemic to make heard
the voice of the ICGLR member States superlatively
illustrates his personal commitment to the Central
African Republic. At the same time, it reflects the
firm resolve of the community of countries of the
Great Lakes region, on whose behalf he is speaking
in his capacity as ICGLR Chairperson, to reiterate
their full solidarity with our brotherly country.
“The countries of the subregion continue
to work towards the full implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
through the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA). Our countries will
unwaveringly continue to work together with the
brotherly people of the Central African Republic
and its Government to achieve lasting peace in
strict respect for its sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and unity.
“Of course, the primary responsibility for
bringing about the necessary conditions to achieve
that end lies with the Government of Central
African Republic itself, in particular by focusing
on confidence-building measures aimed at national
reconciliation; ensuring the protection of the
civilian population, which is unfortunately paying
the heaviest price for the recurring armed conflicts;
and at the same time assuming the overarching duty
to protect the country’s territorial integrity.
“In addressing the worsening political situation
and the resurgence of violence that the Central
African Republic saw suddenly faced with last
year, I spoke out in no uncertain terms on behalf of
the States members, in my capacity as Chairperson
of the Economic Community of Central African
States, to condemn the shift away from peace.
In a public statement delivered on 24 December

S/PV. 8802

2020, together with my peers, I firmly urged all
stakeholders to prioritize dialogue and avoid any
action that could lead to renewed bloodshed in the
Central African Republic.
“Moreover, on the eve of the 27 December
2020 dual elections, the tenth extraordinary session
of the Conference of ECCAS Heads of State and
Government, held in Brazzaville on 26 December
2020, unequivocally condemned the use of violence
as a means of resolving conflicts and all attempts
to challenge the institutional order in the Central
African Republic.
“At the meeting, together with my brother and
friend His Excellency President Faustin Archange
Touadera, we adopted a series of concrete and
urgent measures to resolutely support the Central
African Republic on the path leading towards
stability and lasting peace.
“Today, in the light of current persistent
security challenges, MINUSCA acted on the
relevant decision by the Security Council to
reinforce the Mission’s troop strength and reiterated
the importance of the subregion’s commitment to
the political and peace process.
“We believe that we must be more proactive
in supporting the Government of the Central
African Republic so that it can better shoulder its
responsibilities as guarantor of the security and
the protection of its people and ensure the nation’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
“ECCAS is therefore relying on the wisdom
of the Council to adopt measures that take that
reality into account so that the defence and security
forces can equip themselves with the necessary
resources to address the situation on the ground,
while strengthening their operational capacities,
which are today largely limited by the embargo that
President Lourenço and I have regularly referred to.
“In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
firm commitment of the subregion to pursuing
the political and peace process in the Central
African Republic. ECCAS, which is one of the
guarantors of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
calls on the international community to support
President Faustin Archange Touadera with greater
determination in the struggle, particularly with

21-1648911/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

regard to his commitment to an inclusive republican
dialogue, which represents a decisive step towards
national reconciliation.”
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): The
situation in the Central African Republic surpasses
the most pessimistic scenarios that we imagined a few
months ago.
I will stress three critical issues — the urgency of
the situation, justice and reconciliation.
First, with regard to the urgency of acting to end the
violence, the situation in the Central African Republic
is abhorrent — extrajudicial executions, gang rapes,
torture and the military occupation of schools. The
violence is targeting Muslim communities in particular,
as illustrated by the assassination of a traditional leader
a few days ago. We are not talking about rumours but
well-documented facts.
People are kept in fear and living in inhumane
conditions. France condemns the violations of
human rights law and international humanitarian law
committed in the Central African Republic, as well as
the law of silence that has been imposed on the victims.
The Central African Republic has become one of the
most dangerous countries in the world for humanitarian
and medical personnel, with more than 220 incidents
since the beginning of the year. Almost 600,000 people
are at risk of starvation, owing to insecurity and the
increasing restrictions on humanitarian access.
Let us be clear. The armed groups of the Central
African Republic no longer pose the only threat to the
people of the Central African Republic. The reports of
the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic
(S/2021/87) and the Secretary-General (S/2021/571)
point to the responsibility of a new mysterious actor
that is operating alongside the armed forces of the
Central African Republic. Some will try to deny the
presence of the Wagner Group, but who are those men
involved in the fighting, in what capacity are they
present in the Central African Republic and to whom
are they accountable for their actions?
It is important that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) provide us
as soon as possible with more details about what is
really happening on the ground. It is also imperative
that the smear campaigns against MINUSCA and other
representatives of the international community stop.
12/30

23/06/2021

Our priority must be to protect civilians. That is the
principle underlying the reinforcement of MINUSCA,
which was decided by the Council and will begin this
summer. France calls on all parties to guarantee safe
and unhindered humanitarian access. France condemns
the increasing use of explosive devices and calls on the
Central African Republic to ratify without delay the
Ottawa Convention on Anti-Personnel Mines. France
calls on the authorities of the Central African Republic
and bilateral forces on the ground to comply fully
with their obligations by fully respecting the status of
forces agreement.
Finally, it calls on Member States with influence to
do everything in their power to achieve de-escalation.
France is also concerned about the attack on a Chadian
post on the border with the Central African Republic
that left several people dead last month. We commend
the authorities of the Central African Republic and
Chad for their willingness to shed light on that incident.
Given the situation and the risk of destabilization in
the region, it is clear that the spread of weapons is part
of the problem and that the complete lifting of sanctions
cannot be the solution. As we have already stated here
in the Council, it is clear that changes in the sanctions
regime must be part of an overall strategy that takes
into account the progress made on the political front
in the Central African Republic, regional efforts and
inroads made in achieving arms-control objectives set
by the Council.
Our second priority must be justice. Violence must
not go unpunished. I welcome President Touadera’s
commitment to prosecuting those responsible for
the violence and those who issue threats against the
United Nations. I also welcome his decision to establish
a commission of inquiry into abuses committed in
the Central African Republic. France calls for the
commission to work closely with the United Nations and
the African Union and for its conclusions to be followed
by effective prosecutions. The Special Criminal Court
will play an important role. It has strong international
support, including from France. Some abuses could be
prosecuted at the International Criminal Court.
Thirdly, reconciliation alone will bring about
peace. That was the message conveyed by the United
Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the European Union
during their recent visit to Bangui. We noted the efforts
of Prime Minister Dondra to meet with the political
21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

opposition as soon as he was appointed. It is an
encouraging first step. We hope that it will be followed
by the appointment of an inclusive Government and
harmonious cooperation with the international partners
of the Central African Republic.
I welcome the President of the Republic of Angola
to today’s meeting and laud his personal commitment.
I also laud the participation of representatives of the
region. France fully supports regional mediation. The
road map drawn up by Angola and Rwanda calls for
dialogue with all political groups and for a resumption
of the peace process with the armed groups.
Lastly, France encourages the authorities of the
Central African Republic to fully commit to this
path — the only way to bring reconciliation, peace and
stability to the region.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): My delegation welcomes the
Acting Chairperson of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and President of the Republic
of Angola, His Excellency Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves
Lourenço, to today’s meeting.
I thank Special Representative Mankeur Ndiaye;
European Union (EU) Managing Director for Africa
Rita Laranjinha, as well as African Union (AU)
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security
Bankole Adeoye for their informative briefings.
I also welcome the participation of the
representatives of the Central African Republic, Chad
and the Congo.
Allow me to highlight the following points. First,
with regard to the political and security situation, Viet
Nam is encouraged by the commitment of the authorities
of the Central African Republic to reinvigorating the
peace process, ensuring socioeconomic development
and implementing the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. We
take this opportunity to reiterate the central role of the
Political Agreement — the most feasible way towards
stability in the country.
Nevertheless, we would like to express our grave
concern about the continued fragility of the security
situation, which severely affects civilians. My
delegation calls on all parties to exert every effort to
settle differences through peaceful means, while taking
into account the aspirations for peace and development
of the people of the Central African Republic. Trust and
confidence need to be rebuilt in order to pave the way

S/PV. 8802

for a broad and inclusive political dialogue. Meanwhile,
the equal participation of women and youth in the
process is also important.
Secondly, as a result of violence, socioeconomic
hardship and the impact of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic is alarming. It is distressing to
see the statistics provided in the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/571) — more than half of
the population is in need of assistance, one third is
displaced, 2.3 million face food insecurity; and more
than 630,000 face emergency (phase 4) and so on.
We are also troubled by the continuation of security
incidents affecting humanitarian work on the ground.
My delegation therefore calls for further assistance for
the people of the Central African Republic. We would
also like to reiterate that it is an obligation to maintain
unimpeded, sustained and secure humanitarian access.
Thirdly, we fully value the role of regional
cooperation in conflict prevention and conflict
resolution. Regional organizations are well positioned
to understand the root causes of conflict and can
provide great assistance in that regard.
We take note the efforts of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) to help settle the insecurity situation in the
Central African Republic. We also support the efforts
of Chad and the Central African Republic to ensure a
peaceful settlement of the border incident, including
the agreement to establish an international commission
comprising the AU, ECCAS and the United Nations to
clarify the incident.
With regard to the question of sanctions, as
mentioned today by representatives of the countries of
the region, we believe that such measures serve as a
temporary tool for promoting conditions conducive to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
They should be lifted when conditions allow. Regular
reviews are needed to ensure their effectiveness and
impact on the long-term objectives of peace, stability
and development.
Last but not least, the current crisis cannot be
overcome without the support of the international
community. My delegation fully supports the efforts of
the AU, EU other regional and bilateral partners to bring
back peace to the Central African Republic. To that end,

21-1648913/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

we recognize the vital role played by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). At the
same time, we are concerned about reports regarding
incidents that have affected MINUSCA’s operations in
recent months, as well as other anti-MINUSCA rhetoric
and actions.
The most favourable conditions should be created
to assist the Mission in discharging the mandate
entrusted to it by the Council. The safety and security of
peacekeepers must also be a priority for all concerned.
We would like to emphasize the importance of the full
implementation of the status-of-forces agreement. It
is crucial that all efforts be well coordinated to help
promote peace and stability in the country.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Council, namely Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia,
and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
We welcome the participation of His Excellency
Mr. João Gonçalves Lourenço, President of the
Republic of Angola and acting Chair of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, and we thank
him for his engagement and his insightful statement.
We join other delegations in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye, for his comprehensive briefing on the activities
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA).
We also thank the representative of the European
Union, Ms. Rita Laranjinha, and the representative
of the African Union, Mr. Bankole Adeoye, for their
insightful briefings.
We commend the fundamental role played by
MINUSCA in assisting the authorities and people of
the Central African Republic in their quest to achieve
lasting peace and stability.
We thank and commend the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2021/571).
The A3+1 statement will focus on the political,
security and humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic and recent developments in the
country and the region.
14/30

23/06/2021

On the political front, the December 2020 presidential
and legislative elections served as a litmus test for
both the usefulness of the 2019 Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic and the progress made in its implementation.
Those elections, which were organized with the support
of international partners, made it possible to preserve
constitutional order and institutional stability despite
challenges and threats. The finalization of the electoral
process will be completed with the holding of credible
and inclusive local elections, which are tentatively
planned for the first quarter of 2022.
We value the efforts of MINUSCA and the United
Nations country team in providing integrated electoral
support for the preparation of those local elections.
We also commend the efforts of the Central African
authorities and the contribution of all stakeholders to
that process and look forward to the holding of the
elections in a more peaceful and secure climate.
We further note with satisfaction the recent
holding of national consultations as a prelude to
what is known as the republican dialogue and the
association of partners in that process. We encourage
political dialogue, including with political opposition,
civil society, women and young people, in order to
create better conditions for the democratization and
reconciliation of Central African society.
We note that some progress has been made in the
implementation of the Political Agreement and we
reiterate our conviction that it remains the only valid
political framework for peace and stability. While
we commend the continued efforts to reinvigorate
the Political Agreement despite ongoing armed
confrontation with the Coalition des patriotes pour le
changement (CPC), we note with concern that some
key provisions of the Political Agreement have not
been implemented. The situation is further complicated
by the many violations of the Political Agreement by
signatory armed groups. We call on all parties to abide
by the provisions of the Political Agreement and to
work effectively on their full implementation.
We note the joint visit made earlier this month
by representatives of the United Nations, the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the European Union to Bangui, as well as
the meetings they held with all parties to encourage
credible and inclusive political dialogue to revitalize
the peace process.
21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

We also remain deeply concerned about the
continued threats and attacks against the civilian
population, humanitarian actors and United Nations
peacekeepers, as well as allegations of serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law allegedly committed by the parties to the
conflict and their allies. We strongly denounce the
disinformation campaigns, hate speech and targeted
attacks against MINUSCA and its leadership, as well
as other international partners of the Central African
Republic. In that regard, the A3+1 acknowledges the
public statement by President Touadera calling for an
end to those acts and the prosecution of the instigators.
The A3+1 regrets the cross-border incident
that occurred on 30 May, which generated tensions
between the Central African Republic and Chad. We
are encouraged by the speedy way in which the two
parties moved to address it through dialogue. In that
regard, we welcome the joint communiqué by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of both countries as a first
encouraging step towards resolving that issue through
diplomatic channels.
On the security front, the A3+1 remains deeply
concerned by the ongoing destabilizing activities of
armed groups, mainly CPC-affiliated groups, which
have resulted in further casualties and displacements.
We express our concern over the unprecedented reports
of violations of the status-of-forces agreement and
obstructions targeting MINUSCA. Those acts are
hindering MINUSCA’s ability to effectively conduct
its mandate, in addition to putting its personnel at
risk. We welcome President Touadera’s commitment
to ending those acts and ensuring the prosecution of
the perpetrators. We further call on the Central African
Republic authorities and their partners to abide by
that agreement.

S/PV. 8802

We note the recent assessment report of the
Secretary-General on the progress achieved so far by
the Central African Republic authorities on the key
benchmarks related to the arms embargo with the support
of MINUSCA and other regional and international
partners. While we commend the efforts of the Central
African Republic authorities and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic aiming
at further advancing the full implementation of those
benchmarks, the A3+1 considers that the full and
effective implementation of those benchmarks will pave
the way for the lifting of the arms embargo. We recall,
in that respect, resolution 2566 (2021), in which the
Council reiterated its readiness to review the measures
of the arms embargo on the Government of the Central
African Republic through, inter alia, the suspension or
progressive lifting of those measures in the light of the
progress achieved on those key benchmarks.
We call on the national authorities to strengthen
their efforts in the fight against impunity, including
through the Special Criminal Court, as well as the
operationalization of the Commission on Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation.
The already volatile security situation has further
exacerbated the dramatic humanitarian situation in the
Central African Republic. Population displacement,
surging food prices, the socioeconomic impact of the
coronavirus disease and the declining agricultural
production caused by floods are but a few of the
alarming aspects of the dire humanitarian situation.
United Nations data indicates that more than half of the
population — 2.8 million people — need humanitarian
assistance and protection, with 1.9 million in dire need,
whereas half the country’s children are out of school.

We commend the Central African Republic national
authorities on the conduct of a review of the national
security-sector reform strategy and look forward to the
implementation of the resultant recommendations.

In that regard, we call on the Central African
Republic authorities and all armed actors in the country
to ensure unhindered humanitarian access. We appeal
to international and regional donors and partners to
further provide financial support for the country’s
humanitarian response plan.

With regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, we commend the efforts of the Central
African Republic authorities, with the support of
MINUSCA, in advancing that important task along with
the improvement of the justice and law sector, despite
the negative impact of the volatile security situation on
its functioning during the electoral phase.

We join the Secretary-General in expressing deep
concern about the significant increase in human rights
violations and abuses, including conflict-related sexual
violence, targeted abuse, the stigmatization of ethnic
and religious minorities, and the use of excessive use
of force by all perpetrators, be it armed groups, the
national defence and security forces, or bilaterally

21-1648915/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

23/06/2021

deployed or other security personnel. We encourage
the Central African Republic authorities to ensure
the implementation of international humanitarian
and human rights law and that all violators are
held accountable.

whose presence on the ground in the Central African
Republic is so, so critical. The United States condemns
all attacks against peacekeepers in the strongest terms,
and we again stress that those attacks may constitute
war crimes under international law.

We reiterate our deep concern about the illicit
trafficking, trade, exploitation and smuggling of natural
resources, and illegal taxation, which continue to fund
and supply armed groups, further threatening peace
and stability in the Central African Republic.

As we have heard today, there are a growing
number of reports of human rights violations and
abuses, especially those appearing to target members
of the Muslim community. The United States is deeply
concerned by those reports. We are troubled as well
by continued reports of the commission by the armed
forces of the Central African Republic and Russian
instructors of violations of international humanitarian
law and the United Nations arms embargo.

While reaffirming our continued solidarity with
and full support for the people of the Central African
Republic in their legitimate efforts to achieve stability
and development, we reiterate our strong belief that
achieving those objectives will be possible only by
relaunching the peace process. There is no alternative.
In conclusion, the A3+1 commends the efforts
deployed by the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States, in their
capacity as guarantors of the peace agreement, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and other partners in their quest for peace in the Central
African Republic. We reiterate our full support to the
commendable efforts of MINUSCA in that regard. We
encourage them to enhance their good offices to contain
tensions and encourage all stakeholders to engage in
dialogue as the only way to bring security and stability
to the Central African Republic and the entire region.
In that respect, we are looking forward to the
outcome of the field mission to be conducted by the
African Union Peace and Security Council to Bangui
by the end of this month.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank all
our briefers, whose reports today, I think, have painted
a clear image of the current challenges in the Central
African Republic. I also want to thank, on behalf of
my delegation, President Lourenço for being at this
meeting today and sharing his views and updates
on the situation. And I thank especially Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ndiaye for
the important contributions that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) is making
every day to save lives.
I want to begin by expressing the deep
appreciation of the United States to all the troopand police-contributing countries and civilian staff,
16/30

In his report (S/2021/571), the Secretary-General
notes a 28 per cent increase in incidents of human rights
violations and abuses and violations of international
humanitarian law over the past four months.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General’s report marked
an alarmingly sharp increase in abuses committed by
national and bilateral personnel. I think we need to be
clear about these bilateral personnel. The individuals
committing what many are now referring to as atrocities
are not independent actors. They are operating as a
direct extension of Russia’s Ministry of Defence.
We remain deeply disturbed that a member of the
Security Council has failed to take action to prevent
its mercenaries from impeding MINUSCA’s freedom
of movement on a daily basis. We condemn — as other
speakers have — the appalling incident in which those
bilateral Russian actors threatened the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and a United
Nations delegation that was on a humanitarian mission
to Bang on 28 May. Such life-threatening actions
interfere with MINUSCA’s ability to conduct its daily
operations. They endanger peacekeepers and civilians
and they prevent humanitarian actors from delivering
assistance. Those types of abuses undermine stability
and security in the Central African Republic, and they
threaten to derail the fragile peace that Central Africans
have been working to realize since 2013.
We call on all Member States to support MINUSCA
and the peacekeepers whom we have sent into harm’s
way. The United States reminds the Government of the
Central African Republic that it is responsible for the
safety and security of United Nations personnel serving
in the Central African Republic and for upholding the
status-of-forces agreement (SOFA). We call on the
21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

Government of the Central African Republic to ensure
that all security actors operating on its territory respect
the SOFA and the authority of the mission.
We reiterate the need for all security actors in
the country to respect human rights and comply with
international humanitarian law. It is critical that
everyone focus on credible security sector reform,
fully coordinated with MINUSCA and other security
partners, rather than undermining those reform efforts
and fuelling the conflict in the Central African Republic.
The Council must speak with one voice against
abuses and actions that destabilize the Central African
Republic and risk the lives of civilians. MINUSCA
has made tangible gains in supporting the Central
African Republic on its path to peace and stability. We
cannot let the irresponsible and unrestrained actions of
mercenaries imperil that progress. The United States
will continue to support accountability for those who
commit human rights abuses and violations. The people
of the Central African Republic deserve justice.
Let me conclude by saying that we congratulate the
newly appointed Prime Minister of the Central African
Republic, Mr. Henri-Marie Dondra. The United States
looks forward to further strengthening its bilateral
partnership with the Central African Republic, and
we hope that the new Government will bring renewed
energy to fully implementing the 2019 peace agreement.
It is essential that the ongoing violence in the
Central African Republic be brought to an end in a
peaceful manner, with the full implementation of the
peace agreement and inclusive political dialogue. In
that regard, let me emphasize that it is crucial to take
the needs of women and girls into account. Ensuring
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in all spheres at all levels of the political leadership
throughout the peace process can yield substantial
benefits for long-term peace and stability in Central
African Republic.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by warmly
welcoming the President of Angola, His Excellency
Mr. Lourenço, to today’s meeting. We greatly value
the thoughts and insights that he shared with us. We
appreciate the role of Angola in this particular matter.
We would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ndiaye, European Union
European External Action Service Managing Director
for Africa Rita Laranjinha and African Union (AU)
Commissioner Bankole Adeoye for their respective

S/PV. 8802

briefings. I also welcome the representatives of the
Congo, Chad and the Central African Republic.
The developments following the presidential
elections held in December 2020 have provided hope
for peace and reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. The legislative elections took place in line
with the constitutional timelines despite the precarious
security situation and boycott by the opposition
Coalition des patriotes pour le changement (CPC). We
commend the role played by the National Electoral
Authority, in collaboration with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and
the United Nations country team, in holding those
elections. We hope that the authorities will hold the local
elections as scheduled in 2022. We also take note of the
convening of the new Parliament and the appointment
of the new Prime Minister. We wish the Prime Minister
well in forming an inclusive Government and focusing
on advancing institutional reforms.
The holding of national consultations and the
announcement of a republican dialogue are positive
developments, even though the CPC has refused to
join. It is important that the authorities reach out to
the elected opposition members and parties, putting
aside their political considerations in the interest of
peace. The stakeholders, particularly the CPC, must
heed that call and participate in the dialogue. The full
implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic is the
only way forward to achieve national reconciliation, end
political tensions and bring stability to the country. In
his inaugural address, President Touadera emphasized
the implementation of the Political Agreement, good
governance and reconciliation. We look forward to
follow-up actions on the ground.
The continuing violence in the Central African
Republic remains a cause for concern. Armed groups
continue to challenge the authority of the Government
and pay no heed to the peace agreement that they signed.
We condemn the violence and attacks perpetrated by
the armed groups, especially those against innocent
civilians, including women and children. It is regrettable
that we are witnessing an increase in serious human
rights abuses, including sexual violence, in areas
dominated by the rebels. That constant state of unrest is a
major cause of the deteriorating humanitarian situation.
The increasing population displacement, food scarcity
and malnutrition, compounded by the effects of the

21-1648917/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

coronavirus disease pandemic, need urgent attention.
The international community should extend all possible
assistance to address the humanitarian situation.
The deployment of local authorities in the
prefectures of the Central African Republic is a right
step in implementing the peace agreement. We also
welcome the improvement in the deployment of judicial
personnel, the holding of disciplinary hearings and the
opening of investigations, including into the attacks
against MINUSCA peacekeepers. MINUSCA should
extend assistance to the Central African Republic,
in line with its mandate, towards the extension of
State authority across the country. We also call on
all partners, including countries assisting the Central
African Republic on a bilateral basis, to continue to
coordinate closely with MINUSCA on the reform of the
justice and security sectors. We must consolidate the
early gains and ensure that the requisite systems are
put in place.
There has been a considerable increase in
violations of the status-of-forces agreement during
the reporting period, which has put the safety and
security of peacekeepers in jeopardy. That is a cause
of very serious concern. We need to protect those
who are protecting us. We take note of President
Touadera’s personal assurances to the joint United
Nations-AU mission earlier this month and hope that
there will no impediments to MINUSCA’s operations.
The authorities of the Central African Republic,
MINUSCA and other troops on bilateral arrangements
must work in a coordinated manner. We also welcome
the establishment of an independent international
commission by the Central African Republic and
Chad to examine the 30 May border-post incident. It is
important that terrorists and terrorist groups not take
advantage of violence and instability and spread their
tentacles further in the region.
India has been assisting the Central African
Republic through its development partnership,
including lines of credit for several projects, as well
as through capacity-building programmes. India has
also supported MINUSCA by contributing more than
$1.5 million over the past year.
In conclusion, let me say that the Central African
Republic has a historic opportunity to move forward
towards sustainable peace. All stakeholders must bury
their political differences and work together to ensure
that. The international community, including the United
18/30

23/06/2021

Nations, the AU, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region can play a positive role. The onus
is clearly on the political stakeholders in the Central
African Republic.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): May I, too, begin
by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ndiaye for his leadership in these challenging
times and, through him, the military, peace and other
personnel under his leadership for their service. I also
thank President Lourenço for his contribution to our
discussions this morning and for the perspective that he
brings from the region through his delegation. We are
also grateful to the other briefers.
It is clear from the briefings we heard this morning
and from the reporting that the Central African Republic
today faces a series of complex challenges — a fragile
security and political environment; armed groups
fomenting instability in order to line their pockets;
enormous unmet humanitarian needs; and now a
new factor of instability: Russian private military
companies acting in concert with the national armed
forces to obstruct the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and violate the rights of the
civilians and citizens of the Central African Republic.
In the face of all of that, the United Kingdom
commends the continued resilience and courage of
the people of the Central African Republic and of the
women and men of MINUSCA, who continue to put
their own lives at risk to protect civilians. I want to
underline, as others have this morning, our utmost
concern at the significant increase in status of forces
agreement violations against MINUSCA. They are
unacceptable and they must stop immediately.
The United Kingdom is also deeply troubled to
hear further reports of violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights violations
and abuses, including acts of sexual violence. We
know those are being committed not only by armed
groups — something that we have sadly come to
expect — but also by members of the national armed
forces and the Russian private military personnel
accompanying them.
Now I know my Russian colleague will deny this
in her statement. But the evidence is increasing and
overwhelming and I hope they will reflect on the role
they want to play in the Central African Republic
21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

and their responsibilities as a permanent member of
this Council. I join France and others in calling on
MINUSCA for clarity on the status of Russian private
military personnel and more detailed reporting on
questions of violations and who is committing them.
We are encouraged by President Touadera’s
commitment to addressing impunity. But we now urge
the Government to take concrete steps to investigate
all allegations and take preventative action. Justice and
accountability are fundamental building blocks of any
viable path towards stability and development.
At the same time, we express our concern at the
further allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by
some MINUSCA personnel and urge all contributing
countries to swiftly address such allegations, in line
with the United Nations zero-tolerance policy.
We are extremely worried by the further
deterioration in the humanitarian situation over the
course of the past six months. As we have heard,
an estimated 2.8 million people are now in need of
protection and assistance. We urgently call on all
actors to respect the principles of humanitarian access,
including the protection of humanitarian workers, in
line with resolution 2417 (2018). As Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Brown is here,
I want to thank her directly for her own personal efforts
and the risks she is taking in that regard.
It is now imperative that all political actors,
including the Government, armed groups and the
opposition, move ahead with a constructive and
inclusive national dialogue. That is essential to deliver
stability and development for the people of the Central
African Republic.
We have heard today from the briefers and others
what needs to be done to make progress. We therefore
continue to support the engagement of the peace
agreement guarantors and other regional actors in
bolstering those efforts and we welcome the joint visit of
the African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the European Union and the United
Nations. Above all, however, we look to the Central
African authorities to live up to their responsibilities
to find a sustainable exit from the current crisis and
advance an inclusive settlement. That is the only route
to a lasting peace.
Finally, as others including President Lourenço
have raised the issue of the arms embargo, let me

S/PV. 8802

briefly set out our view, which chimes with that of
others. In the light of the volatile situation, we believe it
is important to maintain the arms embargo as it stands,
pending further progress on the key benchmarks set
out by the Security Council in April 2019, in particular
regarding weapons management. We agree the time
may come to ensure the Central African Republic’s
defensive capabilities, but that time is not now.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
welcome His Excellency Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves
Lourenço, President of the Republic of Angola, and
the representative of the Central African Republic, the
representative of the Republic of the Congo and the
representative of Chad to the meeting today. I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Central African Republic, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security, Mr. Bankole Adeoye, and European Union
Managing Director for Africa, Ms. Rita Laranjinha, for
their briefings.
Since the end of last year, the Government and
people of the Central African Republic have overcome
difficulties, completed electoral processes and formed
robust new institutions. The Government has resumed
the exercise of State authority over larger areas of its
territory. Those developments deserve to be fully
recognized. Realizing lasting peace and development
is the aspiration of the people of the Central African
Republic and the common expectation of regional
States and the international community.
China commends the Government of the Central
African Republic for its active political consultations,
looks forward to the success of the republican dialogue
and encourages parties to continue to implement
the Peace Agreement and resolve their differences
through dialogue. The international community, based
on respect for the leadership of the Central African
Republic Government, should provide specific and
constructive assistance.
Regional organizations, such as the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the African
Union, have paid close attention to issues in the Central
African Republic and actively advanced the political
process. Presidents Lourenço and Sassou Nguesso
have convened multiple regional meetings and created
a working group on this matter and have vigorously
conducted mediations and good offices. The presence

21-1648919/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

of President Lourenço in New York for today’s meeting
has once again demonstrated the strong determination
of concerned States to push for a settlement to this issue.
China supports finding African solutions to African
problems and supports subregional organization’s
efforts in the light of the realities and actual needs
of the Central African Republic to push for political
settlements to its issues and to realize peace, stability
and regional prosperity and development.
China will continue to support the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
MINUSCA. China maintains that the status of forces
agreement must be upheld to improve peacekeepers’
safety. China supports MINUSCA and the Government
of the Central African Republic in strengthening
communication and coordination in order to increase
mutual trust and understanding and jointly maintain
peace and stability in the Central African Republic. In
the light of recent developments in the Central African
Republic, MINUSCA should rationalize its resources
and forces. Eventually, the Central African Republic
should rely on itself to establish a lasting peace
and stability.
China hopes that the relevant parties can address
the border conflicts. The international community
should support the Government of the Central
African Republic in strengthening its security forces’
development and management and help it to upgrade its
own capability to maintain stability. The Government
of the Central African Republic has made great efforts
to meet the benchmarks for the lifting of arms embargo
and has made progress. The Security Council should
heed the calls of the Government of the Central African
Republic and regional States and lift the arms embargo
against the Central African Republic as soon as possible.
The Central African Republic’s peace and
development requires international help and support.
The Central African Republic faces many challenges
in maintaining stability, fighting the pandemic and
ensuring people’s livelihoods. The Government is
in financial difficulty and 2.8 million people need
humanitarian assistance. Countries, in particular the
major Powers, should utilize their advantages, step
up assistance and cooperation and help the Central
African Republic translate its energy resource potential
into development advantages, eradicate poverty and
eliminate the root causes of conflict.
20/30

23/06/2021

Parties should fully respect the Central African
Republic’s sovereignty, respect its input and strengthen
communication and coordination in order to build
positive momentum and more effectively advance the
well-being of its people. Along with the international
community, China stands ready to continue our
contribution to further peace and development in the
Central African Republic.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have taken note of the statements of the
speakers at today’s meeting.
We welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of the President of Angola, Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves
Lourenço, as well as the representative of the Republic
of the Congo, who read out a statement by the President
of the Economic Community of Central African States,
the President of the Republic of the Congo, Mr. Denis
Sassou Nguesso.
We are carefully following the developments in the
Central African Republic. The Government forces were
able to repel insurgent forces while limiting their ability
to mount military offensives. The situation overall has
been stabilized. At the same time, an alliance of illegal
armed groups — the so-called Coalition of Patriots
for Change — has not given up its plans to take power
by force. In these circumstances, we believe that it
is important to contribute in every way possible to
bolstering the legitimately elected authorities of the
Central African Republic.
We are convinced that the 6 February 2019 Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic remains the only possible basis for
achieving lasting peace and security in the country.
Accordingly, we welcome the initiative of President
Touadera to launch a Republican Dialogue. The refusal
of the political opponents of the Central African
leadership to take part in the preliminary consultations
is not constructive, as they are missing a unique
opportunity to articulate their demands and achieve
satisfaction of, if not all of their demands, then of at
least part of them.
We welcome the contribution of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and
the Economic Community of Central African States
in contributing to the settlement of the conflict in
the Central African Republic. We also welcome the
outcome of the second mini-summit of the States
members of the ICGLR, which took place in Luanda
21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

on 20 April, which discussed the relaunching of the
Khartoum agreements. At the same time, we believe
that any mediation initiatives sponsored by subregional
organizations should be conducted only with the
consent and participation of the Government of the
Central African Republic.
We believe that the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) should be an important element
in ensuring security in the country, taking into
account such functions entrusted to peacekeepers as
combating illegal armed groups, protecting the civilian
population, including internally displaced persons, and
contributing to security sector reform. It is also our
firm belief that, in selecting additional contingents to
serve in MINUSCA, the United Nations Secretariat
must closely coordinate with Bangui and heed the
views of the Central Africans themselves, including
with respect to the national make-up of the police and
military contingents deployed. This is the only way to
enhance the Mission’s performance and improve the
quality of cooperation between the United Nations and
the Central African authorities.
At the same time, it is important to realize that
MINUSCA cannot and should not be a substitute
for the efforts of the national authorities, who bear
the main responsibility for the fate of their country
and for protecting their population. In this regard, it
is important to continue building the capacity of the
Central Africans forces. However, the arms embargo
hinders this task. We once again draw the attention of
our colleagues in the Security Council to the need to
listen to the appeals of the Central African Republic
itself and partners in the region to lift the restrictions
against Bangui.
On the whole, we are in favour of closer coordination
between MINUSCA with Bangui and bilateral partners
on the ground. We are convinced that fully fledged
implementation of the mandate of the peacekeeping
mission can be achieved only by maintaining mutual
trust and confidence with the authorities of the
host country.
At the request of the authorities of the Central
African Republic and with the knowledge of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central
African Republic — the specialized sanctions
committee — Russian instructors are present and

S/PV. 8802

working in the country. They are successfully
enhancing the professional expertise of the Central
African security forces without taking part in combat
operations against the illegal armed groups. However,
in recent days, we have witnessed constant attempts to
discredit our instructors on the basis of highly dubious
reports, which looks like an anti-Russian political hit
job. If one undertakes a Google search on the Central
African Republic on the Internet, hundreds of references
to American and French media reports about so-called
Russian mercenaries come up. At the same time, there is
no evidence provided for these allegations. The sources
are anonymous, supposedly to guarantee the safety
and security of these witnesses. Further, the pictures
that are shown do not correspond at all to the text of
the articles. Can this not be considered an information
campaign? I would like to ask the Ambassador of
France this question: was France not the target of a
similar information campaign in 2014 and 2015?
Once again, let me repeat: any possible cases of
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights must be investigated by the national authorities.
For example, just a few days ago, the Government of
the Central African Republic confirmed the outcome
of an investigation of the recent murder of the of the
mayor and sultan of the city of Koui, and a number of
Western colleagues and media accused the Russian
instructors of his death. The involvement of Russian
instructors in the victim’s death has not been proven,
whereas the investigation confirmed that the main
culprits were fighters from the Return, Reclamation,
and Rehabilitation movement.
As far as the unfounded allegations coming
from the United States are concerned, they are
not made by chance. Our colleagues seem to see
Russian instructors — or, rather, so-called Russian
mercenaries — everywhere. The impression this gives
is that people in Washington are living in a virtual
reality. Everything that the United States does is good,
whereas everything that everyone else does, especially
Russia, is evil.
At the same time, the opinions of the African States
whose issues come before us are of no interest to anyone
at all. In the course of every one of our statements in
the Council, whether it is on Iraq or on Afghanistan,
we consistently draw attention to two instances of
violations of humanitarian law or of human rights
committed by the United States, namely, detainees in
Guantánamo and inhumane interrogation, both of which

21-1648921/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

are well documented. Yet the United States, which
has accusations for us at every turn, seems always to
be trying to shift the attention of the international
community from focusing on the destructive activities
of the illegal armed groups in the Central African
Republic, which are precisely the activities that are at
the heart of the new cycle of escalation of violence in
the country.
We have often said that, in the Central African
Republic as well as in the African continent as a whole,
there is enough room to welcome mutually reinforcing
efforts by all countries that are ready to help Africans
return to the path of peace and resolve some of their
chronic problems. Many of those chronic problems are
the result of the colonialist and neo-colonialist policies
of our Western colleagues.
The situation in the Central African Republic
has been growing worse for many years. Various
international actors have been trying to help. What
has been done to stabilize the situation? What were
the successful results? For those who have a short
memory, in December 2020, a military coup was
planned and declared in the Central African Republic.
It was derailed largely thanks to the fact that a number
of bilateral partners, including Russia, came to the
assistance of the legitimately elected authorities of the
country. Russia will remain open to working together
with all constructively motivated actors.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): We are grateful for the briefings by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mankeur Ndiaye, Commissioner Adeoye and Director
Laranjinha. I especially welcome the President of
Angola, Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, and
thank him for sharing his perspective with us earlier. I
also thank the representatives of the Congo, Chad and
the Central African Republic.
Mexico welcomes the mediation efforts of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
chaired by Angola, to foster peace efforts in the Central
African Republic. Undoubtedly, the coordinated
support of regional organizations can decisively
drive the political process and mitigate the impact on
neighbouring countries. The unfortunate incident on
the border with Chad at the end of May, in which six
soldiers were killed, showed us the security risks that
the situation in the Central African Republic poses to
the region.
22/30

23/06/2021

We welcome President Touadera’s proposal to
hold a republican dialogue. We are convinced that the
formation of a new Government under way represents
an opportunity to open spaces for various political
actors, including women, at all levels of responsibility
and revitalize the reform agenda, in line with the 2019
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic. We believe that the political
instability affecting the country demands an inclusive
dialogue that addresses the legitimate grievances of
marginalized communities and lays the groundwork for
true reconciliation.
Mexico supports the work carried out by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and especially
recognizes its efforts to protect the civilian population.
The success of the implementation of its complex
mandate depends on effective cooperation with the
authorities of the Central African Republic. We
therefore note with concern that the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/571) reveals a significant
increase in attacks against the Mission, including
violations of the status-of-forces agreement by national
security forces.
We also condemn the targeted attacks against the
Muslim population. Those acts are a setback on the
path towards reconciliation and create new grievances
that complicate the prospects for achieving sustainable
peace. Mexico urges the authorities of the Central
African Republic to take the necessary steps to mitigate
tensions among the communities and deliver justice to
the victims.
On the road to reconciliation, accountability for
the crimes committed during the conflict in the Central
African Republic is crucial to achieving peace. In that
regard, the operationalization of the Commission on
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation must
begin as soon as possible. Accordingly, we call for the
allocation of the needed resources to that end.
My country welcomes the establishment of a special
commission of inquiry to investigate allegations of
serious crimes and violations of human rights allegedly
committed by the national armed forces and bilaterally
deployed and other security personnel. We hope that
that body will begin to operate as soon as possible and
contribute to improving public confidence in State
institutions, which is crucial to ending the current cycle
of violence.
21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

Unfortunately, the violence continues to aggravate
the humanitarian situation by increasing the number
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
the Central African Republic. With regard to such
vulnerability, my country, Mexico, condemns in the
strongest terms the forced recruitment of children, as
well as the increase in sexual violence against women
and girls, by armed rebel groups, State security forces
and forces deployed under bilateral agreements.
Mexico urges parties to uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In conclusion, we believe that it is particularly
important to give momentum to a renewed regional
strategy to implement the Nairobi Protocol and the
Central African Convention for the Control of Small
Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All
Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their
Manufacture, Repair and Assembly. Legislation on
conventional arms and the establishment of the National
Commission on Small Arms and Light Weapons are key
to combating their proliferation in the Central African
Republic and throughout the region. Support for the
national authorities in their implementation is urgently
needed. The widespread availability of weapons will
only increase the deadly nature of the conflict and pose
a constant threat to any prospect of peace.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me thank today’s
briefers for their valuable insights. Let me also thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his latest report on
the Central African Republic (S/2021/571). I also
welcome the presence of the President of Angola and
the representatives of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and Chad.
Recent news from the Central African Republic,
including the latest report of the Secretary-General,
is very sobering. Norway is deeply concerned about
the increase in protection concerns and the dramatic
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
country. More than half of the population is in need
of humanitarian assistance and protection. One third
remains displaced. Half of the country’s children are
out of school, and food insecurity has reached alarming
levels, with the risk of even worsening next year.
Crucially, much of the humanitarian crisis is manmade. Therefore, we see three important elements that
must change to ease the suffering of the people:
First, the violence against civilians must stop.
Human rights violations and abuses, including conflict-

S/PV. 8802

related sexual violence, must stop. Violations of
international humanitarian law must stop. Violations
and abuse of children’s rights, including the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict, must stop. And
the targeted abuse and stigmatization of ethnic and
religious minorities must stop. Let me be clear. This
is a message to all parties to the conflict. Armed
groups should lay down their arms and commit to the
process of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and resettlement or repatriation. But the national
defence forces and their foreign instructors also bear a
heavy responsibility.
The Secretary-General is clear in his latest report,
which states that,
“Investigations
by
the
United
Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
revealed that most civilian deaths resulted from
indiscriminate, disproportionate and excessive use
of force by national defence forces and bilaterally
deployed and other security personnel.” (S/2021/571,
para. 66)
That is unacceptable. The national army and those
who have been invited to support it should protect the
people — not kill, rape and loot.
Secondly, the recent sharp increase in the number
and gravity of status-of-forces agreement violations
by national security forces, as well as by their Russian
instructors, is inadmissible. MINUSCA is an instrument
of the Council. It must be allowed to do its work and fully
and independently implement its mandate. MINUSCA’s
access should be unrestricted for the Mission to truly
protect civilians, as it is mandated to do.
We urge all those with influence over the actors
on the ground to help end the targeting of MINUSCA
and ensure the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers. Recent signals by the authorities of the
Central African Republic are positive, but we need to
see an actual change in the field. Norway also strongly
condemns the targeting of humanitarian workers
and infrastructure. We call on all actors to ensure
unhindered humanitarian access.
Thirdly, an inclusive political dialogue must be
resumed. We need a reinvigorated peace agreement.
We applaud the announcement by President Touadera
of the imminent launch of a “republican dialogue”.

21-1648923/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

We encourage him to make that dialogue genuinely
inclusive, addressing all legitimate grievances.
We congratulate Prime Minister Dondra on his
recent appointment and look forward to the formation
of a new, inclusive Government. We call on the new
Prime Minister to ensure the full, equal and meaningful
political participation of women. That could be a
unique opportunity to put the political process back
on track. We recommend in particular making use of
the excellent African Union (AU) resources, such as
FemWise-Africa, to that end.
Norway commends actors in the region for their
engagement. We applaud the intensified involvement of
the AU, the United Nations, the European Union and the
Economic Community of Central African States. We
appreciate the leadership of the President of Angola and
urge the Government of the Central African Republic
to honour commitments on dialogue and inclusion
made during the second mini-summit held in Luanda
in April. We encourage the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region to continue working closely
with the international community in those important
mediation efforts.
Let me conclude by expressing Norway’s deep
appreciation for MINUSCA’s work, in very challenging
circumstances. We are pleased to see that the
reinforcement of the Mission is gearing up, following
the decision of the Council to increase troop ceilings.
Norway has also decided to second civilian staff to
MINUSCA. Special Representative Ndiaye and his
team have our full support and confidence.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French):
I would also like to thank the briefers for their very
clear and relevant briefings today. I would like to
acknowledge, in particular, the presence of His
Excellency President Lourenço. The work of the
Central African and Great Lakes region has been and
will remain crucial for the Central African Republic. I
also acknowledge the presence of the representatives
of the Congo, Chad and the Central African Republic.
I would like to sincerely thank Mankeur Ndiaye and
the entire team of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) for the continued implementation
of their mandate, despite the considerable challenges
they face.
24/30

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic
remains extremely worrisome. The 2019 Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic set the stage for a peaceful
solution for the political parties in the country. It must
be implemented with urgency and determination.
Preparations for a “republican dialogue” offer a unique
opportunity for the authorities to undertake a truly
inclusive process. It must include all stakeholders,
including women, young people and opposition parties.
The holding of presidential elections, as well
as the first round of the legislative elections, before
the constitutional deadline, was a success and
demonstrated the determination of the citizens of the
Central African Republic. The small number of women
elected to office is disappointing. We encourage the
authorities to ensure that women are meaningfully
represented in the Council of Ministers. Local elections
provide another opportunity to encourage and facilitate
the participation of women as voters, candidates and
elected officials. Every effort must be made to protect
those who exercise their right to vote.
(spoke in English)
We appreciate the continued engagement of
neighbouring States and regional organizations to
promote peace and dialogue. That commitment is
evidenced by the presence today of the representatives
of Angola and the Republic of the Congo. It is vital that
those regional efforts continue and that the Council
work to support them. We call on the authorities of the
Central African Republic to engage constructively in
those efforts.
We
welcome
the
recent
joint
African
Union-European Union-United Nations-Economic
Community of Central African States visit to the
Central African Republic, along with the assurances
provided during that visit. Commitments made by the
authorities, including President Touadera, must now be
followed by concrete action.
We are gravely concerned about continuing serious
status-of-forces agreement violations, which endanger
United Nations personnel and place the protection of
civilians in jeopardy. Ireland calls on the Government
and all parties on the ground to facilitate unhindered
access for all United Nations operations. That is
essential to MINUSCA’s ability to fulfil its mandate.
Attacks against MINUSCA, including those perpetrated
21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

in the media or online, are simply unacceptable and
must end immediately.
Violations and abuses of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law are widespread and
escalating in the Central African Republic. Allegations
of violations and abuses perpetrated by national and
bilaterally deployed and other security personnel
are of particular concern. MINUSCA documented a
staggering 278 per cent increase in such incidents.
We urge the Government of the Central African
Republic to systematically investigate all allegations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
violations and to prosecute the perpetrators of all such
violations. Those investigations must be independent,
impartial and conducted in line with international
standards. We welcome progress made towards the full
operationalization of the Special Criminal Court and
hope that it will help to contribute to the fight against
impunity in the Central African Republic.
Conflict-related sexual violence, which is already
at unacceptable levels, is increasing significantly in the
Central African Republic. As they committed to in the
2019 Central African Republic-United Nations joint
communiqué, the authorities have a responsibility to
protect victims and survivors and ensure the provision
of holistic and survivor-centred support services,
including psychosocial, sexual and reproductive
health services. Impunity must not be tolerated and
perpetrators, regardless of nationality or affiliation,
must be brought to justice.
We also condemn the continued attacks against
humanitarian workers in the strongest possible terms.
With the humanitarian situation now at its worst
level in five years, the deliberate targeting of those
working to bring assistance to people in need is totally
unacceptable. It is absolutely vital that unhindered
humanitarian access be ensured by the Government
and all armed actors operating in the country. A total of
2.3 million people are now food insecure in the Central
African Republic. There is no doubt that conflict and
insecurity have played a key role in exacerbating
those needs.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, it is clear that the Central African
Republic finds itself yet again at a critical juncture in
its history. Finding the right path to meet the needs of
all Central Africans requires the strong and continuous

S/PV. 8802

commitment of the national authorities, the countries of
the region and, of course, the Security Council. Only by
working together can we ensure that the hard-won gains
achieved since 2013 are not lost.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Estonia.
I thank Special Representative Ndiaye for briefing
us today on developments in the Central African
Republic and on the difficulties and dangers facing
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). I would also like to thank Mr. Adeoye,
President Lourenço and Ms. Laranjinha for sharing
their observations with us after their visit to the Central
African Republic.
There are two distressing developments that I
would like to highlight today.
First, Estonia strongly condemns the significant
increase in human rights violations and abuses and the
excessive use of force committed by all perpetrators,
including armed groups and national defence and
security forces and their Russian partners. Reports of
the exploitation of ethnic and religious tensions and
the execution of innocent civilians are horrifying.
While armed groups continue to be responsible for the
majority of such incidents, the number of documented
human rights abuses by the Central African Armed
Forces and their partners has almost tripled. The
reported indiscriminate and excessive use of force,
including summary executions, conflict-related sexual
violence and looting, severely undermines attempts
at establishing national cohesion and reconciliation.
Unfortunately, such behaviour has already spilled
across borders and led to clashes with and casualties
among the Chadian forces.
Secondly, the hostile threats and incidents by the
national security forces and their partners targeting
MINUSCA and United Nations staff are utterly
unacceptable. Such actions violate Security Council
resolutions and the commitments made as part of the
Status of Forces Agreement. They unnecessarily hinder
MINUSCA from protecting civilians and obstruct
humanitarian aid at a time when food security for the
people of Central African Republic is the worst it has
ever been. They also endanger the safety and security
of United Nations peacekeepers and staff. Such hostile
actions must stop immediately, and accountability for
those violations must be established. With a greater

21-1648925/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

variety of security actors active on the ground, it is
particularly important to ensure the coordination of
activities in order to avoid unwanted and completely
avoidable clashes in the field.
The two foregoing developments pose great
challenges to the new Government of the Central
African Republic, undermining its authority and
prospects for peace in the country. Estonia joins
the call for the rapid revitalization of the process for
reconciliation and political dialogue and supports the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
those processes.
I wish to conclude by commending the efforts of the
guarantors and facilitators of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic and the active support of regional initiatives
aimed at achieving peace in Central Africa.
I now resume my function as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Kpatamango (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate the Republic of Estonia on its presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June, and I wish
to thank you in particular, Sir, for convening today’s
session dedicated to my country, the Central African
Republic. Allow me also to appreciate the exceptional
participation in this meeting of His Excellency Mr. João
Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, President of the Republic
of Angola and current Chairperson of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.

23/06/2021

security situation the Central African Republic in the
light of recent events. It also provides an opportunity to
clarify certain points in the report — as well as others
that are the subject of much speculation — something
that tends to tarnish the efforts made by the Central
African authorities, the Central African population
and all international and bilateral partners working
alongside the Central African Republic to establish
lasting peace and security.
On the political front, after the failure of the
attempt to destabilize the country by the rebel forces of
the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement (CPC), it
is imperative to highlight that the past four months have
seen the consolidation of institutional stability and,
consequently, the preservation of the constitutional
order. That is due in part to the inauguration of the
President of the Republic on 30 March for a second
term of office, as well as the inauguration of the seventh
legislature, the six remaining seats of which are to be
filled in the upcoming elections scheduled for 25 July.
Respect for constitutional order, which has been
demanded and advocated by the entire international
community and supported by the Central African
subregion, has required considerable efforts aimed at
preserving the democratic gains made and avoiding
falling back into the vicious circle of crises that has
always condemned the Central African Republic to
precariousness and violence.

On behalf of His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, President of the Central African Republic
and its Head of State, and on behalf of the Government
and the people of the Central African Republic, I would
like to express my sincere thanks and gratitude to all
those who are gathered in this Chamber today for the
kind attention they have given to my country, despite
their many other commitments and busy schedules.

In accordance with his commitment to constitutional
stability and a policy of dialogue, the President of the
Central African Republic reaffirmed, in his inaugural
speech, the priorities of his second term of office.
Those priorities are fully aligned with the issues and
challenges that the Central African Republic is facing,
namely, good governance, human rights, development
and prosperity, ensuring greater social cohesion and
a better life for Central Africans and not forgetting
security for the country, its population and its territory
through the continued implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation, which was
achieved with the participation and contribution of all.

Today’s meeting, on the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Central African Republic and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
contained in document S/2021/571 and published
on 16 June, gives me, on behalf of my country, the
opportunity to share with the Council the political and

To that end, President Touadera has initiated a
Republican Dialogue in order to once again reaffirm his
desire to involve all Central Africans in the country’s
reconstruction. Such a dialogue will give the Central
African Republic and all components of the nation
the opportunity to turn the page on so many years of
barbarity, violence and human rights and territorial

26/30

21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

integrity violations. It is not another dialogue based
on the notion of inclusiveness, often confused with the
concept of integration, which seeks for each individual
to integrate into an existing space, instead of allowing
the space to be extended or enlarged in order to
guarantee a place for each individual.
This Republican Dialogue is in essence inclusive,
as it aims to rally Central Africans around the concept
of the Republic and its values — unity, dignity and
work — and engage them in a discussion on the
common national interest. To do that, the first stage,
which was initiated and led directly by the President
of the Republic, made it possible to hold consultations
with the country’s national stakeholders — political
parties, civil society, religious associations and so
forth — and national institutions. The consultations
were conducted mostly through direct exchanges, as
well as through the submission of written suggestions
and proposals, such as the contribution made by
the opposition parties that formed the Coalition de
l’opposition démocratique 2020. At the conclusion of
the first stage, the President of the Republic presented
his conclusions from the consultations in an address to
the Central African people on 6 June and launched the
second stage, which is the preparation and organization
of the Republican Dialogue.
The Dialogue will be conducted in a transparent
manner with the participation of all, in accordance
with the guiding principles set out in the road map
for the Republican Dialogue, which was presented
to the country’s stakeholders and all the technical
and financial partners working alongside the Central
African Republic, namely, the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation, which is our peace plan, the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, which is
our development and post-conflict recovery plan, and
the conclusions of the 2015 Bangui Forum, which is our
reconciliation plan. Accordingly, the achievements and
progress of our collective work will be strengthened
and consolidated.
I can assure you, Mr. President, that the people of the
Central African Republic, having learned from a violent
past, want to turn the page and begin a new chapter
that looks towards a better future. The Central African
people want to go beyond a purely political dialogue,
which in their experience amounts to discussions about
political posts and indulges a political immaturity that
leads to too many dialogues and political forums.

S/PV. 8802

Would Council members disagree if I said that any
society that embraces unethical, selfish and reckless
behaviour is doomed to failure and decline? To promote
national stability, as specified in paragraph 5 of the
report, we must be innovative and not simply repeat
yesterday’s solutions, which have not produced the
desired results. We need to be credible and constructive
and work towards a dialogue based in substance, not
form. Aware that our choices determine our future, we
must make the right choices today, consistent with the
values we defend, in order to have a positive impact on
the future or to correct or improve upon our mistakes.
On the security front, I would first like to recall
that the common goal remains the return of lasting
peace and stability. Institutional stability has cost us
dearly — with the blood of civilians, of valiant soldiers
of the armed forces and security forces of the Central
African Republic, of peacekeepers from the United
Nations and from bilateral forces, and with violations
of human rights. We must not turn away from that
objective so as not to risk creating a haven for the
enemies of peace. We must remain firm in our ideals,
which are also at the heart of the Charter of the United
Nations. Indeed, in 2012, following the invasion of the
Central African Republic by the Séléka Coalition, and
in 2013, following the counter-attack by the anti-balaka
faction — which led to the erroneous belief that this
major crisis was religious in nature — my country
naturally turned to the international community,
through the French Republic, its historical partner, to
request and obtain an intervention by United Nations
forces in order to protect civilians and avoid a massacre
that was nothing other than an expression of the will
to commit genocide against Central Africans, be they
Muslim, Christian or animist.
Throughout the various crises experienced by the
Central African Republic, our approach has been the
same: to request that the international community,
the subregion and our traditional partners provide
consistent support commensurate with the challenge.
That was seen in the recent security situation, which
was rightly foreseen by the Central African authorities,
who called for extending MINUSCA’s mandate to
secure the upcoming elections. The difficulties on
the ground resulting from the cruelty and barbaric
atrocities of the CPC rebels have forced the Central
African authorities to meet their responsibilities and
ensure the defence and protection of their people and
territory. That is what led to the launch of bilateral

21-1648927/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

agreements that would strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations Mission.
In the period from December 2020 to today, the
most recent elections were held without bloodshed and
territories have been liberated, which has brought joy
to people who had been deprived of their land, property
and freedom of movement for too long. We must
remember that we prevented a human disaster from
being perpetrated in the Central African Republic.
And by simply acting in legitimate self-defence, we
prevented terrorism and terrorists from setting up a
system whose very essence is war, violence, racism,
oppression, repression and the impoverishment of an
entire people, as the illustrious Nelson Mandela so
rightly said.
Our common challenge is to silence the guns and
eradicate armed groups and terrorism. That has been
the challenge of the Central African Republic for
decades. It is why the allegations made against the
Armed Forces of the Central African Republic, their
allies and the United Nations forces must be addressed,
as the report states. To that end, a special commission
of inquiry was established and is working to ensure that
the truth prevails and that justice is rendered so that
proven perpetrators are held accountable and punished.
Respect for the separation of powers requires that we
let the judiciary continue its work within the scheduled
time frames.
However, persistent unverified allegations lead us
away from our humanist ideals, making us forget the
aggressor at the expense of the victim. It is crucial not
to ignore the fact that the Central African Republic,
its people and its republican institutions have been
attacked by CPC armed groups and mercenaries. I
would therefore recall that the Charter of the United
Nations, in defining the Purposes and Principles of the
Organization, states that one of the purposes the United
Nations is
“to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and
for the suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of the peace” (Charter, Article 1, para. 1).
Inspired by this principle, at the Security Council
meeting on 21 January 2021, the Central African
authorities, through its Minister for Foreign Affairs,
asked the Council to establish an international
commission of inquiry to shed light on the perpetrators of
the conspiracies, attacks and attempts to destabilize the
28/30

23/06/2021

Central African Republic (see S/2021/76, annex XIV).
That request, while legitimate and essential, did not
receive the Council’s attention. Now we are confronted
with the truth.
The Central African Republic is astounded by the
account of unacceptable and implausible allegations,
such as crimes perpetrated with anti-personnel mines
said to have delays in order to give the perpetrator time
to escape. I reiterate the words of the President of the
Republic: no crime will go unpunished.
I would like to remind those present that the Central
African population is a people that has been bruised
and traumatized by incessant violence. They have been
too scorned, vilified and denigrated for the Central
African authorities to allow such allegations to be
overlooked. That would fuel a loss of trust on the part
of the people, who have been distraught since the great
crisis of 2012 at the atrocities perpetrated by those who
came to protect them. The rapes, crimes and sexual
violence must be punished, whoever the perpetrators,
impartially and without discrimination.
I have spoken at length, but the situation and the
context needed to be clear. To conclude, I would like to
address three points very briefly.
The first point concerns the presence of Russian
instructors. It should be recalled that it was in the
presence of Council members that the Security Council,
the guarantor of the maintenance of peace in the world,
authorized the delivery of weapons from the Russian
Federation, accompanied by instructors. Every Member
State present here was informed and took part in the
discussions. Moreover, nothing is done on Central
African territory without all the technical and financial
partners being around a common table.
The second point concerns the perception of
Member States regarding the difficulties reported by
personnel. Imperfection being human, if we need to
improve the way in which we work together, the Central
African Republic has always been willing to make the
necessary effort so that the efforts of all contribute
effectively to maintaining and consolidating peace and
security. That is imperative, since the outcomes of such
work are expected to realize the dreams and hopes of
the Central African people.
Knowing that certain difficulties encountered
on the ground will in fact be resolved by sharing
information with the Central African authorities in
21-16489

23/06/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

advance, during the reporting period up until today
the Central African Republic has remained in a state
of emergency, meaning that fundamental freedoms can
be restricted.
Improving our coordination is extremely necessary
and feasible. The long-scarred Central African
Republic has that sweet dream of the famous Madiba
to be a nation at peace with itself and the world — a
sweet dream still very far from that of development
and prosperity.
I conclude my remarks with my third point, which
is the embargo. To help us effectively would mean also
leaving us to shoulder our responsibilities. The crutch
imposed by the embargo is a real handicap for my
country. It is a handicap that benefits the intentions of
enemies of peace without any political ideology or vision
of a society for the Central African nation because they
are not Central Africans. It forces the Central African
Republic to seek the necessary external support to
make up for its shortcomings. It is a handicap which,
due to the unjust sanctions, deprives the country of its
basic legitimate right, which has been established as a
fundamental principle — the principle of the sovereign
equality of all Members.
No State has built an army under the control
of sanctions on its Government forces. The Central
African people humbly wish to live in peace and
request that their dignity be restored to them through
the lifting of the embargo, which denies them dignity
and leaves them at the mercy of mercenaries motivated
only by blood.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chad.
Mrs. Baroud (Chad) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to congratulate the Republic of
Estonia on its successful presidency of the Security
Council during the month of June and on convening
this important meeting on the situation in the Central
African Republic. I would also like to welcome the
presence at this meeting of His Excellency Mr. João
Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, President of the Republic
of Angola and Acting Chairperson of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
I would also like to express my deep gratitude
to my brother, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
African Republic, for his very enlightening briefing on

S/PV. 8802

the developments in the situation in the Central African
Republic, and to Ambassador Bankole Adeoye, African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace
and Security, and, of course, Ms. Rita Laranjinha,
European Union Managing Director for Africa, for
their inspiring briefings.
Chad and the Central African Republic are
neighbouring countries with a long border of more than
1,900 kilometres, sharing a common destiny, history
and centuries-old ties between the populations on both
sides of the border. That is why Chad has always stood
by the Central African Republic, including at difficult
moments in its history. On several occasions, Chad has
not hesitated to share the few means at its disposal with
its sister country, the Central African Republic, when it
was necessary.
Chad has also consistently supported all subregional,
regional and international efforts to restore peace and
reconciliation in the Central African Republic, and will
continue, alongside the international community, to
advocate and work for the peaceful resolution of the
Central African crisis through inclusive dialogue.
Since the resurgence of violence in the Central
African Republic, on the eve of the presidential
election last December, the peace dynamic created by
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, signed by the Central
African parties in February 2019, has been lost.
The latest developments in the situation in the Central
African Republic, marked by human rights violations
and atrocities committed by foreign mercenaries against
civilians, run the risk of exacerbating the violence, with
all the humanitarian, social and security consequences
that that entails for the Central African Republic and
neighbouring countries.
That situation concerns us all. Chad wishes to
express its deep concern about the rupture of the
peace dynamic and the lack of progress in the peace
and reconciliation process despite the ongoing appeals
of the international community, in particular the
Security Council, the African Union and subregional
organizations. Chad regrets that the military option
has taken precedence over negotiations with all Central
African actors, including armed groups.
Chad shares the concerns expressed in various
reports, particularly those of the Panel of Experts on
the Central African Republic, the United Nations

21-1648929/30

S/PV.8802

The situation in the Central African Republic

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of
the right of peoples to self-determination, with regard
to the increasingly prevalent role played by foreign
mercenaries in the deterioration of the situation in the
Central African Republic, thereby exposing the civilian
population to atrocities and human rights violations.
Chad appeals to the United Nations, and MINUSCA in
particular, to strengthen the protection of civilians.
On 30 May, the outpost of Sourou on Chadian
territory was attacked by the Armed Forces of the
Central African Republic and the foreign mercenaries
accompanying them. Six Chadian soldiers died, five of
whom were taken prisoner and then coldly executed on
Central African territory. That attack inside Chadian
territory is indisputable proof that the situation in the
Central African Republic represents a serious threat to
the stability of the entire region. That deadly attack,
about which the Central African authorities say they are
surprised, demonstrates the prominent role of foreign
mercenaries in the conduct of military operations
and control of the country. The presence of those
mercenaries during the attack against Chad leaves no
room for doubt.
Despite that attack against its territory, the
Government of Chad showed restraint in order to
give dialogue a chance. It was in that framework that
a Central African Republic delegation was received
in N’Djamena that included the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs, Defence and National Security. Following these
bilateral discussions, it was decided to establish an
international impartial team comprising experts from
the United Nations, the African Union and ECCAS to
establish the facts and assign responsibility.
That deadly attack against Chadian territory
did not help efforts to resume dialogue as called for

30/30

23/06/2021

by subregional organizations, including the African
Union, which has been resolutely committed to efforts
seeking to silence the guns in Africa. The growing
role of foreign mercenaries risks wiping out the gains
made over several years and dragging Africa back into
renewed cycles of devastating violence. Chad calls
on the international community, primarily the United
Nations and the African Union, to ensure that the
progress made in terms of peace and stability is upheld
and strengthened.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the Central African Republic, of 16 June 2021
(S/2021/571), details the recurrent attacks that
MINUSCA faces, imperilling the lives of peacekeepers.
Chad calls on the perpetrators of such attacks to cease
them, reiterates its full support for MINUSCA and
calls on the Security Council to grant the Mission all
resources necessary to discharge its mandate.
In conclusion, Chad recalls once again the pressing
need for inclusive political dialogue, including with
armed groups, to definitively restore peace to the
Central African Republic. Chad endorses the call by
ECCAS regarding the need for regional mediation
and underscores the importance of coordinated action
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, with a view to a resumption of dialogue
and the implementation of the peace process. Indeed,
progress on inclusive dialogue and in restoring State
authority throughout the country in the context of the
peace process will make it more likely that the embargo
imposed on the Central African Republic to prevent
weapons from falling into the hands of militias and
armed groups and exacerbating violence will be lifted.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

21-16489
