184

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

6. Further requests the Secretary-General to convene
the first session of the Advisory Committee in early
1981, to provide it with all necessary assistance and to
submit its first report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session;
7. Invites the Advisory Committee to pay particular
attention to regional and international meetings dealing
with youth or related to youth questions and requests
the Secretary-General to provide every means to assist it
in this regard;
8. Calls upon the Advisory Committee, when applying paragraph 7 above, to seek information about the
activities of regional and international meetings dealing
with youth or related to youth questions;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a list of
relevant meetings for the first session of the Advisory
Committee and invites the Committee to consider the
question of being represented at such meetings in consultation with the bodies concerned;
I 0. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to take concrete measures, through all the communications media at his disposal, to give widespread
publicity to the activities of the United Nations system
in the field of youth and to increase the dissemination of
information on youth;
11. Appeals to all States, to international governmental and non-governmental organizations and to the
public to make in due time generous voluntary contributions to supplement funds provided under the United
Nations regular budget for the costs of the programme
of the International Youth Year and requests the
Secretary-General to take all appropriate measures for
obtaining such voluntary contributions;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session the item entitled "International
Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace" and to
grant it high priority.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980

35/127.

Preservation and further development of cultural values, including the protection, restitution and return of cultural and artistic property

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
31 /39 of 30 November 1976 and 33 /49 of 14 December
1978,
Profoundly convinced of the continuing need to
develop and strengthen international cultural relations,
based on mutual respect for cultural integrity and on the
principles of equality and sovereignty of States,
Recognizing that the future of international cultural
relations is closely interrelated with the preservation,
development and promotion of cultural values as important factors of the identity and diversity of all nations.
Considering that the preservation and development
of cultural values, which form part of mankind's cultural
heritage, have a great role to play in the process of
preparation of societies for life in peace and in the furtherance of the ideals of peace, humanism and freedom,
A ware of the importance of cultural values as a
catalyst of world progress and national development.
particularly in the social and economic fields.

Conscious of the role of the cultural dimension in
plans and actions aiming at the establishment of the new
international economic order.
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization 50 on the preservation and further development of cultural values, including the protection. restitution and return of cultural and
artistic property;
2. Commends the United Nations Educational.
Scientific and Cultural Organization for including on a
continuing basis the problem of the preservation and
further development of cultural values in its mediumterm and long-term plans and for the significant results
already accomplished in that field;
3. Calls upon the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization to continue pursuing active efforts with a view to promoting the preservation and further development of cultural values, including the inscription of the subject on the agenda of
the World Conference on Cultural Policies, to be held in
1982.
92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980

35 / 128.

Return or restitution of cultural and artistic
property to its countries of origin

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December I 973,
3187 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX) of
19 November 1975, 31/40 of 30 November 1976, 32/18
of 11 November 1977, 33/50 of 14 December 1978 and
34/64 of 29 November 1979.
Recalling also the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property,' 1 adopted
by the General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on
14 November 1970,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, ' 0
A ware of the importance attached by the countries of
origin to the return of cultural property which is of fundamental spiritual and cultural value to them, so that
they may constitute comprehensive or single collections
representative of their cultural heritage,
Reaffirming that the return or restitution to a country
of its objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, manuscripts, documents and any other cultural or artistic
treasures constitutes a step forward in the strengthening
of international co-operation and the preservation and
further development of cultural values,
Deeply concerned at the persistence of the illicit traffic
in cultural property, which continues to impoverish the
cultural heritage of all peoples.
Supporting the solemn appeal launched on 7 June
1978 by the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for
the return to those who created it ofan irreplaceable cultural heritage,
''' A/35/349, annex.
' United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference. Sixteenth Session, vol. 1,
Resolutions, pp. l 3.'i-141

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
-- - - - - - - - -- · - - - - - - - ~ - - -- ··-----

1. Commends the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for the work it has
done in connexion with the return or restitution of cultural property to its countries of origin;
2. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to intensify its efforts to
help the countries concerned to find suitable solutions to
the problems relating to the return or restitution of cultural property and urges Member States to co-operate
with that organization in this area;
3. Invites Member States to draw up, in cooperation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, systematic inventories
of cultural property existing in their territories and of
cultural property abroad;
4. Appeals to all States to take adequate measures to
prohibit and prevent the illicit import, export and
transfer of ownership of cultural property;
5. Further appeals to Member States to co-operate
closely with the Intergovernmental Committee for
Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation, particularly through bilateral agreements, in
order to encourage the return or restitution of their cultural property;
6. Invites once again Governments to accede without delay to the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, of
14 November 1970;
7. Appeals to Member States to encourage the mass
information media and educational and cultural institutions to strive to arouse a greater and more general
awareness with regard to the return or restitution of cultural property to its countries of origin;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, to take the necessary measures
to alert and mobilize international public opinion in
favour of the return or restitution of cultural property to
its countries of origin, in particular by mobilizing the
United Nations information media for this purpose;
9. Expresses the desire that the second World Conference on Cultural Policies, to be held in 1982, will
devote considerable attention to the question of the return or restitution of cultural property with a view to
improving international cultural co-operation;
I0. Requests the Secretary-General to take the
above considerations into account when preparing, in
collaboration with the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the report which is to be submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session in accordance with
resolution 34 /64.
92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980
35/129.

Problems of the elderly and the aged

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 33/52 of 14 December 1978
by which it decided to convene a World Assembly on the
Elderly in 1982, as a forum to launch an international
action programme aimed at guaranteeing economic and
social security to older persons, as well as opportunities
to contribute to national c!'evelopment,

-

--- - - -

·----- -

185

Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1980 /26 of 2 May 1980 concerning the World Assembly
on the Elderly,
Recognizing that the question of aging is a complex
one which is concerned with the aging individual as well
as with the aging of populations,
Recalling, in particular, paragraph 3 of its resolution
33/52, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
elaborate, in consultation with Member States, the
specialized agencies and organizations concerned, a
draft programme for the World Assembly on the
Elderly,
Desiring that the World Assembly on the Elderly
should result in societies responding more fully to the
socio-economic implications of the aging of populations and to the specific needs of older persons,
Appreciating the leiJding role of the Centre for Social
Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat in preparing for the World Assembly on the
Elderly,
Appreciating also the financial support of the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities in the preparatory work for the World Assembly on the Elderly,
Stressing that the World Assembly on the Elderly is a
significant event through which a long-term programme of action can be launched,
Having considered with satisfaction the report of the
Secretary-General on the draft programme for the World
Assembly on the Elderly, 52
I. Calls upon the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to enable the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs, in close co-operation
with the specialized agencies and organizations concerned, to undertake all the necessary preparatory and
follow-up activities of the World Assembly on the
Elderly;
2. Adopts the recommendations of the Economic
and Social Council contained in its resolution 1980 /26;
3. Decides to change the name of the World Assembly on the Elderly to the World Assembly on Aging in
view of the interrelatedness of the issues of aging individuals and the aging of populations as defined by the
Secretary-General's draft programme;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a voluntary fund for the World Assembly on Aging and to inform Member States of the existence of the fund;
5. Appeals to Member States to make in due time
generous voluntary contributions to the Fund for the
World Assembly on Aging;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to launch a campaign, as soon as possible, to establish an appropriate
emblem for the World Assembly on Aging;
7. Invites the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities to continue to provide financial support to the
preparatory work for the World Assembly on Aging as
well as to the implementation of the international programme of action which would result from the Assembly;
8. Invites Member States to consider establishing
national committees for the World Assembly on Aging
and to conduct activities at the national level along the
lines of the Secretary-General's programme and in ways
that are in conformity with the culture, customs and
traditions of each country;
'' A/35/130.
