United Nations

S/PV.3341*

Security Council

Provisional

Forty-ninth Year

3341st Meeting
Tuesday, 1 March 1994, 6 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mérimée . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Djibouti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Cardenas
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Li Zhaoxing
Mr. Kovanda
Mr. Olhaye
Mr. van Bohemen
Mr. Ayewah
Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Mr. Khan
Mr. Lozinskiy
Mr. Abimana
Mr. Pedauye
Mr. Wood
Mr. Boardman

Agenda
1.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories
Letter dated 25 February 1994 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1994/222)
Letter dated 25 February 1994 from the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1994/223)

_________
*

Reissued for technical reasons.

94-85237 (E)

This record is subject to correction. Correction should be sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief
of the Verbatim Reporting Section, Room C-178, and incorporated in a copy of the record.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
The meeting was called to order at 6.10 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (interpretation from French): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
March, I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute,
on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Roble
Olhaye, Permanent Representative of Djibouti to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security Council
for the month of February 1994. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Olhaye for the great diplomatic
skill and unfailing courtesy with which he conducted the
Council’s business last month.

3341st meeting
1 March 1994
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia),
Mr. Batu (Turkey) and Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bahrain, Bangladesh, Japan,
Mauritania and Ukraine in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.

Adoption of the agenda
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories
Letter dated 25 February 1994 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1994/222)
Letter dated 25 February 1994 from the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1994/223)
The President (interpretation from French):
In
accordance with the decisions taken at the 3340th meeting,
I invite the representative of Israel to take a place at the
Council table; I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine
to take a place at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Egypt, Greece,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Qatar,
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey and the
United Arab Emirates to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yaacobi (Israel)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan), Mr. Lamamra (Algeria), Mr. Elaraby
(Egypt), Mr. Exarchos (Greece), Mr. Nasier (Indonesia),
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Bataineh
(Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Makkawi (Lebanon),
Mr. Elhouderi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Razali
(Malaysia), Mr. Al-Ni’mah (Qatar), Mr. Yassin (Sudan),
2

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Faihani
(Bahrain), Mr. Majid (Bangladesh), Mr. Motomura (Japan),
Mr. Ould Mohamed Mahmoud (Mauritania) and
Mr. Khandogy (Ukraine) took the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
1 March 1994 from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
which reads as follows:
"In my capacity as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, I have the honour to request that I
be invited to participate in the debate on the agenda
item ’The situation in the occupied Arab territories’,
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council."
On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in
this matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now resume its
consideration of the item on the agenda. Members of the
Council have before them document S/1994/231, which

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
contains the text of a letter dated 28 February 1994 from
the Permanent Representative of Greece to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the
text of a declaration of the European Union.
Members of the Council have also received
photocopies of a letter dated 28 February 1994 from the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council,
which will be issued as document S/1994/236.
The first speaker is the representative of Afghanistan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan) (interpretation from
French): As the first speaker as you begin your presidency
of the Security Council on this first day of March, I should
also like, Sir, to be the first to congratulate you. The
Council now has to decide on some most serious and
complex issues, and we have every confidence in your
abilities as an experienced diplomat and in your wealth of
knowledge of these issues to enable you to guide the work
of the Council to a successful conclusion.
With the deepest pain and great indignation, the entire
world has condemned the massacre committed in Al-Khalil,
or Hebron, before sunrise on Friday, 25 February, the
fifteenth day of Ramadan, the month of fasting. We are
here first and foremost to raise our voices in echo of the
voices of vast numbers of human beings.
It should be clearly understood that in occupied
Palestinian territory those armed by the occupier are
shooting not only adolescents who throw stones at the jeeps
of the occupying army, but also those who fast, as Abraham
and Moses fasted, and those who prostrate themselves
before God, the common God of the three Abrahamic
religions.
Hebron is called Al-Khalil by Palestinians, Arabs and
Muslims throughout the world, and Al-Khalil means "close
friend". Why "close friend"? Because that is where the
tomb of Abraham is found. Consulting the Koran, we find
that Sura 4, verse 125 - which I wish to quote in English,
as well as in French, and also in Arabic, which is now an
official language of the United Nations - says:
"For God did take
Abraham for a friend."
The same verse states that every believer should follow
the religion of Abraham - "millat Ibrahim" - the religion of

3341st meeting
1 March 1994
a hanif, that is, of an upright person. For Muslims,
Abraham is the spiritual patriarch of all the sincere believers
of mankind - "al-nas" - as is stated in the last verse of Sura
22 of the Holy Book of Islam, a Book where the name of
Abraham is mentioned 70 times.
This is why the haram - the precinct of this place of
Islamic pilgrimage in the city of Al-Khalil, the precinct that
was desecrated at dawn on Friday by a terrorist with the
infidel’s heart in a massacre of believers who had already
begun their fast and were prostrating themselves before the
Lord of Abraham, who is also their Lord - is the most
sacred site in Palestinian territory, after, obviously, the
Haram al-Sharif, which is the holy precinct of the city of
Al-Quds, or Jerusalem.
It might be said that the points I have just made are
religious points. But even lay people, whose way of life is
prevalent here at the United Nations, will find in them
certain socio-political facts of great importance.
Numerically speaking, the abominable massacre of
25 February set a record. Historically speaking, this is not
the first time we have condemned such an occurrence.
Indeed, three and a half years ago, on 8 October 1990, in
the Haram al-Sharif, this holy sanctuary of the city of
Al-Quds, or Jerusalem, violence committed by the Israeli
security forces left more than 20 dead and more than 150
wounded among Palestinian civilians who were in the act of
praying. Security Council resolution 672 (1990) called
upon Israel, the occupying Power, to abide scrupulously by
its legal obligations and responsibilities upon under the
Fourth Geneva Convention, applicable to all the territories
occupied by Israel since 1967 - including, clearly,
Jerusalem.
However, for a quarter of a century now, Israeli
propaganda has generally tried to suggest to the inhabitants
of settlements that they were living in territory that
belonged to them. This unofficial attitude of the Israeli
authorities prepared the ground for ideological
indoctrination that runs counter to the whole purpose of the
peace process now under way. Since the Palestinian civil
population has been living in the same territories for
centuries, those preaching hate for the peace process were
able to gain tremendous influence, particularly in the
settlements, which were set up under military occupation.
It is therefore important, first and foremost, for anyone
trying to promote the continuation of the peace process to
disarm ideologically the fundamentalist extremists in these
settlements and to convince them that the land on which
they have been installing themselves since 1967 is occupied
3

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
temporarily and unjustly. It belongs, in fact, to the
Palestinians, who have been living there for many centuries.
Anyone who strives for peace while insisting on
maintaining settlements in territory occupied militarily, and
who supports the settlers and their actions by means of
armed force will never achieve his goals of peace. This is
the lesson that we learned from the end of colonialism in
the twentieth century, and it is also the lesson of thousands
of years of the history of nations.
In our century, in this age of automatic weapons,
instruments that make it possible to kill a whole crowd of
human beings in a few seconds, it is important to start by
disarming these settlers, whether or not they be psychopaths
or lunatics.
For the moment, the massacre at dawn on Friday has
profoundly harmed not only the Palestinians but also the
credibility of the peace process. For the future, these
settlements are centres for terrorists and have been rightly
called time bombs that could destroy the entire peace effort.
The massacre of 25 February has demonstrated
irrefutably that the peace process is totally incompatible
with the actions of the armed occupation forces of armed
settlers, whether or not they wear the uniform of Israeli
reservists. Let us recall that this point has already been
made. In paragraph 4 of resolution 681 (1990), of
20 December 1990, the Israeli Government is called upon
to accept the de jure applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 to all the territories occupied by Israel
since 1967 and to abide scrupulously by the provisions of
that Convention.
Furthermore, it is an actual fact that the settlers, armed
not only with automatic weapons but also with certain
political plans, are working under the benevolent and
complaisant gaze of the occupying army. I say "political
plans" because among these settlers there are certain centres
of hatred. Consequently, there is a potential for sabotage of
the entire Palestinian-Israeli peace process.
The acts of these settlers in particular and the
occupation security forces in general are contrary to the
principles clearly enunciated by the current Government of
Israel, and hence to the Oslo negotiations of August 1993
and the Washington Declaration of Principles of
13 September 1993.
The need to protect the Palestinian civilians in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds
(Jerusalem), not only is based on international law but is
4

3341st meeting
1 March 1994
also required and made imperative by a practical and
concrete situation which the Government of Israel should
recognize as being of prime importance.
What is the solution to all this? Three consecutive
stages can be clearly envisaged.
First, the extremists, the fundamentalists, among the
settlers must be disarmed immediately.
Secondly, the rest of the settlers must be disarmed
immediately thereafter.
Thirdly - that is, in a subsequent stage - there must be
an accelerated dismantling of the Israeli settlements in all
the occupied Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds
(Jerusalem). This might, of course, require the building of
housing within Israel to which these settlers can be
transferred. The ways and means of carrying out such a
plan would be part of the peace negotiations.
At the same time, international protection of the
Palestinian civilian population is clearly necessary. The
duration of such protection will be a function of the success
of the peace process - the quicker that process is completed,
the shorter will be the time needed for such protection.
This international protection would be a positive factor,
militating in favour of satisfactory progress in the peace
process.
In conclusion, an overwhelming consequence for the
prospects for peace would seem to be the need to revise
fundamentally the agenda for the ongoing peace
negotiations - particularly to reorder the priorities radically.
The most urgent priority now is clearly the need to afford
protection to the Palestinian civilians in the occupied
territories. All the parties involved, including the United
Nations, must deal with this. It is a new chapter in the
book concerning respect for the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people - first and foremost their right to live and
to survive, and then their right to independence.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Afghanistan for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the United
Arab Emirates. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation
from Arabic): I should like to begin by expressing to you,
Sir, the congratulations of the delegation of the United Arab
Emirates on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We are certain that your
diplomatic skills and your experience will contribute to the
Council’s achievement of positive results.
I have the honour also of expressing our appreciation
and paying a tribute to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the sister country of Djibouti, for the
efficient and able way in which he presided over the
Council’s deliberations last month.
I wish also to express to you, Mr. President, and to the
other members of the Council our thanks and appreciation
for having convened the Council and for giving us the
opportunity of addressing it.
We were shocked, indeed stunned, by the magnitude
of the tragedy that befell our Palestinian brothers as a result
of the heinous carnage perpetrated by an evil, criminal
Israeli hand against persons praying at Al-Haram
Al-Ibrahimi at dawn on Friday, 25 February 1994. The
people and the Government of the United Arab Emirates
have condemned in the strongest possible terms this
criminal massacre that took a toll of more than 50 martyrs
and resulted in the wounding of hundreds of other
Palestinians.
Since this massacre took place, many Palestinians have
been killed or wounded by Israeli military forces. Their
only crime was that they were expressing their indignation
at this heinous act perpetrated against their kith and kin in
Al-Khalil. Their only crime was that they were demanding
that an end be put to the Israeli occupation of their
homeland and that they be given an opportunity to exercise
their inalienable, legitimate national rights, like all the other
peoples of the world that have attained independence and
rid themselves of the yoke of foreign occupation.
The criminal transgression against the sacred Al-Haram
Al-Ibrahimi and the murder of the Muslims praying there
was a heinous crime, totally incompatible with the sanctity
of the Holy Places which are held in such high esteem by
all the divinely revealed religions. It was also a flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law.
This bloody carnage cannot be regarded as an isolated
event. It is linked with two similar events: the arson at the
Holy Al Aqsa Mosque in El-Quds (Jerusalem) in 1969, and
the killing of 20 persons and the wounding of hundreds of
others at the Haram Al-Sharif in Jerusalem in 1990 by

3341st meeting
1 March 1994
Israeli military forces, without any regard or respect for the
fact that the Holy Places are sacred to millions of Muslims
in the world.
Israel’s record since its occupation of the Palestinian
territories is replete with examples of the desecration of
holy shrines. Anyone who analyzes these three crimes
against Muslim places of worship will conclude that Israel
is either unable or unwilling to provide adequate protection
for the holy shrines and for those worshipping in them.
Whatever the reason may be, that position is untenable.
The Israeli authorities take no measures to prevent
extremist Israeli groups from perpetrating their terrorist
crimes and acts of aggression against the Palestinian people.
To the contrary, the Israeli authorities permit those groups
and other settlers to carry weapons, on the pretext of selfdefence. But all the evidence indicates that those weapons
have been used only to attack unarmed Palestinian civilians.
Israel is attempting to shirk its responsibility for this
carnage, on the pretext that the perpetrator was deranged.
We reject that argument, both in form and in content. It
was the Israeli authorities themselves who permitted him to
carry weapons; it was they who permitted him to enter the
mosque during prayers; they took no swift, effective action
to stop the carnage. That proves that the Israeli authorities
condone the crimes perpetrated by the settlers against the
Palestinian people. Moreover, preliminary reports indicate
that some Israeli soldiers actually participated in the
murders.
The Israeli authorities confiscated Palestinian lands and
have permitted the establishment of settlements on those
lands. They have transferred tens of thousands of settlers
from all over the world to live there, in total contravention
of the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
That policy is in flagrant violation of United Nations
resolutions declaring the settlements illegal, and of the
norms of international conduct, the United Nations Charter
and the rules of international law.
In the face of this situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which is deteriorating owing to Israeli practices
against the Palestinian civilian population, the international
community, and in particular the Security Council, cannot
continue to be a helpless spectator content with declarations
of condemnation and resolutions of denunciation. It has the
duty to take decisive steps to guarantee the security and
safety of the Palestinian people.

5

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
Hence, the Government of the United Arab Emirates
calls upon the international community, and especially the
Security Council, fully to shoulder its responsibility under
the Charter and under the rules and norms of international
law by adopting an unambiguous decision to protect the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. It must also seek the
implementation of Security Council resolution 681 (1990)
and appoint an international commission to investigate the
circumstances under which the carnage was perpetrated in
Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi in Al-Khalil, taking whatever steps
are required to enable that commission to discharge its
mandate.
Recent statements by Israel regarding its intention to
disarm some settlers are not enough to prevent the repetition
of such crimes and carnage against the Palestinian people.
We therefore consider it important - indeed, necessary - that
all settlers without exception be disarmed. That measure
must be implemented in the context of a policy leading to
the dismantling of existing settlements and the return of the
settlers to Israel, in conformity with Security Council
resolution 465 (1980), paragraph 6 of which calls for the
dismantling of existing settlements.
That is the right approach for the Israeli authorities to
take if they are indeed seriously interested in achieving a
just, comprehensive, peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict and the question of Palestine.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of the United Arab Emirates for the kind
words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Elhouderi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
(interpretation from Arabic): Let me begin, Sir, by saying
how pleased I am to see you presiding over the work of the
Security Council for this month, which coincides with the
holy month of Ramadan. It is a time when the holy places
are filled and Muslims - their faces glowing with a sense of
trust and serenity - seek, through prayer, fasting and good
works, to come closer to God.
I am sure, Sir, that your ability and diplomatic skill
will enable the Council to do a remarkable job in the face
of these tragic events.

3341st meeting
1 March 1994
I wish also to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Olhaye of Djibouti, who guided the work of
the Council last month with great skill.
The events the Council is considering today constitute
a crime of collective extermination that in a brief moment
resulted in 60 deaths and some 300 injuries among
Palestinians. A Zionist gang led by an extremist American
Jew committed this crime. This gang is motivated by the
hatred that infects their hearts so deeply that they are blind
to the holiness of a House of God. This gang preyed upon
the trust and serenity of the worshippers in order to
overwhelm them with gunfire, and thus achieved their
premeditated criminal aims.
Following the crime, the malevolent masters of
propaganda announced that the crime had been committed
by a single criminal. That constitutes an attempt to harbour
criminals and save them from punishment, and to conceal
the plans to terrorize and exterminate the Palestinian people.
This propaganda reiterates that the criminal was a madman;
we are accustomed to hearing such claims following each
crime.
But the evidence shows that the perpetrators are part
of a gang of the followers of Rabbi Meir Kahane, a
terrorist, extremist Jew.
This gang has a long history of attacking places of
worship. They were the ones who set fire to the holy
mosque of Jerusalem in an attempt to blow it up. They are
also the ones who attacked Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi several
times in the past, opening fire on worshippers and stealing
its historic wealth. If they are indeed madmen they should
be kept in hospitals to prevent them from bringing about
such suffering. Such horrible carnage could not have been
brought about without premeditation and without protection
from the Zionist entity in occupied Palestine, because we
know that Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi is under the protection of
the Zionist army. Where was that army at the time this
barbarous act was committed? The Zionist army did not
remain idle: it opened fire on the Palestinians who had
gathered in the courtyard of the local hospital in Hebron to
give blood or to seek news of their loved ones. The Zionist
entity could not commit such terrorist criminal acts without
the moral and material support of the United States of
America, which turns a blind eye to the Zionist entity’s
violations of human rights and, indeed, impedes efforts to
bring it to heel. The United States is interested only in the
continuation of the peace talks.
This was a premeditated and organized criminal act,
carried out with sophisticated weapons. It was a flagrant,

6

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
violent act of aggression that typifies what the Palestinians
have to endure every day.
While the Zionist entity denounces these acts today,
others remain silent and even join the funeral cortege of
their victims. One may rightly wonder whether we are
really on the road to peace, because, so far, that road leads
only to the interests of the Zionist entity: To speak of
peace and security is to speak of the peace and security
enjoyed by that entity. But there is no security or peace for
the Palestinian people. The Zionist entity, thanks to
American support, is already enjoying the fruits of peace,
even before peace has been established. There are
agreements to provide American weapons. There are trade
agreements to ensure the security of that State, whereas the
Palestinian people only finds destruction, death and
expulsion.
The Arab peoples in general and the children with
stones in particular cannot believe in such a process; they
cannot accept a peace based on inequality and oppression.
The Arab peoples will support a just peace, one which is
aimed at freeing Palestinian and occupied Arab territories
from occupation and extremism so that Muslims, Christians
and Jews may live together in a democratic State, as is
possible today in South Africa. That is the only solution
likely to bring about a just peace, and not these false and
shameful initiatives.
The Security Council is today considering a flagrant
act of aggression - a barbaric terrorist act which threatens
international peace and security. The Security Council must
shoulder its responsibilities with the same enthusiasm and
determination it has shown in other cases which have been
considered to be threats to international peace and security.
The Council is therefore faced with a difficult test today.
It has but two options open to it: to continue with the
policy of double standards imposed by most of the
permanent members, a policy which has brought about
inequality and destroyed the Council’s credibility or to
shoulder its responsibility for safeguarding international
peace and security by implementing the Charter of the
United Nations.
The peace of the Palestinian people and its security are
seriously endangered. Hence the Security Council is in
duty bound to adopt forthwith the following measures to
guarantee to that people its right to live in peace and
security: firstly, the organization of an international enquiry
within the framework of the Security Council to ascertain
the identities of the perpetrators of the crime; secondly,
protection of the Palestinians from attacks by settlers;
thirdly, confiscation of the settlers’ weapons and withdrawal

3341st meeting
1 March 1994
of the Zionist army from Palestinian towns and villages;
fourthly, the dismantlement of Zionist settlements, which
are in fact citadels of terrorism and provocation.
If the Security Council fails to assume its
responsibility with resolve and persists in its hypocritical
policy, it will mean that Arab and Palestinian blood is
cheap and does not merit the interest of the Council.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for his
kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Makkawi (Lebanon): Sir, allow me first to
extend, on behalf of my delegation, sincerest congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency for this month. In
Lebanon, we are all well aware of your commitment to the
cause of peace in the Middle East and are confident that the
work of the Council will be conducted most efficiently
under your wise and proven leadership.
I should also like to thank your predecessor, my
brother and friend, the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Djibouti, for the exemplary manner in which he
conducted the affairs of the Council during the month of
February.
In addition, I avail myself of this opportunity to
express Lebanon’s deep gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his expeditious handling of this crisis, and for his
wisdom in offering to dispatch United Nations observers to
the occupied Palestinian territories.
The whole world is stunned by the horrendous
massacre at Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi in Al-Khalil, Hebron.
This is the first time a man has entered a place of worship
during the holy month of Ramadan and gunned down
hundreds of people prostrated in prayer. Clearly, the root
of this tragedy is the continuation of the Israeli occupation,
the insidious growth of settlements and the sustained influx
of Jewish fundamentalists into the occupied territories.
Peace in the Middle East cannot be achieved when
Palestinians are allotted only 20 per cent of their historic
land and when that 20 per cent is traumatized by 144 illegal
settlements within the Palestinian homeland.
These settlements are armed camps and hotbeds of
extremism openly hostile to the indigenous population. The
world was shocked this weekend to learn that some Jews in
7

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
Israel and the occupied territories proudly associate
themselves with the man who committed this macabre act.
This sad truth is underscored by the fact that a thousand
fundamentalists attended his funeral procession and by the
rabbi who eulogized the murderer with the words that
"One million Arabs are not worth a Jewish
fingernail."
All of us would like to believe that this was the act of
a lone, crazed gunman, but the fact remains that
Baruch Goldstein was the product of a society and ideology
supported by former Israeli Governments and funded by
ultra-Zionist groups. Some 300 dead and wounded are
hardly the work of one man, a fact which speaks of
complicity in the crime.
The Government of Israel, despite its involvement in
the Middle East peace process and its signing of the
Declaration of Principles in Washington, has done nothing
to discourage settlements or check extremist activity in the
territories. Instead it has engaged in tactical manoeuvres
aimed at postponing an Israeli troop withdrawal from Gaza
and Jericho, such as its petty arguments over Palestinian
troop sizes, border controls and Jericho’s boundaries.
Consequently, the 13 December deadline for withdrawal
from Gaza and Jericho has come and gone with no
substantive progress achieved.
Now, with the news of the massacre, Palestinians are
finding that hope is giving way to anger and desperation.
Since 1967 Israel, the occupying Power, has failed to
provide protection for the civilian population under its
occupation, as it is its obligation to do under the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. Furthermore, with the growth
of militant Judaism in the occupied lands, it is incumbent
upon Israel to redouble its efforts to provide this protection.
However, Israel’s characteristic negligence and brutality is
attested to by the fact that Israeli soldiers not only
facilitated the massacre by allowing the gunman to enter the
mosque, but were responsible for some of the deaths at the
scene, as reported by the news media. And, as if this were
not enough, soldiers have killed many demonstrators.
Lebanon knows what it is to suffer under the brutal
policies and practices of occupation, because we have
endured the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon for the
past 16 years. Not a single day passes without the death of
innocent civilians and the destruction of homes and
property. None the less, the people of Lebanon are
thoroughly convinced of the need for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, which must
encompass the Lebanese, Syrian, Jordanian and Palestinian
8

3341st meeting
1 March 1994
tracks.
However, peace cannot prevail so long as the
occupation continues, the settlements remain and Jewish
extremists continue to threaten the security of Palestinians
in the West Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem. As has been
echoed time and time here, the need for a just and equitable
solution to the Palestinian problem is the root of the broader
Arab-Israeli conflict. Such a solution is the only hope for
stability in the region and for the triumph of moderation.
Peace in the Middle East cannot be achieved unless the
Palestinians are granted their legitimate national rights and
Israel withdraws from the Palestinian and Syrian territories
in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), and from southern Lebanon, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 425 (1978).
The reality of the need for a comprehensive peace is
demonstrated by the fact that the effects of the massacre
have been felt throughout the Arab and Muslim worlds. In
Lebanon, Syria, Jordan and Egypt demonstrators rallied
vehemently against the massacre, casting a dark shadow
over the peace process. The Governments of Lebanon,
Syria and Jordan responded by suspending talks with Israel
which had been scheduled for this week.
Also, in Lebanon, just two days after the massacre, a
bomb exploded during a church service, killing nine
innocent worshippers and wounding more than 60 people.
This proves that the forces which have tried over the years
to destabilize Lebanon and undermine our unity and
national reconciliation are behind this bombing, which they
carried out in order to divert attention away from the
massacre at Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi in Al-Khalil. However,
they will not succeed. Lebanon is committed to the peace
process and is strong enough to overcome this conspiracy.
The Government and the people of Lebanon are standing
firm to ensure that the tranquillity that has reigned in
Lebanon for the last three years will continue. Furthermore,
we will do everything in our power to bring the criminals
to justice.
At this critical juncture the Government of Israel must
make a decision upon which the fate of the Middle East
peace process will depend: does it want peace enough to
dismantle the illegal settlements and bring back
130,000 settlers to Israel proper, or does it want to jettison
the whole peace process and face what is quickly becoming
a rising and insurmountable wave of religious extremism?
Israel’s condemnation of the massacre is not enough. Nor
are its promises to arrest, disarm and restrict the movement
of a handful of extremists. These empty gestures will do

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
little to affect the situation on the ground unless all settlers
are disarmed. After all, if settlers in the territories have no
confidence in Israeli military protection, then why should
the Palestinians? Either allow all civilians in the territories
to carry arms, or disarm them all.
I should like to conclude by saying that, in addition to
the immediate disarming of settlers, what is urgently needed
is for the Security Council to establish an international
presence in the West Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem to
ensure the safety and security of the Palestinian population.
Lebanon joins those Member States calling for the
establishment of a temporary international presence in the
occupied territories in accordance with Security Council
resolution 681 (1990), and as provided for in the
Declaration of Principles as a measure to be taken prior to
final-status negotiations. Until that time, the international
community must bear in mind that Israeli settlements are,
first and foremost, illegal. Secondly, they are an obstacle
to the peace process. And, finally, we have

3341st meeting
1 March 1994
learned the lesson that they are time bombs whose
explosions reverberate throughout the region.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Lebanon for his kind words addressed
to me.
There are a number of speakers remaining on my list.
In view of the lateness of the hour, I intend to adjourn the
meeting now. With the concurrence of the members of the
Council, the next meeting of the Security Council to
continue consideration of the item on the agenda will be
fixed in consultation with the members of the Council.
Before adjourning the meeting, I should like, on behalf
of the members of the Council, to express our warm thanks
and appreciation to the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Benon Sevan, for his exemplary service to the Council.
We wish him well as he takes up his new functions in the
Organization.
The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.

9
