A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/28
26 January 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 39 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/52/L.29 and Add.1)]
52/28.

Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/192 of 22 December 1992, concerning the United Nations Conference on
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and resolutions 50/24 of 5 December 1995
and 51/35 of 9 December 1996, concerning the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks,1
Recalling also resolutions I and II adopted by the Conference,2
Recognizing the importance of the Agreement for the conservation and management of straddling fish
stocks and highly migratory fish stocks and the need for the regular consideration and review of
developments relating thereto,
Recognizing also the importance of artisanal and subsistence fishers,
Noting with appreciation the information provided by States, relevant specialized agencies, international
organizations, intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations in accordance with
resolution 51/35,

1

A/CONF.164/37; see also A/50/550, annex I.

2

A/CONF.164/38, annex; see also A/50/550, annex II.

98-76165

/...

A/RES/52/28
Page 2

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,3
1. Recognizes the significance of the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks1 as an important contribution to
ensuring the conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks;
2. Emphasizes the importance of the early entry into force and effective implementation of the
Agreement;
3. Calls upon all States and other entities referred to in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement
that have not done so to ratify or accede to it and to consider applying it provisionally;
4. Also calls upon States to ensure that any declarations or statements that they have made or make
when signing, ratifying or acceding to the Agreement are consistent with articles 42 and 43 of the Agreement;
5. Takes note with concern that many commercially important straddling fish stocks and highly
migratory fish stocks have been subject to heavy and little-regulated fishing efforts and that some stocks
continue to be overfished;
6. Welcomes the fact that a growing number of States and other entities, as well as regional and
subregional fishery management organizations and arrangements, have adopted legislation, established
regulations or taken other measures to implement the provisions in the Agreement, and urges them to enforce
those measures fully,
7. Calls upon States and other entities and regional and subregional fishery management organizations
and arrangements that have not done so to consider taking measures to implement the provisions of the
Agreement;
8. Urges States, relevant specialized agencies, international organizations, intergovernmental bodies
and non-governmental organizations that have not yet done so to provide information to the Secretary-General
to ensure as comprehensive a report as possible;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session and
biennially thereafter on further developments relating to the conservation and management of straddling fish
stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, including the status and implementation of the Agreement, taking
into account information provided by States, relevant specialized agencies, in particular the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and other appropriate organs, organizations and programmes
of the United Nations system, regional and subregional organizations and arrangements for the conservation
and management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, as well as other relevant
intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that reporting on all major fishery-related activities
and instruments is effectively coordinated and duplication of activities and reporting minimized, and that
relevant scientific and technical studies are disseminated to the international community, and invites the
relevant specialized agencies, including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, as well
as regional and subregional fishery organizations and arrangements, to cooperate with the Secretary-General
to that end;

3

A/52/555.
/...

A/RES/52/28
Page 3

11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session, under an item entitled
"Oceans and law of the sea", the sub-item entitled "Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks".
57th plenary meeting
26 November 1997
