United Nations

S/PV.6028

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6028th meeting
Wednesday, 3 December 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jurica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Croatia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kumalo
Ms. Pierce
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-63120 (E)

*0863120*

S/PV.6028

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Luis MorenoOcampo, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Moreno-Ocampo to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, whom I welcome. I
now give him the floor.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I thank Council members
for the opportunity to brief the Council again on my
judicial activities. As in the past, I will endeavour to
provide as much clarity as possible on the steps
foreseen by my Office.
One year ago, in December 2007, I informed the
Council that my office would investigate who bears the
greatest responsibility for ongoing attacks against
civilians in Darfur, who maintains Minister Ahmad
Harun — a man indicted for war crimes and crimes
against humanity — in a position to commit crimes,
and who instructs Harun and others. I also informed
the Council that I was planning to investigate a third
case focusing on the attacks against African Union
peacekeepers.
Six months later, in June 2008, I informed the
Council about the details of those two cases. I
described the attacks against ethnic groups throughout
Darfur, in their villages and in the camps for displaced
persons, attacks which had been pursued over a period
of five years. Such acts required, I said at the time, the
sustained mobilization of the Sudanese State apparatus,

2

including the military, security and intelligence
services and including the integration of the militias
and Janjaweed into the reserve forces, the coordination
of the diplomatic and public information bureaucracies
and the control of the judiciary.
I indicated that the case would be presented to the
Judges by mid-July 2008. I also described the progress
of the investigation into the murderous attack by rebels
against peacekeepers in Haskanita in September 2007.
I reported again that the Sudanese Government had
taken no steps to arrest and surrender Ahmad Harun
and Ali Kushayb, against whom the Judges had issued
arrest warrants in April 2007.
Finally, I asked the Security Council to send a
strong message to the Government of the Sudan
requesting cooperation and compliance. Presidential
statement S/PRST/2008/21 of 16 June 2008 sent this
strong and united message:
“The Security Council takes note of the
efforts made by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court to bring to justice
the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Darfur ...”,
and
“the Council urges the Government of Sudan and
all other parties to the conflict in Darfur to
cooperate fully with the Court, consistent with
resolution 1593 (2005), in order to put an end to
impunity for the crimes committed in Darfur.”
Security Council resolution 1593 (2005) gave
jurisdiction to the Court. That presidential statement
confirmed the Council’s support for the judicial work
of the Court.
As announced, on 14 July 2008, I requested
Pre-Trial Chamber I to issue an arrest warrant against
President Omar Al-Bashir on charges of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. The evidence
shows that in March 2003, President Al-Bashir ordered
the attacks against the Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa ethnic
groups. Stating, “I want no prisoners or wounded, only
scorched earth”, he triggered brutal attacks in villages
and in camps for displaced persons. At least 35,000
persons have been killed; approximately 300,000
suffered a slow death; and thousands of women and
girls are the victims of rape. Today, the 2.5 million
people in the camps are being subjected to living

08-63120

S/PV.6028

conditions calculated to bring about their physical
destruction.
In response to the application, Presidential
Adviser Bona Malwal said on 25 July, “We are telling
the world that, with the indictment of our President
Al-Bashir, we cannot be responsible for the well-being
of foreign forces in Darfur”; Adam Hamid Musa,
recent Governor of South Darfur, threatened that there
would be “more genocide such as has never before
been seen by anyone” if President Al-Bashir were
indicted; and President Al-Bashir himself said, “We are
not looking for problems, but if they come to us, then
we will teach them a lesson that they will not forget.”
Such statements inciting violence are threats against
the victims and against the men and women deployed
on the ground under the authority of the Council. Such
threats should be seen for what they are: a confirmation
of criminal intentions.
The judges will rule shortly on this application. It
is time to be prepared for their ruling.
On 20 November 2008, I presented to Pre-Trial
Chamber I the Haskanita case, against three rebel
commanders allegedly responsible for the war crimes
of directing attacks against peacekeepers, murder and
pillaging. Those commanders led forces of
approximately 1,000 men with heavy weapons to attack
peacekeepers of the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS). They killed 12 peacekeepers and
severely wounded 8 others. Such attacks against
peacekeeping operations constitute exceptionally
serious offences; they strike at the heart of the
international system established for the purpose of
maintaining peace and security; and they affect the
millions of civilians whom peacekeepers are mandated
to protect.
In response to my Office’s application, there have
been reactions by five rebel groups, parties to the
conflict, stating that they are ready to collaborate with
the International Criminal Court (ICC) and to hand
over any member of their movement if so requested by
the Court. Such words must be followed by actions.
The individuals involved in the crimes will have to
come to The Hague and appear before the judges. No
one is above the law.
Over the past few months, the Government of the
Sudan has not heeded the Council’s presidential
statement contained in document S/PRST/2008/21.
Genocide continues. Rapes in and around the camps

08-63120

continue. Humanitarian assistance is still hindered.
More than 5,000 displaced persons die each month. I
repeat: each month, more than 5,000 people die.
In Kalma camp on 25 August, Government forces
armed with guns attacked civilians — Furs — ho
sought to defend themselves with sticks and spears. At
least 31 were killed and more than 65 were wounded,
including women and children. On 10 September, my
Office sent a letter to the Government of the Sudan
requesting information on national investigations or
prosecutions planned or under way in relation to the
events of 25 August. There has been no response.
In camps all over Darfur, the Humanitarian Aid
Commission, within Minister Harun’s remit, working
in close association with the intelligence and security
apparatus, is as active as ever. Significantly, the
Commission’s most recent act was to put an end to
mental health care for the displaced. Day after day, the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and others tally the incidents of
rape perpetrated against women and girls. Yet, as
recently as 7 October, President Al-Bashir publicly
stated that “mass rape does not exist” in Darfur, adding
that “women make these claims because they are
relatives of the rebels”. Villages continue to be
bombed, as evidenced by the recent air strikes on Dairi
Shagi and Oum Al-Wadi, in North Darfur. An
additional 300,000 people have been displaced since
the beginning of this year.
Complementarity is a cornerstone of the Rome
Statute. Complementarity is an opportunity for each
State to shoulder its own primary responsibility for
investigating and prosecuting crimes. As Ivo Sanader,
Prime Minister of Croatia, described in one concise
sentence in the General Assembly, “The ICC provides a
vital recourse to justice in situations where national
Governments cannot or will not address these issues
themselves” (A/63/PV.12).
In the present case, applying the complementarity
test is a straightforward matter. There has been no
change since June. There are no national proceedings
in the Sudan in relation to the massive crimes being
investigated by the Court. The report of the
Government of the Sudan circulated to the African
Union and the United Nations on 17 September 2008
officially confirms that. As the report indicates, over
the past five years, the Sudan has tried and completed
only seven cases — I repeat, seven cases — that are

3

S/PV.6028

from the dockets of the ordinary courts and, more
important, have no connection to the campaign of
crimes coordinated by Ahmad Harun, perpetrated by
Ali Kushayb and others and, as the prosecution alleges,
ordered by President Al-Bashir. The gravest case
investigated by the Sudanese authorities is that of a
student killed during a demonstration. In spite of all
the statements about the work of the Special Courts
since 2005, and in spite of recent announcements and
appointments, nothing — nothing — has been done.
Rumours of an investigation of Ali Kushayb have
not materialized to date. And Ahmad Harun, as the
Council knows, is still the Minister of State for
Humanitarian Affairs of the Sudan, in charge of the
same people he has displaced. President Al-Bashir has
publicly declared that he would not hand over Minister
Harun to the International Criminal Court, because
Minister Harun was implementing his instructions. The
impunity afforded to Ahmad Harun is a direct message
to all perpetrators of crimes in Darfur that the President
will protect those who follow his orders. It is also a
threat to the victims, to the personnel which you,
members of the Security Council, mandated on the
ground, and a direct challenge to the authority of the
Council itself.
President Kikwete of the United Republic of
Tanzania, in his capacity as President of the African
Union, stated in the General Assembly that the most
urgent matter is to save lives in Darfur. His words were
wise words. These crimes must be stopped. For years,
the Security Council and Member States have warned
the Sudanese authorities about the illegality of
bombing schools and of the dangers posed by not
disarming the militia/Janjaweed.
This is a very important issue. The mobilization
of the militia/Janjaweed has allowed President
Al-Bashir to disguise the conflict for years as a tribal
one that had nothing to do with State forces. President
Al-Bashir created the illusion of militia/Janjaweed
autonomy, and this helped him to continue to carry out
the genocide in the face of international scrutiny.
In order to stop the crimes, this Council has
repeatedly formulated key recommendations — namely,
disarming the militia/Janjaweed; ending air strikes
against civilian targets; facilitating aid; and promoting
accountability. In response, the Government of the
Sudan has offered empty promises, which have been
contradicted by their actions.

4

As early as 19 June 2004, President Al-Bashir
ordered a complete mobilization to disarm all illegal
armed groups in the Darfur region, including the
Janjaweed, only to state the day after his pledge that
this applied only to the bandits, not to the Popular
Defence Forces, Popular Police or other tribesmen
armed by the State to fight the rebels. Again, on 3 July
2004, the Government of the Sudan issued a joint
communiqué with the United Nations in which the
Government promised to disarm the militias, bring the
perpetrators of human rights abuses to justice and
remove any obstacles to humanitarian access. The list
is endless.
In Italy, on 15 September 2007, President
Al-Bashir promised a ceasefire. Three weeks later,
Sudanese troops and their allied militias killed over 30
civilians in an attack on Muhagiriya in South Darfur.
On 19 December 2007, President Al-Bashir gave a
public address, stating the Government’s unilateral
commitment to a ceasefire in Darfur. Aerial
bombardments of civilians ensued within a month, with
strikes against the villages of Abu Surouj, Sirba and
Suleia in January and February 2008. Recently, on
17 October 2008, the Secretary-General reported to the
Security Council that the Government of the Sudan had
yet to stop aerial bombardments; had yet to take steps
to disarm the militia/Janjaweed; and had yet to comply
with its obligations under humanitarian law to protect
civilians. On 12 November, President Al-Bashir
pledged once again to commit to a ceasefire and to
disarm the Janjaweed. On 19 November, one week
later, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said that the
United Nations was again looking into reports of
continuing aerial bombings on civilians in Darfur.
When it comes to justice, furthermore, only
words have been offered. Opening the Sudanese
People’s Initiative one month ago, President Al-Bashir
said:
“Because we believe that justice is a paramount
value and ... is the foundation of good
governance, we announce our commitment to
establish the rule of law in all parts of Darfur in
order to do justice to the oppressed.... I have
instructed all legal bodies to continue performing
their duties in Darfur without laxity, paying
special attention to acting on complaints and
finalizing legal procedures in the best possible
way in order to guarantee the conduct of fair
trials in total transparency.”

08-63120

S/PV.6028

Nevertheless, every day we hear of human rights
defenders being arrested and tortured in Khartoum.
Three were arrested last week and tortured on account
of giving information to the International Criminal
Court. So-called suspected ICC witnesses are being
arrested and tried for treason. Sudanese officials are
looking for possible witnesses in order to silence them.
This is not how evidence is collected; this is how
crimes are covered up. This is the “justice to the
oppressed” that President Al-Bashir is talking about.
All the partners of the Sudan have advised it that
the only way forward is to take concrete and concise
steps. The Sudanese authorities have not taken any.
President Al-Bashir could have disarmed the militia,
stopped attacks on civilians, returned land to the
displaced, arrested and surrendered Harun and
Kushayb to the ICC in The Hague. He has not done so.
He continues to implement his plan to destroy entire
ethnic groups. His criminal behaviour includes
providing immunity and concealing crimes. President
Al-Bashir is using the diplomatic apparatus and
campaigning against the ICC. President Al-Bashir is
trying to convince organizations and the Security
Council that they have to protect him. The international
community cannot be part of such a cover-up. Faced
with genocide and crimes against humanity, we know
that inaction and business as usual are part of the
crimes. The victims are not afraid of justice.
The Council has identified four tracks for a
comprehensive solution in Darfur: peace, security,
humanitarian aid and justice. None can succeed in
isolation.
Peacekeepers and aid workers should not be
forced to work in an environment where the crimes
they are trying to prevent are ordered by President
Al-Bashir himself. In such an environment, their
efforts will never be enough. As long as the arsonists
are in charge, it does not matter how many firefighters
you send. There will never be enough.
The Security Council requested judicial
intervention. My Office investigated those bearing the
greatest responsibility. All the arrest warrants and all
the requests for arrest warrants have been made public.
There are no others. Ahmed Haroun and Ali Kushayb
must be surrendered to the Court. All parties to the
conflict must respect the law.
The decision on the request for an arrest warrant
against President Al-Bashir is now in the hands of the

08-63120

judges. The Council must be prepared. If the judges
decide to issue an arrest warrant against President
Al-Bashir, there will be a need for united and
consistent action to ensure the execution of the arrest
warrant. President Al-Bashir will insist on denying his
crimes and will offer a few words. President Al-Bashir
will insist on getting the Council’s protection.
The international community cannot conceal the
crimes. President Al-Bashir’s criminal actions should
not be ignored. Statements of ceasefires followed by
bombings, denial of mass rapes or promises of justice
while torturing the witnesses should not be supported.
The international community cannot be part of any
cover-up of genocide or crimes against humanity.
As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica,
Bruno Stagno Ugarte, said in June (see S/PV.5905), all
we need is for the States members of the Security
Council to muster the political will necessary to
enforce full compliance with resolution 1593 (2005) by
the authorities in Khartoum. Enough appeasement: the
time has passed for continuing to accommodate evil.
The President: I thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for
his briefing. I shall now give the floor to the members
of the Security Council.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): Once again, Sir, we would like to
congratulation you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to assure you of our full and constructive cooperation.
We would also like to express our high appreciation to
Mr. Jorge Urbina and his staff for their exemplary
conduct of the Council’s work in November.
We thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for his
briefing, although we have some criticisms of it. We
believe that peace and justice are inseparable
objectives and are necessary for the settlement of any
conflict, whether in Darfur or elsewhere. We believe
that judicial justice can be achieved only in an
environment of security and political stability. The
establishment of peace and stability is thus an objective
prerequisite for upholding justice. We therefore always
attempt to avoid any measures that could have a
negative impact on efforts to the establish security and
achieve a political settlement.
Regrettably, the recent step taken by the
Prosecutor regarding an arrest warrant against the

5

S/PV.6028

President of the Sudan, Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, raises
legitimate questions and concerns. That step comes at
an extremely sensitive time when the deployment of
the hybrid force has begun and when further regional
and international efforts are being made to move the
political process ahead. This is precisely the time at
which the Prosecutor has taken this step.
The report of the Prosecutor speaks of all the
measures taken in accordance with the mandate
accorded by resolution 1593 (2005). We hope that that
mandate will be complied with objectively and
professionally, in order to ensure justice, and with a
comprehensive understanding of this extremely
complicated subject.
Many claims and accusations have been made,
foremost among which is the 14 July 2008 request that
the ICC to issue an arrest warrant against the President
of the Republic of the Sudan, Mr. Omar Hassan
Al-Bashir, within the context of accusations of crimes
of genocide. This request was made in a manner that
gave the impression that we are dealing with a
Government whose sole concern is to obliterate its
most important components, namely, its people and its
social fabric.
Experience and a concern for justice have taught
us that strong words — and here I am referring to
resolution 1593 (2005) — are not conducive to finding
solutions or to creating an environment of cooperation
and assistance with the Government of the Sudan, as
called for by both the resolution and the report before
us. To the contrary, strong words endanger the growing
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. All of us understand that, by its very nature,
cooperation is a dynamic process that can only be
successful through calm dialogue and mutual trust,
however
differently
we
may
interpret
the
complementary nature of the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court or the Sudan’s
commitment to resolution 1593 (2005).
Although the report indicates that the Prosecutor
has been actively involved with the United Nations, the
African Union, the League of Arab States and other
organizations, it does not address the apprehensions
and concerns expressed by those bodies in many
resolutions and statements with regard to the negative
impact of the latest measure taken against the President
of the Republic of the Sudan. For example, in its

6

communiqué of 21 July 2008, the African Union Peace
and Security Council expressed its conviction that,
“in view of the delicate nature of the process
under way in the Sudan, approval by the Pre-Trial
Chamber of the application by the ICC
Prosecutor could seriously undermine the
ongoing efforts aimed at facilitating the early
resolution of the conflict in Darfur and the
promotion
of
long-lasting
peace
and
reconciliation in the Sudan as a whole and, as a
result, may lead to further suffering for the
people of the Sudan and greater destabilization
with far-reaching consequences for the country
and the region” (S/2008/481, annex, para. 9).
Should not all those considerations be taken into
account by everyone who is truly concerned about
ensuring justice and ending the humanitarian suffering
in the region?
In the same communiqué, the African Union
Peace and Security Council requested the United
Nations Security Council, in accordance with article 16
of the Rome Statute, to defer the process initiated by
the International Criminal Court. Undoubtedly, the
motive of the African Union Peace and Security
Council is to establish peace and end human suffering,
which are prerequisites for ensuring justice.
In addition to that example and the position of the
African Union, which is the main partner of the United
Nations in the Hybrid Operation in Darfur, other
regional organizations such as the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the League of Arab States have
expressed similar positions in statements and decisions
that they have adopted. We therefore call on the
international community, as represented in the Security
Council, to take the initiative to respond to the
concerns expressed and requests made by those
organizations stemming from their interest in
maintaining international peace and security.
We have recently seen great momentum in the
Sudan in favour of establishing peace in Darfur.
Decisions have been taken by the Sudan People’s
Initiative, with the participation of all political entities
and stakeholders in Darfur and the Sudan. These
decisions have been widely welcomed at the national,
regional and international levels and have engendered
hope for the chances of achieving peace in Darfur.
Ensuring justice and combating impunity have been at
the centre of those recommendations and decisions.

08-63120

S/PV.6028

In conclusion, Libya would like to reiterate its
strong commitment to the principles of peace and
justice and to not permitting impunity. We should also
like to express our ongoing readiness to take part in
every effort aimed at establishing peace and ensuring
justice in Darfur. We call upon the international
community, the African Union and the Arab League to
pursue their joint efforts to find a resolution to that
bloody conflict, so as to create the conditions
necessary to ensure justice.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo
for his report. His statement prompts me to make six
comments.
First, serious crimes continue to be committed in
Darfur today. The information provided by the
Prosecutor in that regard is alarming. We encourage
him to continue his investigations into the situation.
Secondly, the arrest warrants issued for
Mr. Haroun and Mr. Kushayb have not yet been
executed. To the contrary, Sudanese officials have once
again reiterated that the Government of the Sudan does
not intend to cooperate with the Court and that, in
particular, in violation of a resolution of the Security
Council, that it has no intention to surrender those two
persons to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Thirdly, the report contains detailed information
about the second matter at hand, namely, the charges
against President Omer Al-Bashir, against whom the
Prosecutor has requested an arrest warrant. My
delegation is deeply concerned about information
regarding the systematic involvement of the State
apparatus in a plan to destroy ethnic groups, which is
the basis for the charge of genocide being made by the
Prosecutor. In particular, the allegations of systematic
rape aimed at annihilating populations, and policies
whose purpose is to methodically starve the same
populations, must be either confirmed or disproved
through a judicial process. Persons being investigated
by the Court, now and in the future, as well as the
Government of the Sudan, must reply seriously to
those accusations, rather than verbally attacking the
ICC and the Prosecutor. Given the extreme seriousness
of the matter at hand, my delegation is more than ever
convinced that the judicial process must continue in
total independence. The populations of Darfur will not
be able to enjoy lasting peace as long as impunity
reigns.

08-63120

Fourthly, my delegation takes note of the opening
of a third investigation of war crimes allegedly
committed by three rebel commanders. Intentional
attacks against peacekeeping staff and materiel are
unacceptable and must be prosecuted in conformity
with the Rome Statute.
Fifthly, we thank the Prosecutor for explaining in
his report and briefing the issues relating to
admissibility and complementarity. These clarifications
are welcome because a degree of confusion often exists
around these central notions of the Rome Statute. As
the Prosecutor says in his report:
“The Office is not mandated to assess the
Sudanese judicial system as a whole, or to
monitor judicial proceedings in the Sudan ...
“The complementarity test is whether or not
the Government of the Sudan has genuinely
investigated or prosecuted, or is genuinely
investigating or prosecuting the cases selected for
prosecution by the Office …
“Furthermore, it is the responsibility of the
Government of the Sudan, or the individual
concerned, should they assess that such national
investigation or prosecution exist, to come to the
ICC and challenge the admissibility of the case.
This cannot be done through the media or through
the reports of intermediaries. It can only be done
through proper legal channels. Finally, the
decision rests with the ICC Judges.”
Sixthly, my delegation is pleased to note the
many meetings between the Prosecutor and the
representatives of States and organizations, particularly
in Africa. This communication is indispensable and can
help to dissipate a number of misunderstandings and
confusion with regard to the issue of complementarity,
the basis for the jurisdiction of the Court in Darfur, as
well as misunderstandings with regard to the role of the
Prosecutor. In this regard, it is useful to recall, as the
Prosecutor did at the conclusion of his briefing, that
“[t]here is no immunity on account of rank or
official position before the International Criminal
Court for persons against whom warrants of
arrest have been issued by the Judges of this
Court”.
A number of conclusions should be drawn from
what I have said. First, we must reaffirm the need to
allow the International Criminal Court to do its work in

7

S/PV.6028

complete independence
interference.

and

oppose

all

political

Secondly, the Government of the Sudan must
cooperate with the Court and the Prosecutor, as
required by resolution 1593 (2005) and as was recalled
in the presidential statement of 16 June 2008. In
particular, the Government must arrest and hand over
the two individuals against whom arrest warrants have
been issued — one of whom is still a Government
minister — so that they can present their defence
before the Court.
Thirdly, we must also urge all parties to the
conflict to abstain from all violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights.
Fourthly, the Security Council must not tolerate
and must hold the Sudanese authorities responsible for
any threat or reprisal against the peacekeeping forces,
humanitarian workers or civilians in Darfur that might
be organized following the issuance of an arrest
warrant against the President. These threats should —
and once again I quote the Prosecutor — “be seen for
what they are — a confirmation of criminal intentions
and not rewarded with promises of impunity. The
Security Council would discredit itself if it were to
allow itself to be manipulated by blackmail.
Finally, Belgium supports the call of the
Prosecutor to consider imposing sanctions in the form
of a travel ban or an assets freeze against persons or
groups protecting persons against whom arrest
warrants have been issued.
Mr. Ripert (France)(spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for
his report, submitted pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005).
In 2005, the Security Council referred the
situation in Darfur to the International Criminal Court
(ICC), pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter, in
response to the extremely serious violations of
international humanitarian law committed in that
region.
The most recent quarterly report of the Prosecutor
unfortunately confirms that, six years later, these
violations are continuing and that serious and repeated
crimes falling under the jurisdiction of the ICC and
within the purview of resolution 1593 (2005), continue
to be committed in Darfur. Therefore, the submission
to the Court remains fully justified.

8

In its preamble, the Rome Statute emphasizes that
crimes as serious as those perpetuated in Darfur
“threaten the peace, security and the well-being of the
world” and affirms that “the most serious crimes of
concern to the international community as a whole
must not go unpunished”.
These words provide a full explanation of the
Security Council’s action. We adopted resolution 1593
(2005) because the struggle against impunity is
inseparable from the restoration of peace and security
to Darfur. By its resort to article 13 of the Rome
Statute, the Security Council, the principle organ for
the maintenance of international peace and security, is
fully carrying out the mission entrusted to it by the
United Nations Charter.
Three investigations on the crimes committed in
Darfur have been opened by the Prosecutor since the
adoption of resolution 1593 (2005). The first led to the
issuance by the Court of arrest warrants against
Mr. Ahmed Haroun and Mr. Ali Kushayb for crimes
against humanity and war crimes. The second led the
Prosecutor to request the issuance of an arrest warrant
of the President of the Sudan for genocide, crimes
against humankind and war crimes. Finally, in the
third, the Prosecutor placed before the Court charges
on war crimes against three rebel commanders
allegedly responsible for the Haskanita attack against
African Union forces.
In the first instance, the Government of the Sudan
is still not cooperating with the Court in the carrying
out of the arrests of Mr. Haroun and Mr. Kushayb. At
the moment, nothing leads us to believe that it intends
to carry out these arrests. Mr. Haroun even continues to
occupy his ministerial functions.
In the two other cases, we await the decision of
the Court, which will make a fully independent ruling
based on the merits of the indictments. As the
Prosecutor has emphasized, no procedure has actually
been begun within the Sudanese judicial system
regarding the cases currently before the ICC.
France is dedicated to the authority of both the
Security Council and the ICC, the judicial body
authorized to punish the most serious crimes against
international humanitarian law and human rights.
The responsibility for the present situation in
Darfur falls neither on the Security Council, which has
taken the measures it deems necessary for the

08-63120

S/PV.6028

maintenance and restoration of peace, nor on the ICC
and its various bodies, to which the Council entrusted a
mission which it is exercising in full independence.
The Sudanese authorities have the obligation to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court with
regard to the execution of the warrants issued for
Mr. Haroun and Mr. Kushayb. They could, for
example, themselves undertake to pursue the two
accused under national jurisdiction in accordance with
articles 17 to 19 of the Statute of Rome.
Furthermore, the Sudanese authorities bear a
heavy portion of the responsibility for hindering
international deployment and humanitarian activity in
Darfur, for the cross-border activity of armed groups
aimed at destabilizing the neighbouring country of
Chad and for the absence to date of a potential political
solution to the crisis.
Progress has recently been made in the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the renewal of moratoria
on the restrictions on humanitarian operations and the
resumption of diplomatic relations with Chad.
However, that does not constitute a radical change in
the policy of the Sudanese authorities in Darfur.
Attacks continue despite the proclamation of a +unilateral cessation of hostilities; the Janjaweed militia
show no signs of concern; the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. For their part, the rebels must
assume their full responsibility in seeking to reduce
violence, to respect international law and to effect the
active resumption of the political process.
As the Prosecutor has done in his report, I would
like to recall the language of the presidential statement
adopted by the Security Council, our Council, on
16 June:
“The Security Council takes note of the
efforts made by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court to bring to justice
the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Darfur and … the transmittal by the
Registry of the International Criminal Court to
the Government of the Sudan on 16 June 2007 of
arrest warrants and the opening by the Prosecutor
of other investigations on crimes committed by
various parties in Darfur.
“In this respect, the Council urges the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur to cooperate fully with the

08-63120

Court, consistent with resolution 1593 (2005), in
order to put an end to impunity for the crimes
committed in Darfur” (S/PRST/2008/21).
That presidential statement remains fully
relevant. The Sudanese Government’s dispute of both
the authority of the Security Council and the
jurisdiction of the Court is not admissible. We must
remind the Sudan of its obligations to respect the
Security Council’s resolutions and to cooperate with
the International Criminal Court in the implementation
of resolution 1593 (2005). In 2005, the Security
Council gave the Court the task of fighting impunity in
Darfur in the interests of justice and peace. The
Sudanese Government must cooperate with the Court
to carry out this mission, as do all other parties to the
conflict in Darfur and, more generally, all States and
regional and international organizations concerned.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate Croatia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I believe that, under your guidance, the
work of the Security Council will proceed very
smoothly.
We appreciate the briefing to the Security
Council by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on the latest
developments in dealing with impunity in Darfur. The
question of the Sudan covers two issues: the NorthSouth question and that of the Darfur region. The
problem of Darfur involves the political process,
peacekeeping deployment, economic development,
humanitarian relief assistance and judicial justice. The
situation is complex and very tough. Currently, the
international community is focused on two major
issues: first, whether the peaceful situation can be
maintained in the Sudan; and secondly, whether the
largest mission in the history of United Nations
peacekeeping can be implemented smoothly and
achieve its desired results.
At present, North-South relations in the Sudan,
next year’s presidential election and the political
processes in Darfur are at very sensitive junctures. As
the Sudan is the largest country in Africa in terms of
geography, the question of whether peace can be
maintained there is of great significance to the region
and the African continent as a whole. It will take a
great political wisdom to find a balanced and
comprehensive way to achieve peace and justice.

9

S/PV.6028

Regional conflict usually leads to massive human
rights violations and criminality. In recent years, in the
context of the international community’s cooperative
efforts to address regional hotspots, answers have been
proposed for addressing impunity and achieving
international judicial fairness. However, the pursuit of
international judicial justice should be carried out with
the ultimate aim of putting an end to conflict and in the
wider context of restoring peace.
We recall that, in recent years, international
judicial action against impunity has been successful
only in situations where conflict has ceased and peace
has been consolidated. In such circumstances, judicial
practices are less likely to experience interference from
political factors and are thus more likely to achieve
justice. The hasty launch of legal proceedings while
conflict is ongoing will inevitably result in interference
in the relevant political processes. In such
circumstances, no good results will be obtained, even
with the best intentions to pursue international justice.
The International Criminal Court embodies the
expectations and aspirations of nations to pursue
international justice. To that end, the Court needs the
political trust and support of all nations. In July, the
Prosecutor of the ICC announced the Court’s charges
against leaders of the Sudan, causing considerable
worldwide repercussions. Many States are concerned
that this move will have a negative impact on peace in
the Sudan. The League of Arab States and the African
Union have both expressed their serious concern.
The Government of the Sudan is working to end
impunity in Darfur through national proceedings.
Furthermore, the Government of the Sudan has also
been making new efforts, including through active
cooperation with the United Nations peacekeeping
deployment. It has expressed its support for the Carter
initiative and for the peaceful efforts of the Joint Chief
Mediator to promote negotiations. It has also
announced a ceasefire in Darfur. All these measures
deserve to be acknowledged and welcomed.
The
Chinese
Government
supports
the
international community’s efforts to achieve peace and
international justice in Darfur. We appeal to the
International Criminal Court in the spirit of
cooperation to create a situation in which its efforts,
together with those of other parties of the international
community, can interact positively to jointly promote
the peace process in the Sudan.

10

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I wish at the outset to thank Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for the eighth report of the
Prosecutor on steps being taken to investigate the
situation in Darfur pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1593 (2005), and for his briefing today. This
contained both analytical and emotional elements, as
well as political views that exceeded the boundaries of
the competence of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court.
The Russian Federation views the report’s
information on the unceasing violence in Darfur with
profound regret and concern. It is clear that this
violence can reliably be stopped only through clear
progress towards a political settlement in that region of
the Sudan. In that regard, the Security Council bears a
great responsibility with respect to ensuring the
effectiveness of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, carried out under a
Council mandate.
We take note of the Prosecutor’s aspiration to
carry out his functions in an independent and unbiased
manner. But there is also a need to balance the
demands of personal responsibility and the interests of
the peace process. Work in the legal sphere must
proceed taking into account the joint efforts towards a
settlement of the situation in Darfur and in the Sudan
as a whole.
On numerous occasions in the past, the Russian
Federation has noted the importance of an objective
assessment of the actions of all parties to the conflict.
We are satisfied by the fact that steps are being taken
in the investigation to clarify the circumstances of the
September 2007 attack on African Union peacekeepers
at Haskanita. At the same time, however, in spite of the
difficulties in this area of the investigation, it is
important to step up work to gather information about
the activities of rebel factions.
It is well known that the Prosecutor’s decision to
approach the judges of the ICC with a request for an
arrest warrant against President Al-Bashir of the Sudan
did not produce a unanimous reaction: it evoked
diverse reactions in international circles. Specifically,
authoritative regional organizations such as the African
Union and the League of Arab States expressed their
concern about an indictment’s possible negative

08-63120

S/PV.6028

consequences for the situation in the Sudan. We fully
understand their position on this issue.
At the present politically sensitive stage, it might
well make sense to focus efforts on measures designed
to restore dialogue and trust among the parties to the
conflict. In our view, steps taken by the Sudan side to
create its own capacity to investigate crimes that fall
within the jurisdiction of the ICC should be
encouraged. In that regard we take note of the letter
dated 17 November 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2008/714), containing
information about Khartoum’s latest initiatives in this
area.
For its part, the Russian Federation will continue
to do everything in its power to bring about peace in
Darfur.
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): I too would like,
on behalf of my delegation and on my own account, to
thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for his important
briefing. I reiterate Italy’s full support for the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and for the work of
the Prosecutor. Italy appreciates the difficult
circumstances in which the Prosecutor is conducting
this investigation and wishes to renew its strong
confidence in him and in the Court. Italy believes that
full support for him by the Security Council should
emerge from today’s debate.
More than three years have passed since the
adoption of resolution 1593 (2005). On that occasion
the Council decided to send a strong signal that peace
and justice must be pursued hand in hand. Today we
are being told once again that appalling crimes against
civilians, including heinous violence against women,
continue to be committed in Darfur in a climate of
impunity. And we are being told that Sudanese
institutions are still not cooperating with the
International Criminal Court, while worrisome
allegations are increasingly being made concerning the
continuing involvement of the Sudanese Government
in facilitating the activities of the Janjaweed militias.
The need for a more effective approach to the conflict
in Darfur, encompassing the humanitarian, security,
political and rule-of-law dimensions, is today more
urgent than ever in order to restore and maintain a
lasting peace. There is no doubt that bringing to justice
those responsible for serious and continued violations

08-63120

of international humanitarian law and human rights law
cannot be avoided, in order to contribute to peace in
Darfur and throughout the country.
Italy welcomes the action undertaken by the
Prosecutor with regard to the attacks against the
African Union peacekeeping mission at Haskanita in
2007. The Rome Statue is clear in qualifying that type
of crime as a war crime. At the same time, we strongly
condemn all attacks against the civilian population,
non-governmental organizations and humanitarian
organizations, as described in the Prosecutor’s report.
Resolution 1593 (2005) must be fully
implemented. I should like to recall that in its
paragraph 2 it requires that
“the Government of Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur, shall cooperate fully with
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution”.
We are concerned by the reports of continued
lack of cooperation, to which I have referred, and by
the fact that the two arrest warrants that have been
issued have not yet been executed. The European
Union has issued many clear statements calling on the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate unconditionally
with the ICC and to surrender the two individuals for
whom it has issued arrest warrants. It may also be
appropriate to recall that the Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur are under
a specific obligation to comply with Security Council
resolutions. In that regard, we believe that the Security
Council should carefully and promptly consider the
issue of the possible adoption of individual sanctions
with respect to those against whom arrest warrants
have been issued.
Italy encourages the ongoing dialogue and
diplomatic efforts deployed to date by the ICC, the
African Union and the League of Arab States, as cited
in the report. Fighting impunity is an important priority
for the international community, but that principle,
which is at the core of the Rome Statute of the ICC,
has yet to be translated into consistent practice. The
Court is entitled to intervene only when national
authorities are unwilling or unable to genuinely
prosecute. All States are under the primary obligation
to prevent or to punish offences committed in their
territories.

11

S/PV.6028

It is still possible for the Government of the
Sudan, in the context of Darfur, to prove that it can
prosecute and punish those who have committed
crimes, at all levels, in its national courts. Justice,
however, can no longer be postponed.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for his
introduction of the eighth report on the activities of his
Office with respect to the Darfur conflict. We take note
of the report.
It is now a truism to say that the situation in the
Sudan continues to be of great concern, given the very
large number of victims both among civilians and
among personnel of peacekeeping operations. We
reaffirm that deliberate attacks against civilian
populations and peacekeeping forces are unacceptable,
irrespective of who carries them out. Faced with so
complex and tragic conflict as that of Darfur, the
international community must therefore demonstrate
ingenuity and courage in order to bring about a
comprehensive political solution as quickly as possible.
We therefore welcome the numerous international
initiatives of the United Nations, the African Union and
several States, including Qatar, to help the people of
the Sudan to survive their difficult ordeal. We thank in
particular the joint United Nations-African Union
Mediator for his ongoing efforts to that end. We also
pay tribute to the women and men of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), who work every day in particularly trying
conditions at the side of the people of the Sudan. For
their part, the Sudanese parties have also made major
commitments to finding a solution to the conflict.
However, their efforts remain clearly insufficient, and
they must be urged to be bolder and more engaged.
Faithful to the principles of justice and the rule of
law, Burkina Faso wishes to reaffirm, as the African
Union has already done, its dedication to fighting
impunity and to promoting equal justice for all in the
Sudan, and in Darfur in particular, without which no
political solution to the crisis can endure. That is the
only way to ensure that justice is done on behalf of the
thousands of victims of the war.
Burkina Faso believes that the search for a
political solution and the administration of justice are
not at all contradictory so long as the integrity of each
process is fully maintained. That is why, as a State

12

party to the Rome Statute, my country reaffirms yet
again its full support for the activities of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and believes that
those activities must be undertaken with the greatest
possible caution and in the context of a purely judicial
approach, with the sole objective of revealing the truth,
prosecuting the guilty and protecting the interests of
the victims in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005).
There is a particular need to avoid any action that
could weaken the population’s trust in the international
community and thereby polarize the positions of
parties, which could undermine all ongoing efforts and
scuttle the political process, including the deployment
of UNAMID, which we believe is not what the
international community seeks to achieve. There is thus
a need to assess opportunities in a dispassionate and
objective manner and to take measures to ensure that
equitable justice is served, while maintaining peace in
Darfur, the Sudan and the region.
Follow-up and the success of the political process
are to a great extent in the hands of the United Nations
and the African Union, which, in support of that
process, have decided together to deploy in Darfur the
largest peacekeeping mission in history. We therefore
invite the Sudanese Government to take all necessary
steps to cooperate in the prosecution of persons
recognized as being guilty of war crimes and crimes
against humanity and, in general, to cooperate in
combating impunity.
The Security Council, which has referred the case
of Darfur to the ICC, must continue to closely follow
developments in the prosecution and to pursue its
consideration of the issue. It cannot reject any potential
solution or spare any effort. It must be ready to listen
to all, including the victims, the Court and, above all,
its African Union partner. The African Union has
always reaffirmed — in particular in its communiqué
of 21 July — its conviction that “in order to achieve
long-lasting peace and reconciliation in Darfur, it is
imperative to … bring to justice the perpetrators of
gross human rights violations in that region”
(S/2008/481, annex, para. 10). It is not advocating
impunity in Darfur, but rather insisting on the need to
preserve the integrity of all political and judicial
processes and to ensure that the will for justice does
not entail the taking of decisions that could jeopardize
the political process.

08-63120

S/PV.6028

Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I am convinced that your abilities and
experience will ensure your successful leadership of
our work.
I thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for his introduction of his report
to the Council today.
We often feel that the international community is
not yet fully aware of the true significance of the
creation and consolidation of the ICC. The Court
undoubtedly represents a transcendent step in the
process of strengthening international law. We have
clearly stated on other occasions that, as a member of
the Council, Costa Rica intends to the best of its
abilities to represent the interests of the small States
that make up more than half the membership of the
Organization and whose independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity depend on awareness and the strict
observance of international law.
It is precisely for that reason that my country
welcomed the creation of the Court and works
assiduously to consolidate it. An international order
that is unable to deliver punishment for the most
serious crimes against humanity is one that cannot
offer guarantees or protection to the millions of human
beings who are subject to barbarity. We must raise our
voices on behalf of those innocent victims and work to
strengthen international law.
Fortunately, acting under Chapter VII of the
Charter, in 2005 the Council adopted resolution 1593
(2005), putting the capacities of the young ICC to the
test. I am that sure that, in adopting that resolution, the
Council was aware that it was not only testing the
Court’s capacities, but, more important, expressing its
commitment to implementing the Court’s decisions. In
referring the case to the Court, we were not merely
lending it our support, but also committing ourselves to
implementing and cooperating in the implementation
of its decisions.
If the judges of the Court accede to the new
requests of the Prosecutor by issuing new arrest
warrants, all of those responsible will have the
opportunity to exercise their full legal rights under the
Rome Statute. My delegation is concerned that such
warrants will simply be added to the list of those that
have yet to be implemented. In April 2007, the judges

08-63120

of the Court issued two arrest warrants against Ahmed
Haroun and Ali Kushayb, but unfortunately those
individuals remain free and continue to occupy
important posts in the Government of the Sudan.
My Government regrets the pressure that has
been applied on this Council to work for the
suspension of the Court’s decisions. We believe that
the pressure should be applied on the Government of
the Sudan so that they comply with the requirements of
the Court, and not on this Council for it to suspend the
Court’s decisions.
Costa Rica agrees with and endorses the
recommendations of Prosecutor Ocampo. This Council
should begin to consider what should be our next steps
to enforce the arrest warrants, to ensure that the
Council’s decisions in resolution 1593 (2005) are
implemented.
We cannot today change the facilities provided by
the Government of the Sudan for the deployment of
UNAMID. They cannot be exchanged for more new
crimes, for more impunity and for the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Sudan. Nor can we
content ourselves with new calls for cooperation with
the Court. We did that in presidential statement number
21 earlier this year, and cooperation with the Court
continues to be zero. This afternoon the Council will
hear Mr. Holmes, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, speak of the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Darfur. We cannot be
satisfied with the adjustments made for the deployment
of UNAMID and say nothing about the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Sudan.
Costa Rica recalls once again that because of its
very nature the Court is not equipped to arrest those
persons. No court of justice in the world has that role.
Costa Rica understands that execution of the arrest
warrants is up to States and, ultimately, to the
international community.
This is not the time to be content with meeting on
a six-month schedule. To the contrary, this is the
moment to increase the pressure to finally bring about
the needed cooperation with the Court. This Council
should not give in to the voices that insist that we are
endangering the peace process in the Sudan. We
already know, and we have been warned, that there
may be reprisals. The situation could get even worse,
but true peace will be closer to hand. We should
know — as the poets of old have so often said — that

13

S/PV.6028

night is darkest just before dawn. The Council cannot
hesitate to enforce the decisions of the Court and to
hold perpetrators responsible for the consequences of
their actions.

be brought to justice without delay. My delegation
deeply regrets and is concerned by the information
contained in the report on the ongoing crimes by all
parties.

It is urgent that we begin a process that takes a
serious look into the issue of complying with the
mandates of the Court. We need to revise the broad
range of instruments available to the international
community to meet its objectives and to place some of
them at the service of the Court’s effectiveness,
because the Court’s future depends on that
effectiveness.

A great deal has been said today about problems
in establishing cooperation between the International
Criminal Court and the Government of the Sudan. My
delegation regrets that no progress has been achieved
in this matter. In addressing the matter of cooperation
between the Court and the Sudan, my delegation
reasserts the importance of viewing it from a broader
perspective. It should be also approached in the context
of a search for a comprehensive solution to the
situation in Darfur, which is comprised of four
dimensions: political, peacekeeping, humanitarian and
legal dimensions. They are all mutually reinforcing and
complementary to one another. Our efforts in all
dimensions need mutual cooperation and reinforcement
rather than division and isolation of certain
dimensions. As the Prosecutor stated this morning in
his briefing, none can succeed in isolation.

We are in the presence of a State that does not
want to — or is not able to — protect its population,
who are the target of war crimes, crimes against
humanity, genocide and ethnic cleansing. How much
longer will the Council delay in examining whether we
are seeing the first case of the responsibility to protect,
as stipulated in the 2005 World Summit Outcome?
We are, of course, concerned about the statements
of the Sudanese authorities with regard to the security
of internationally protected staff and the humanitarian
workers. We are concerned about the acts committed
against them every day. We recall that international
humanitarian law proscribes any attacks on
internationally protected staff, particularly on those
who are attempting to assist populations at risk, as in
the case we are looking at. We absolutely reject, and
would condemn, any reprisals against international
civil servants and humanitarian staff, and we will work
within this Council to determine who is responsible if
that turns out to be necessary.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in welcoming the Prosecutor,
Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, to the Council and in
thanking him for his briefing on the implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005).
The security and humanitarian situation in Darfur
remains worrying. The international community’s
efforts to help the Sudan to address the situation in
Darfur are facing mounting challenges, and primary
among them are the continued armed clashes.
Let me reiterate that Indonesia strongly condemns
all gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. We condemn those who commit war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Impunity must not
be tolerated, and the perpetrators of those crimes must

14

In this context, we agree on the importance of
striking a balance and having synergy between the
pursuit of justice and the maintenance of peace and
security. In that regard we fully support the views of
the African Union, the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the NonAligned Movement on the need to ensure that the
ongoing peace process in Darfur is not jeopardized.
Indonesia reasserts that the implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005) and actions of the Prosecutor
shall neither nullify the principle of complementarity
nor absolve Sudan’s national court of its
responsibilities, as stated in the presidential statement
of 16 June 2008 (S/PRST/2008/21).
In line with the communiqué of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union of 22 September
2008 and the package solution offered by the Arab
League, Indonesia urges the Government of the Sudan
to urgently take concrete steps to bring to justice the
perpetrators of gross violations of human rights in
Darfur. The Government of the Sudan should also
ensure that its national law does not exempt anyone
from responsibility. It is also important that all the
crimes covered in international humanitarian law will
be covered by Sudanese law. Indonesia is confident
that the Sudanese Government will take up those

08-63120

S/PV.6028

responsibilities to meet the requirements of the
principle of complementarity.
In the context of implementation of the principle
of complementarity, my delegation shares the view on
the importance of the contributions of the African
Union, the Arab League and others to the promotion of
an accountability mechanism in the Sudan.
We welcome the conclusion of the investigation
with regard to crimes against peacekeepers and
humanitarian personnel in Haskanita. The issuance of
arrest warrants for war crimes in Haskanita is a
significant step that requires further action by the
Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court. In that regard, we wish to stress that ensuring
the continued cooperation of all Darfur armed rebel
movements is essential.
Finally, my delegation wishes to emphasize once
again its appreciation of the Court’s independence and
of the Prosecutor’s efforts to implement resolution
1593 (2005).
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for his
briefing and for keeping the Council informed of
developments on the Sudan.
Today I would like to make four points.
First, the United States expresses its grave
concerns over the situation in the Sudan, in particular
in Darfur. The humanitarian situation remains dire, and
attacks on civilians by both Government of the Sudan
forces and rebel groups alike continue.
Secondly, we support the Darfur peace process
efforts of the Joint African Union-United Nations Chief
Mediator Bassolé. Our primary and immediate goal is
to see measurable improvement of the situation on the
ground for the people of Darfur, not mere declarations
or promises.
Thirdly, we note with interest the announcement
by the Government of the Sudan of a unilateral
ceasefire in Darfur and its recognition that such a
ceasefire should have a monitoring mechanism to
enforce it. However, we are deeply disappointed by the
continued violence in Darfur, including attacks by
rebel movements and the Sudanese armed forces. A
viable and lasting ceasefire is a vital step towards
establishing peace in Darfur and in the region as a
whole.

08-63120

Fourthly, the United States remains steadfastly
committed to promoting the rule of law and helping to
bring violators of international humanitarian law to
justice, and it will continue to take a leadership role in
righting those wrongs. We applaud efforts to identify
and bring to justice any persons perpetrating crimes
against the people of the Sudan. Our previous actions
with respect to the terrible crimes being committed in
the Sudan should leave no doubt about the strength of
our commitments. The international community has not
ignored the atrocities and massive human suffering that
has occurred during the ongoing conflict in Darfur,
which the United States has declared to be a genocide.
The United States has domestically designated,
and thus barred from the United States financial
system, seven individuals and multiple entities for
conduct or financing related to the conflict in Darfur.
The United Nations Security Council sanctions
committee is able to designate those who impede the
peace process, constitute a threat to stability in Darfur
and the region, commit violations of international
humanitarian or human rights law or other atrocities,
violate the arms embargo or are responsible for
offensive military overflights. The United States urges
the sanctions committee to use responsibly the tools at
its disposal in order to prevent further violence in
Darfur. We encourage members of the sanctions
committee to allow for meaningful follow-up to the
recommendations of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan,
and we urge the Council to request briefings from the
Permanent Representatives of the Sudan and Chad.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the Chair for the month of December and assuring
you of my delegation’s support. Allow me also to thank
the Ambassador of Costa Rica for his sterling work in
presiding over the Council during November. I also
wish to express the appreciation of my delegation to
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) for his statement in this Chamber and in
particular for his important work.
Since the Prosecutor’s last report to this body, an
event has taken place that has resulted in a closer look
at the Rome Statute and specifically article 16 thereof.
I am of course referring to the application by the
Prosecutor to the Pre-Trial Chamber for the issuance of
a warrant of arrest in respect of President Omer
Al-Bashir of the Sudan, a matter which is still pending.
This sensitive matter has, more than any other event

15

S/PV.6028

over the last six months, stimulated debate on the
relationship between peace and justice. The debate has
raised the challenge of finding a balance between
ending impunity for international crimes through
judicial accountability, on the one hand, and the
realities of bringing an end to conflict through a
sensitive peace processes, on the other.
The wise drafters of the Rome Statute were
keenly aware of that sensitive balance between
political and legal considerations during the drafting
process, and that is what led to their recommendation
that the Security Council be accorded the powers
contained in article 16 — powers that allow the
Council to strike a balance between the important
principles of peace and justice, should the situation on
the ground demand it.
We appreciate the fact that the Prosecutor’s
responsibility is to follow the evidence wherever it
leads him and to implement the law without fear,
favour or even political considerations, and we support
his role in that respect. However, we also recognize a
corollary responsibility of the Security Council, which
is to consider political imperatives in situations with
which it is seized that are before the Court and, if the
Council finds it meritorious, to request the Court to
defer prosecution in accordance with article 16 of the
Rome Statute.
The African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council had considered it advisable that the Security
Council consider making a request to the ICC to defer
the potential case against President Al-Bashir. The
decision of the African Union Peace and Security
Council was brought to the attention of the Security
Council on 31 July 2008. The AU Peace and Security
Council
“expresse[d] its conviction that, in view of the
delicate nature of the processes underway in the
Sudan, approval by the Pre-Trial Chamber of the
application by the ICC Prosecutor could seriously
undermine the ongoing efforts aimed at
facilitating the early resolution of the conflict in
Darfur and the promotion of long-lasting peace
and reconciliation in the Sudan as a whole and, as
a result, may lead to further suffering for the
people of the Sudan and greater destabilization
with far-reaching consequences for the country
and the region” (S/2008/481, annex, para. 9).

16

It is also worth noting that the African Peace and
Security Council is not advocating for impunity; on the
contrary, in the same decision that I quoted, the Peace
and Security Council also invited the AU Commission
to set up
“an Independent High-Level Panel made up of
distinguished Africans of high integrity, to
examine the situation in depth and submit
recommendations to Council on how best the
issue of accountability and combating impunity,
on the one hand, and reconciliation and healing,
on the other, could be effectively and
comprehensively addressed” (ibid., para. 11 (ii)).
The AU Peace and Security Council further
“urge[d] the Government of the Sudan to take
immediate and concrete steps to investigate human
rights violations in Darfur and bring to justice their
perpetrators” (ibid., para. 11 (iv)).
In the light of the steps being taken by the
African Union and others to ensure that peace and
justice are mutually reinforcing in Darfur rather than
contradictory, we continue to hope that this Council
will take the time necessary to have a discussion and
decide on an article 16 deferment as it relates to the
President of the Sudan.
South Africa is a member of the International
Criminal Court and indeed, one of the founding
members of that important Court, and we remain fully
committed to supporting its work. It is precisely based
on our support for the Court and the Statute
establishing the Court that we advocate for the
application of the Rome Statute in resolving any
challenges that arise between peace and justice. Article
16 of the Rome Statute was contemplated for precisely
the kind of situation we face with regard to the
application by the Prosecutor for the indictment of
President Al-Bashir. It is our contention that article 16
can best be applied prior to issuing a warrant of arrest,
so as to avoid interference with the judicial process.
Thus, the Council’s consideration of the request by the
AU Peace and Security Council becomes urgent.
As we have said before in this Chamber, we see
the International Criminal Court as central in ending
impunity for international crimes and in establishing
conditions under which justice and the rule of law can
be maintained. The Court, through its ability to deter
the further commission of international crimes, serves

08-63120

S/PV.6028

as an advocate of adherence to the rule of law, and thus
we expect cooperation by States with its work.
We are acutely aware of the challenges facing the
Prosecutor, which arise primarily from the fact that the
International Criminal Court does not have its own
police force, or even an army, to enforce its arrest
warrants and therefore depends entirely on the
cooperation of States. The Security Council has a
responsibility to demand the cooperation of States,
particularly in cases in which the Council has referred
cases to the Court. It was for that reason that the
Security Council issued presidential statement
S/PRST/2008/21, urging the Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur to
cooperate fully with the Court. We therefore reaffirm
that appeal by the Council and expect that the
Government of the Sudan and all parties to the conflict
in Darfur will cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Court.
Finally, through you, Mr. President, I should like
to pose a question to the Prosecutor. A couple of times,
he warned the Council not to be induced into
protecting President Al-Bashir and others who may be
under investigation by the Court. The question that I
would like to pose to the Prosecutor is: Does this mean
that if the Security Council discusses article 16 of the
Rome Statute as it applies to this case, we will be
understood as either attempting to protect those people
or having been induced in some way into covering up
of what is happening in the Sudan? I think that that
needs to be made very clear. Otherwise, should the
Council get into a discussion of this, those on the
outside might think that we have been trapped into
some kind of cover-up or inducement.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Permit
me at the outset to echo what the representative of
Costa Rica said regarding the paramount importance of
the establishment of the International Criminal Court. I
should also like to thank Prosecutor Luis MorenoOcampo for the report that he has provided us on the
progress made in the investigations being conducted in
Darfur pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
Through resolution 1593 (2005), this Council
took the historic decision to refer a specific case to the
International Criminal Court for the first time. The
Court and its officials have shouldered that
responsibility with all the rigour required for such a
lofty duty, as demonstrated by the progress made in the

08-63120

investigations into the situation in Darfur, as presented
to us this morning. However, after the presentation of
three cases to the Court’s judges and the issuance of
two arrest warrants against alleged perpetrators of
crimes against humanity, those arrest warrants have yet
to be carried out. Impunity cannot and must not be an
option.
In resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council
stipulated that the Government of the Sudan was
obliged to cooperate with the Court and with the Office
of the Prosecutor. However, Panama is concerned at the
lack of constructive responses to the two arrest
warrants issued 20 months ago by the International
Criminal Court against Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb
for allegedly having participated in committing crimes
against humanity. Panama, as a member of the Security
Council and a State party to the Rome Statute, feels
obligated to reiterate the appeal to the Government of
the Sudan to meet its responsibilities towards the
international community.
The International Criminal Court represents the
will of 108 nations that have decided to exchange the
arbitrariness of the past for a system of transnational
justice that does not permit to go unpunished the most
horrendous crimes of which humankind has proved
capable. The same will for change is what motivated
the Security Council to adopt resolution 1593 (2005).
We are aware of the challenge that that entails.
Therefore, both the Council and the United Nations
membership must be prepared to take the measures
required, even if that affects the highest authorities of a
country.
We recognize that it is important that the
Prosecutor has concluded the investigations related to
the attack perpetrated on 29 September 2007 against a
military base of the African Union Mission in the
Sudan at Haskanita. We also appreciate the expressions
of willingness to cooperate with the Court on the part
of some rebel groups. The Security Council must
continue to focus its efforts on ensuring that the 17,000
humanitarian workers providing aid to 2.7 million
victims of the Darfur conflict can carry out their noble
mission without putting their lives at risk. We cannot
allow humanitarian personnel to continue to be
subjected to such indiscriminate attacks.
If we are to resolve the difficult situation in
Darfur and ultimately attain the objectives of
resolution 1593 (2005), the Government of the Sudan

17

S/PV.6028

must fulfil its national and international obligations.
The solidarity and continued cooperation of the entire
membership of the Organization, in particular the Arab
countries and the members of the African Union, are
also essential. Panama views as positive the intention
shown by the Government of the Sudan to raise the
standards of its justice system to acceptable
international levels. We also consider the mediation
proposed by the State of Qatar as a way to create an
atmosphere of peace and sustained justice. That
initiative should have the Council’s support.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I should like to
join you, Mr. President, and others in welcoming the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and in thanking him for his further briefing on his
investigation into the very grave humanitarian situation
in Darfur.
My Government continues to strongly support the
independent judicial role of the ICC in Darfur. We also
support the Prosecutor’s efforts to combat impunity
through the investigation of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed there. The perpetrators of
those most serious crimes should be brought to justice.
Justice for victims is an essential component of
achieving peace in any part of the world, and that also
means in Darfur. We reiterate our thanks to the
Prosecutor and his staff for all their work to help
achieve that. We also welcome the Prosecutor’s
engagement — as detailed in his report — with United
Nations and regional bodies, notably the African Union
and the League of Arab States. It is important that that
dialogue continue.
My Government is deeply concerned by reports
that crimes against humanity and war crimes are
continuing in Darfur and that ongoing attacks against
civilians include murder, systematic rape, the
destruction of homes and villages and forced
displacement. There are horrific reports of the rape of
thousands of women and girls — some as young as
five — by both rebels and Sudanese armed forces.
We commend the Prosecutor’s ongoing efforts to
monitor and investigate these crimes against the
civilian population of Darfur, and we also condemn
attacks on humanitarian workers and peacekeepers.
Once again, I would like to use the occasion of
this debate in the Security Council Chamber to call
upon all parties to the conflict to refrain from further

18

acts of violence against civilians and protected persons
and against humanitarian workers and peacekeepers.
It is also a matter of strong concern that there
have been reports of comments from senior members
of the Sudanese Government expressing doubts about
the continued safety and security of United Nations
personnel and peacekeepers, particularly linked to the
Prosecutor’s ongoing investigations. The Government
of the Sudan should be in no doubt about its
responsibilities to ensure the safety of United Nations
and humanitarian personnel. These allegations and
these reports do the Sudanese no credit. I hope that
they will stop and, on the contrary, that there will be an
affirmation from the Government of the Sudan that it
will live up to its responsibilities in this respect.
Following the Prosecutor’s last briefing in June,
this Council adopted a statement calling on the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the
conflict to cooperate fully with the ICC, in accordance
with their obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).
That statement still stands, and we reiterate it today.
We deeply recall that, more than 18 months since the
issue of arrest warrants for Ahmed Haroun and Ali
Kushayb, there has been no progress. We call upon the
Government of Sudan immediately to execute these
warrants.
I have listened carefully to the debate today and
have noted that some Council members have suggested
that the Security Council should act to defer the ICC’s
investigation. This is not my Government’s view. We
see no justification at present for the suspension of the
ICC’s work in Darfur, and my Government does not
back any such plan. The onus is on the Government of
the Sudan to take much more ambitious, bold and
concrete action to cooperate with the ICC and to
achieve peace in Darfur.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): My
delegation wishes to thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for his briefing on the activities of the Court pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005). We take note of all the
activities carried out by the Prosecutor and his Office,
as reflected in his eighth report to the Council.
Viet Nam is deeply concerned about the
continuing reports of serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in Darfur. We
condemn all attacks aimed at Darfurian civilians,
humanitarian personnel and peacekeeping forces. We

08-63120

S/PV.6028

support the efforts to fully investigate these crimes and
bring the perpetrators to justice.
While stressing the need to implement resolution
1593 (2005) in its entirety, my delegation notes that the
Government of the Sudan had committed to exercise its
jurisdiction through the appointment of special
prosecutors, the establishment of special criminal
courts and the completion of criminal proceedings
against seven cases in 2005. We trust the Government
of the Sudan will sustain and step up such national
judicial efforts to ensure justice for victims of gross
human rights violations in Darfur. We believe that such
an approach would enjoy the broad support of the
international community, including the ICC.
Viet Nam continues to believe that combating
impunity or violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law in Darfur is part of the
comprehensive endeavour for peace and national
reconciliation in the Sudan. We support the African
Union approach, as stipulated in that organization’s
Peace and Security Council communiqué dated 21 July
2008, addressing the interlinked issues of combating
impunity and promoting peace and reconciliation in a
mutually reinforcing manner. We also share the view of
the Arab countries, as reflected in the solution package
agreed upon by the Arab League and the Government
of the Sudan in July 2008.
In this respect, we welcome the recent decision of
the Government of the Sudan to declare an immediate
ceasefire in Darfur; this was a constructive endeavour
to promote the peace process. We call on all other
parties concerned to join in the ceasefire and
participate with good will in the negotiations for a
political solution to the Darfur conflict. The United
Nations and the international community should
intensify assistance to facilitate and consolidate these
fragile developments. We would, therefore, caution
against the imposition of unduly coercive measures
which may further complicate the situation in Darfur.
By way of conclusion, we would like to call for
further cooperation between the Government of the
Sudan and other parties to the conflict in Darfur,
including the ICC, regional organizations and States
interested in the implementation of resolution 1593
(2005).
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Croatia.

08-63120

I join others in thanking Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for
his briefing and offer both him and the International
Criminal Court (ICC) Croatia’s full support.
This morning we heard yet another very
disturbing report which not only conveys a lack of
substantive progress in bringing to justice those
responsible for atrocities in Darfur but also the threat
of ongoing violence. Shocking and abhorrent crimes
continue to be committed against innocent civilians,
mostly women and children. Equally deplorable is a
string of attacks against peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers. We take note of the latest application
presented by the Prosecutor against three rebel
commanders in connection with the Haskanita attack
and the application against Omar Al-Bashir.
It is regrettable that the Government of the Sudan
continues to refuse to cooperate with the Court despite
its prosecutions, many of which engage the
Government in the judicial process. The principle of
complementarity is the cornerstone of the ICC. It is
disappointing to note that, despite its rhetoric, the
Government of the Sudan has not made any genuine
effort to comply with the complementarity test and
allow the Court to examine the admissibility of the
applications.
While we appreciate the ongoing efforts aimed at
securing a peaceful solution to the conflict in Darfur,
and the sensitivities of that process, Croatia believes
that it would be tragic if this should lead to
accommodating permanent impunity by interfering
with the ongoing independent judicial activities.
As regards the lack of cooperation of the
Government of Sudan with the International Criminal
Court, this, in our view, represents the Sudan’s
disregard of its international obligations as specified in
Security Council resolution 1593 (2005). As such, it
also represents the disregard of the Security Council
itself. The constant defiance of the Sudan towards the
Court shows contempt for the multitude of victims in
Darfur, as well as for international order and the United
Nations Charter. The crimes committed in Darfur, and
the impunity associated with these acts, as
demonstrated by the Government of the Sudan, is
intolerable and must be brought to an end.
We reiterate the clear message that this Council
reaffirmed in its presidential statement last June
(S/PRST/2008/21) and call upon the Government of
the Sudan, all parties to the conflict in Darfur, as well

19

S/PV.6028

as United Nations Member States, to extend their full
cooperation to the Court.

replace those members in Darfur who were members of
the army and refused to attack Darfur.

Croatia takes seriously and supports the
Prosecutor’s recommendations on bilateral and
multilateral actions that need to be taken in order to
ensure enforcement of the Court’s decisions in the
future, in the hope that these can be endorsed by all
members of the international community.

Interestingly, Mr. Al-Bashir adjusted the plans for
the extermination of the groups according to the facts.
After 2004, there was increasing pressure from the
international community, and most of the villages that
the Fur, Zaghawa and Masalit were inhabiting were
emptied. Then he adjusted, to attack them in the camps.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The most clear example is how he then appointed
Ahmed Haroun, who was the Minister of State for the
Interior, coordinating the attacks in the villages. In
September 2005, when most of the Fur, Zaghawa and
Masalit areas were clean, he appointed the same person
to be Minister of Humanitarian Affairs. It is a false
name, and that members must know. Of course, it is a
secret service operation; it is an operation to keep
controlling and attacking these people. But of course,
they cannot directly attack people in the camps,
because there would be an international clamour. That
is why they used different strategies. Fear, rape and
hunger are the strategies. That is why people there, aid
workers and African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) peacekeepers, are
under tremendous pressure.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo
to respond to comments and questions raised.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: First, I would like to
respond to the question posed by the representative of
South Africa. For the purpose of clarification, may I
begin by saying that I truly appreciate the question, in
particular because South Africa stands as an example
to the world on how to conduct a transition. As the
Permanent Representative of South Africa said, South
Africa, as a founding member of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), was leading the Rome
discussions, and throughout my five-year tenure, South
Africa has been leading and supporting international
justice. That is why I really appreciate his question and
his frankness.
Let me be totally clear. As he said, I am a
prosecutor; I have to respect the law. I have to follow
the evidence without fear, favour or political
consideration. That is what I am doing. He has his
responsibility, and I will not infringe on his
responsibility. But part of my responsibility is to
investigate crimes, and what I see in the crimes
committed in Darfur is that the crimes have the
particularity that they are committed by the members
of the Government, using the Government apparatus.
That is the particularity of this case, because President
Al-Bashir is the President of the country and the
commander-in-chief of the army. But how can we
ensure that the Sudanese Armed Forces will not follow
illegal orders? That is the particularity. He gave the
orders to commit the crimes. He ensured — and this is
the evidence, I am following the evidence now — he
ensured the implementation of his orders, and let me
review how.
First, he replaced those officers and governors
who refused to follow his instructions. He replaced a
governor in Darfur because he advised him not to use
the militia/Janjaweed. He recruited the militia/
Janjaweed and incorporated them as reserve forces to

20

He gave the orders, he adjusted the orders and he
implemented the orders, but then the other aspect that I
was trying to brief the Council on — and I appreciate
the question because it allows me to provide the
answer — is the covering up of the crimes. A person
cannot openly use a State to commit crimes. That is
why they cover up the crimes. They cover up the
crimes with different strategies, using the Janjaweed
militias, playing with the ambiguity of the Janjaweed
militias and denying the commission of crimes. As
members know, they have denied the crimes and
denied the numbers many times. Today I quoted them
as now denying the rapes, saying that the women who
are raped are relatives of the rebels. They deny the
value of the evidence. They say I have no evidence.
They are trying to attack all of my witnesses, all over
the world. They are attacking the evidence and they are
also protecting individuals sought by the Court. That is
why they have not handed over Haroun, because for
President Al-Bashir, it is a really important point not to
hand over Haroun and to keep people following his
illegal instructions.
One important point I was trying to relate to the
Council is that they always promise national
proceedings and they never deliver national
proceedings. How can you investigate nationally if you

08-63120

S/PV.6028

are attacking those who are speaking out about the
crimes?
Finally, part of his cover-up is diplomatic work to
the Council, the African Union, the Arab League and
the United Nations, promoting and proposing
ceasefires that he never complies with, promising
justice that he never delivers and promising to disarm
Janjaweed militias — and the next day saying, well,
not the reserve forces — and, finally, threatening
retaliation. Using proxy force is the last strategy he
uses to keep his plan working. So I am just talking
about how the crimes are committed, and I have to
alert the Council. This is what I saw according to my
evidence. This is my responsibility.
The President: I thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for
the clarifications he has provided. The representative
of South Africa has asked for the floor to make a
further statement, and I call on him.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Thank you,
Mr. President, for being generous enough to give me
the floor. I just wanted to make a clarification. I thank
the Prosecutor, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, very much for
his clarification.
The only issue I wanted to make clear is that we
are the Security Council. We are not lawyers. We are
not prosecutors. We sit here, having to make decisions,
and we look at the entire Rome Statute. The Rome
Statute makes a provision for this article to be used,
and the Security Council will, at the time when it takes
this issue up, balance the two things: the maintenance
of international peace and security, and the fight
against impunity. The Security Council must be for
fighting impunity, but there is also the other side to it.
My question was intended to make it clear that
people who are not in the Council should not see us
debating this issue and then interpret it as if we are
condoning all these horrible things that we have
spoken of. We in no way condone them, and we regret
that they take place, but we also have the responsibility
to look at the entire matter.
Now, whether the Security Council eventually
agrees with that or not, that is precisely what makes it
fun, because all 15 of us will have to decide if we
agree or not. I was just concerned that when we ask
these tough questions about how to balance all these
awful things we are hearing about and the maintenance
of peace in Sudan, those who are sitting here watching

this must not get the impression that, just because we
are asking the question, we therefore have taken one
side or the other. We have not, and we are delighted
that we have the Court, which can go in and search for
all this information.
I hope Mr. Moreno-Ocampo never gives up in his
work and that he continues as his mandate allows him
to. But we also have the other mandate here, and at
some point we will have to look at and balance the
two. I think some of my colleagues pointed out that, at
some point, we need to step back and not wear
prosecutor’s caps, saying that we want to jail so-andso. But rather but we need to look back at all the
evidence and say: how do we then carry out our
mandate? I think Mr. Moreno-Ocampo’s clarification
has really helped.
The President: I call on Mr. Moreno-Ocampo.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I thank Ambassador
Kumalo for his support.
The President: I call on the representative of
Costa Rica to make a further statement.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica): As Ambassador
Kumalo said, not everyone here is a lawyer. But I am a
lawyer.
(spoke in Spanish)
All I wanted to add is that the Prosecutor has
done his work by presenting his findings to the judges
of the Court, and what we are talking about now is not
the fulfilment of the wishes or the opinions of the
Prosecutor, but the decision of the judges of the Court.
It is important to differentiate, for the role of the
Prosecutor is often confused with that of the Court.
The Council referred the situation in the Sudan to
the Court for investigation. It was investigated by the
Prosecutor, who then requested the issuance of arrest
warrants. The judges then concluded that there was
sufficient evidence to issue those warrants, which they
did. I think that it is now up to the Council to assume
responsibility for the consequences of having referred
the situation in Darfur to the Prosecutor’s Office and
the Court.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

08-63120

21
