United Nations

A/RES/59/186

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 105 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/503/Add.2)]

59/186. Human rights and extreme poverty
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights2 and other human rights instruments adopted by the
United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 47/196 of 22 December 1992, by which it declared
17 October the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, and its resolution
50/107 of 20 December 1995, by which it proclaimed the first United Nations
Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (1997–2006), as well as its resolution 57/211
of 18 December 2002 and its previous resolutions on human rights and extreme
poverty, in which it reaffirmed that extreme poverty and exclusion from society
constitute a violation of human dignity and that urgent national and international
action is therefore required to eliminate them,
Recalling also its resolution 52/134 of 12 December 1997, in which it recognized
that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights was
essential for the understanding, promotion and protection of all human rights,
Deeply concerned that extreme poverty persists in all countries of the world,
regardless of their economic, social and cultural situation, and that its extent and
manifestations, such as hunger, trafficking in human beings, disease, lack of
adequate shelter, illiteracy and hopelessness, are particularly severe in developing
countries, while acknowledging the significant progress made in several parts of the
world in combating extreme poverty,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 2004/23 of 16 April 2004, 3
as well as resolution 2004/7 of 9 August 2004 of the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, 4
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
4
See E/CN.4/2005/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/2004/48, chap. II, sect. A.
2

04-48742

A/RES/59/186

Welcoming the Summit of World Leaders for Action against Hunger and
Poverty of 20 September 2004, convened in New York by the Presidents of Brazil,
Chile and France and the Prime Minister of Spain with the support of the
Secretary-General,
Recognizing that the eradication of extreme poverty is a major challenge
within the process of globalization and requires coordinated and continued policies
through decisive national action and international cooperation,
Reaffirming that, since the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits
the full and effective enjoyment of human rights and might, in some situations,
constitute a threat to the right to life, its immediate alleviation and eventual
eradication must remain a high priority for the international community,
Reaffirming also that democracy, development and the full and effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and
mutually reinforcing and contribute to the eradication of extreme poverty,
Noting with interest the extension for a period of two years of the mandate of
the independent expert on the question of human rights and extreme poverty,
1.
Reaffirms that extreme poverty and exclusion from society constitute a
violation of human dignity and that urgent national and international action is
therefore required to eliminate them;
Also reaffirms that it is essential for States to foster participation by the
2.
poorest people in the decision-making process in the societies in which they live, in
the promotion of human rights and in efforts to combat extreme poverty, and that it
is essential for people living in poverty and vulnerable groups to be empowered to
organize themselves and to participate in all aspects of political, economic and
social life, in particular the planning and implementation of policies that affect
them, thus enabling them to become genuine partners in development;
Emphasizes that extreme poverty is a major issue to be addressed by
3.
Governments, civil society and the United Nations system, including international
financial institutions, and in this context reaffirms that political commitment is a
prerequisite for the eradication of poverty;
Reaffirms that the existence of widespread absolute poverty inhibits the
4.
full and effective enjoyment of human rights and renders democracy and popular
participation fragile;
Recognizes the need to promote respect for human rights and
5.
fundamental freedoms in order to address the most pressing social needs of people
living in poverty, including through the design and development of appropriate
mechanisms to strengthen and consolidate democratic institutions and governance;
Reaffirms the commitments contained in the United Nations Millennium
6.
Declaration, 5 in particular the commitments to spare no effort to fight against
extreme poverty and to achieve development and poverty eradication, including the
commitment to halve, by 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income
is less than one United States dollar a day and the proportion of people who suffer
from hunger;

_______________
5

2

See resolution 55/2.

A/RES/59/186

7.
Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, within
the framework of the implementation of the United Nations Decade for the
Eradication of Poverty, to continue to give appropriate attention to the question of
human rights and extreme poverty;
Welcomes the efforts of entities throughout the United Nations system to
8.
incorporate the Millennium Declaration and the internationally agreed development
goals set out therein into their work;
Requests the independent expert on the question of human rights and
9.
extreme poverty to forward his reports on his activities, which he will submit to the
Commission on Human Rights at its sixty-first and sixty-second sessions, to the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
10. Calls upon States, United Nations bodies, in particular the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations
Development Programme, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations to continue to give appropriate attention to the links between human
rights and extreme poverty;
11. Decides to consider this question further at its sixty-first session under
the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms”.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004

3
