S/2002/1242

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 November 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 13 November 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 13 November
2002, from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq, His Excellency
Mr. Naji Sabri.
I should be grateful if you would have this circulated as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-69099 (E)

141102

*0269099*

141102

S/2002/1242

Annex
Letter dated 13 November 2002 from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq addressed to the Secretary-General
[Original: Arabic]
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
“Go to Pharaoh; he has overstepped the bounds. But speak to him with gentle words
so that hopefully he will pay heed or show some fear”
Almighty God has spoken the truth.
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan
Secretary-General of the United Nations
New York, N.Y.
Sir,
You may recall the enormous uproar created by the President of the United
States of America in the greatest and most wicked slander against Iraq, in which he
was followed in his malicious intent and preceded in word and infliction of harm by
his lackey Tony Blair, when they spread the rumour that Iraq might have produced
or might have been on the way to producing nuclear weapons during the period
since 1998 in which the international inspectors were absent. They later asserted that
Iraq had indeed produced chemical and biological weapons, though they know as
well as we do, and other States are in a position to know, that this is a an utterly
unfounded fabrication. But does knowledge of the truth even enter into the
vocabulary of political interaction in our time, after evil has been unleashed to the
fullest within the American administration and any hope of good has been dashed?
Indeed, is there any good to be expected or hoped for from American
administrations now that they have been transformed by their greed, by Zionism and
by other well-known factors into the false god of our time?
After some States and the public were taken in by this lie, while others
remained silent, Iraq confronted them with its consent to the return of the
international inspectors after agreeing with you, as representative of the United
Nations in New York, on 16 September 2002, and in a press statement issued jointly
in Vienna on 30 September/1 October 2002 by an Iraqi technical delegation headed
by Amer Al-Saadi, Chief Inspector Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Yet a few hours after
Iraq’s consent to the return of the inspectors became an established fact, including
agreement on 19 October 2002 as the date of their arrival, Colin Powell, the
American Secretary of State, declared that he would refuse to have the inspectors go
to Iraq. The gang of evil began once again to talk of the need to adopt a new
resolution in order to entertain the people of the world with something new, rather
than following the teams of inspectors and witnessing the facts stated by Iraq,
namely that it neither had produced nor possessed any nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons of mass destruction during the absence of the inspectors. The
officials in the international Organization and its agencies, however, and especially
those from the permanent members of the Security Council, rather than engaging in
such monitoring so as to expose those responsible for their lies and false

2

S/2002/1242

accusations, busied themselves with discussions of the nature and wording of the
new resolution. They would strike or add a letter here and letter there, a word here
and a word there, until they reached agreement, on the argument that it was better to
take the kicks of a raging bull in a small ring than to face its horns in an open space.
This took place under the pressure of the American administration and its threats to
withdraw from the international Organization unless it agreed to what America
wanted, which was at best evil in the extreme and a reason for embarrassment for
every honest and free member of the international Organization who recalls the
provisions of the Charter and sees that there are some who feel shame on behalf of
those members who are shameless.
We have told members of the Security Council whom we have contacted or
who have contacted us, when they spoke to us of the pretexts of the Americans and
their threats of aggression against our country, either by themselves or with
whomever might stand with them if the Security Council did not agree to what they
wanted, that we preferred, if it was inevitable, to have America alone attack us and
to confront it, placing our trust in God, rather than having it obtain international
cover with which to camouflage its lies in whole or in part, bringing falsehood
closer to the truth so that it might stab the truth with the dagger of evil and perfidy.
Indeed, we have confronted it before, at a time when it could be characterized the
same way, and that was one of the reasons for its isolation in the human
environment all over the globe.
America’s aggressiveness and single-handed infliction of injustice and
destruction on its victims, chief among them Muslim and Arab believers, constitute
the main reason for its withdrawing its ambassadors and other staff, closing its
embassies and limiting its interests in many parts of the world, in addition to the
hatred of the peoples of the world for its aggressive policies and objectives. This is a
situation which no other country in the world has experienced before, not even the
fathers of colonialism in earlier times. Yet the Security Council, or more exactly
those who basically run it, instead of leaving the American administration and its
lackey, behind whom stands hateful Zionism, to reap the consequences of the evil
they have sown, have saved iniquity rather than curbing it. We shall see, and then
remorse will not be of any avail as they bite their fingers.
The influence of any international organization is based on the conviction and
trust of the community in which it exists, once the organization declares that it has
been established to serve goals important to that community. We fear that the United
Nations will lose the trust and interest of peoples, if that has not already taken place,
once it has been exhausted by powerful interests, wherever those interests converge
at the expense of other peoples or flatter each other and haggle over what is false at
the expense of what is true. Thus the United Nations and its agencies will collapse
just as the League of Nations did before it. The responsibility for this will not rest
on the American administration alone, but on all those who, in their weakness, work
for its interests, yielding to its threats, enticements or promises.
He who fails to speak out the truth is a voiceless demon. Nothing is more
distressing than the silence of the representatives of States in the Security Council
during their discussion of the American draft in the face of the question raised by
the representative of Mexico regarding the possibility of lifting the sanctions
imposed on Iraq. During the consultations in the Security Council concerning
resolution 1441 on 7 November 2002, the Mexican representative said that he was

3

S/2002/1242

not satisfied with the explanations provided by the American ambassador
concerning the absence of any reference to the lifting of the sanctions and the
establishment in the Middle East of a zone free from weapons of mass destruction,
adding that he would convey this to his Government in order to receive instructions.
The British representative replied that he had listened to the statements of the
delegations of Syria and Mexico regarding the inclusion in the resolution of a
paragraph on the lifting of the sanctions. He said that Iraq had previously been
afforded an opportunity to rid itself of weapons of mass destruction, but had ignored
it and made a decision to keep them. Consequently, any reference to the lifting of
the sanctions while Iraq still had such weapons was improper. Nevertheless, an
indirect reference to that effect was being included. We should add that none of the
representatives asked him when, how or where such an alleged decision had been
taken by Iraq to keep weapons of mass destruction. The delegates treated the
statement of the British representative as though it related to a matter that did not
concern them, or rather, as though telling the truth was of no concern to them. Do
not this and other things, together with the decline in the prestige of international
organizations of this nature, point to the possibility of the collapse of this
international Organization, which was founded to maintain international peace and
security, but has turned into a kitchen for haggling over the interests of the big
powers and for providing cover for war, destruction, blockades and the starvation of
peoples?
The future will be determined in the light of the potential for reform, or the
inability to achieve reform, as will the future of the United Nations. All those who
show their concern in deed and not merely in word to foster this international
Organization and its work on the basis of its Charter so that stability, justice and
fairness prevail throughout the world as a route to peace, freedom and cooperation
among peoples are called upon to exercise caution and act in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations and not at whim in
accordance with the unrestrained tendencies of those who threaten the world with
their weapons and evil endeavours and those who narrow-mindedly look to their
own interests, which they seek to achieve by bargaining at the expense of truth,
justice and fairness.
We know that those who pressed the case in the Security Council for the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1441 (2002) have objectives other than to
ascertain that Iraq has developed no weapons of mass destruction in the absence of
the inspectors from Iraq since 1998. You are aware of how they left Iraq and who
was the cause of their departure. Although we are aware that, following the widely
known understanding between the representatives of Iraq and the Secretary-General
and the press statement issued by Blix, El Baradei and the representatives of Iraq,
there are no facts or principles of justice and fairness to necessitate the adoption of
that resolution in the name of the Security Council, we hereby inform you that we
will deal with resolution 1441 (2002), despite its iniquitous contents, even though it
is to be implemented against the background of the intentions harboured by those of
bad faith. Based as this is in an attempt to spare our people harm, we shall not
forget, just as others should not forget, that the preservation of our people’s dignity
and of their security and independence within their homeland is a sacred and
honourable national duty on the agenda of our leadership and our Government. The
same is true of the protection of the homeland and its sovereignty, together with that
of the people and their security, interests and high values, from antagonists and

4

S/2002/1242

oppressors. Hence, as we said in the aforementioned agreement and press statement,
we are ready to receive the inspectors so that they can perform their duties and
ascertain that Iraq has produced no weapons of mass destruction in their absence
from Iraq since 1998 under the circumstances known both to you and to the Security
Council. We request you to inform the Security Council that we are ready to receive
the inspectors in accordance with the established dates. All concerned parties should
remember that we are in our holy month of Ramadan and that the people are fasting,
and that after this month is a feast. The concerned bodies and officials, however,
will cooperate with the inspectors against this entire background and that of the
tripartite statement of France, the Russian Federation and China. The Government of
Iraq will also take all of this into consideration when dealing with the inspectors and
with all matters relating to their demeanour and the intentions of any one of them
who demonstrates bad faith or an inappropriate approach to preserving the national
dignity, independence and security of the people and the security, independence and
sovereignty of the homeland. We are eager for them to accomplish their task in
accordance with international law as soon as possible. If they do so in a professional
and lawful manner, and without previously planned goals, the fabrications of the
liars will be revealed to the public and the declared aim of the Security Council will
be achieved. At that point, the Security Council will become legally obligated to lift
the embargo from Iraq, failing which all persons of goodwill throughout the world,
in addition to Iraq, will tell it to lift the embargo and all the other unjust sanctions
from Iraq. Before the public and the law, the Council will be under obligation to
apply paragraph 14 of its resolution 687 (1991) to the Zionist entity (Israel) and
thereafter to the entire region of the Middle East so that it is free of weapons of
mass destruction. The worldwide number of fair-minded persons will increase,
together with Iraq’s potential to drive from its environment the cawing of the crows
of evil, who daily raid its lands, demolish its property and take the lives of those hit
by their bombs, if not already claimed by the evil-doers themselves. When this
happens, it will help to stabilize the region and the world, if accompanied by a
solution not based on double standards to end the Zionist occupation of Palestine
and if the aggressors desist from their attacks against Muslims and the world.
We therefore reiterate, through you, the same statement to the Security
Council: send the inspectors to Iraq to ascertain as much and, if their conduct is
thoroughly supervised to ensure that it is lawful and professional, everyone will be
assured that Iraq has produced no nuclear, chemical or biological weapons of mass
destruction, whatever allegations to the contrary are made by the evil pretenders.
The fabrications of the liars and the deceit of the charlatans in the American and
British administrations will be revealed before the world in contrast to the
truthfulness of the proud Iraqis and the correctness of what they say and do. If,
however, the opportunity is left for the whim of the American administration and the
desires of Zionism, coupled with the followers, intelligence services, threats and
foul inducements of each, to manipulate and play with the inspection teams and
among their ranks, the picture will be muddled and the ensuing confusion will
distort the facts and push matters in a dangerous direction, to the edge of the
precipice, a situation wanted neither by the fair-minded nor by those, including my
Government, who seek to uncover the facts as they stand. The fieldwork and the
implementation will be the deciding factors as to whether the true intent was for the
Security Council to ascertain that Iraq is free of those alleged weapons or whether
the entire matter is nothing more than an evil cover for the authors of the resolution,

5

S/2002/1242

with their vile slander and their shamelessness in lying to the public, including their
own peoples.
So let the inspectors come to Baghdad to perform their duty in accordance with
the law, whereupon we shall hear and see, together with those who hear, see and act,
each in accordance with his obligations and rights as established in the Charter of
the United Nations and international law. The final frame of reference continues to
be resolution 687 (1991), which imposes obligations on the Security Council and
Iraq, as well as the code of conduct contained in the agreement signed with the
Secretary-General in New York on 16 September 2002 and the press statement
issued jointly with Hans Blix and El Baradei in Vienna on 30 September-1 October
2002.
We hope that you will exercise your responsibilities by speaking to the
oppressors and advising them that their unjust treatment of Muslims, faithful Arabs
and all people has disastrous consequences and that God is omnipotent and capable
of all things. Tell them that the people of Iraq are proud, faithful and militant,
having fought and waged war against the former colonialism, imperialism and
aggression, including that of the false god, for years and years. The price paid for
the preservation of their independence, dignity and the high principles in which they
believed was rivers of blood, together with a great deal of deprivation and damage
to their wealth, alongside the immortal achievements and record in which they take
pride. We hope that you will advise those who are ignorant not to push the situation
to the edge of the precipice at the time of implementation, because the people of
Iraq will not choose to live if the price is their dignity, their homeland, their freedom
or the things sacrosanct to them. On the contrary, the price will be their lives if that
is the only way forward to preserve what must be preserved.
Before concluding this letter of mine, I should like to inform you that I shall
address a further detailed letter to you in due course, stating our comments on the
procedures and measures contained in resolution 1441 (2002) that are inconsistent
with international law, the Charter of the United Nations, the established facts and
the requirements of previous relevant Security Council resolutions.
“Have you guaranteed that the One in heaven will not strike earth and cause it
to tumble?”
Almighty God has spoken the truth.
God is great.
(Signed) Naji Sabri
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq
13 November 2002

6
