Resolutions adopted without referenee to a Main Committee

Requests the Secretary-General to invite the Council
for Mutual Economic Assistance to participate in the
sessions and work of the General Assembly in the
capacity of observer.
2266th plenary meeting
11 October 1974
3210 (XXIX). Im·italion to the Palestine
Liberation Organi7.alion

The General Assembly,
Considering that the Palestinian people is the principal party to the question of Palestine,
Invites the Palestine Liberation Organization, the
representative of the Palestinian people, to participate
in the deliberations of the General Assembly on the
question of Palestine in plenary meetings.
2268th plenary meeting
14 October 1974
3212 (XXIX).

Question of Cyprus

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Gravely concerned about the continuation of the
Cyprus crisis, which constitutes a threat to international
peace and security,
Mindful of the need to solve this crisis without delay
by peaceful means, in accorda-nce with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations,
Having heard the statements in the debate and taking
note of the report of the Special Political Committee
on the question of Cyprus, 10
1. Calls upon all States to respect the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus and to refrain from all acts
and interventions directed against it;
2. Urges the speedy withdrawal of all foreign anned
forces and foreign mHitary presence and personnel
from the Republic of Cyprus, and the cessation of all
foreign interference in its affairs;
3. Considers that the constitutional system of the
Republic of Cyprus concerns the Greek Cypriot and
Turkish Cypriot communities;
4. Commends the contacts and negotiations taking
place on an equal footing, with the good offices of the
Secretary-General, between the representatives of the
two communities, and calls for their continuation with
a view to reaching freely a mutually acceptable political
settlement, based on their fundamental and legitimate
rights;
5. Considers that all the refugees should return to
their homes in safety and calls upon the parties concerned to undertake urgent measures to that end;
6. Expresses the hope that, if necessary, further
efforts including negotiations can take place, within
the framework of the United Nations, for the purpose
of implementing the provisions of the present resolution, thus ensuring to the Republic of Cyprus its
fundamental right to independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity;
10 Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item I IO,
document A/9820.

3

1. Requests the Seoretary-General to continue to
provide United Nations humanitarian assistance to all
parts of the population of Cyprus and caUs upon all
States to contribute to that effort;
8. Calls upon all parties to continue to co-operate
fully with the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus, which may be strengthened if necessary;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
lend his good offices to the parties concerned;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to bring
the present resolution to the attention of the Security
Council.
2275th plenary meeting
1 November 1974
3213 (XXIX). Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the international
Atomic Energy Agency to the General Assembly for
the year 1973/1974 and the addendum thereto, 11
Aware that the statement of the Director-General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 5 November 197412 provides additional information on the
main developments in the Agency's activities,
l. Takes note of the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency and of the addendum thereto;
2. Commends the International Atomic Energy
Agency for its action in amending the rules of procedure of the General Conference in such a way as to
enhance and streamline its performance;
3. Welcomes the actions taken by the InternationaJ
Atomic Energy Agency to increase the level of the
1975 target for voluntary contributions to the general
fund by 50 per cent for a total of $4.5 million;
4. Notes with appreciation the reorientation of the
programme of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
in view of the energy situation, by the adoption of an
expanded programme for nuclea4" power and reactors,
nuclear safety standards and environmental protection,
and the International Nuclear Information System;
5. Further notes with appreciation the steps taken
by the International Atomic Energy Agency in ex•·
panding its training programme to meet the urgent
need of developing countries which plan to utilize
nuclear power at an early date;
6. Realizes the importance of the initiative taken
by the International Atomic Energy Agency in arranging for an international conference on nuclear power
and the fuel cvcle, to be convened in l 977, to review
and appraise the role of nuclear energy and alternative
energy sources in satisfying energy demand in th.:
future;
1. Commends the Inttl;national Atomic Energ:·
Agency on the steps it has taken, a,; reflected in the
addendum to its report, in implementing Ucn,:ral
Assembly resolution 2829 (XXVI) nf 16 Decembrr
1971 to establish, within its framewor ..:. ,1a in•.e:rn:t·
tional service for nuclear explosion, for pea-:dl,! pttr11 International Atomic Energy Agency, A 1111uul Report,
I July 1973-30 June 1974 (Vienna. July I 974) nnJ addendum;
transmitted to the members of the General Assembly by notes
of the Secretary-General ( A/9722 and Add. I ) .
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twe11ty-11i11th
Session, Plenary Meetin,rs, 227fith rneetin~ p'.11:1~. 1-·1i1.

4

General Anembly-Twenty-ninth Senion

poses under appropriate international control, particularly the approval of the procedures in responding to
requests for services related to nuclear explosions for
peaceful purposes, and the resolution of the Board of
Governors of 13 September 1974 to establish, within
the Agency, a separate organizational unit fO£ this
purpose;
8. Urges all countries concerned to ratify or accede
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons11 or finalize their safeguards agreements with
the International Atomic Energy Agency as soon as
possible in accordance with the provisions of that
Treaty, in view of the fact that the Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuolear Weapons will take place in May 1975;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Director-General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency the records of the twenty-ninth session
of the General Assembly relating to the Agency's
activities.
2277th plenary meeting
5 November 1974
3236 (XXIX).

Question of Palestine

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Palestine,
Having heard the statement of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian

people,u.
Having also heard other statements made during the
debate,
Deeply conrerned that no just solution to the problem
of Palestine has yet been achieved and recognizing that
the problem of Palestine continues to endanger international peace and security,
Recognizing that the Palestinian people is entitled to
self-determination in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations,
Expressing its grave concern that the Palestinian
people has been prevented from enjoying its inalienable
rights, in particular its right to self-determination,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the

Charter,
Recalling its relevant resolutions which affirm the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
t. Reaffirms the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people in Palestine, including:
(a) The right to self-determination without external
interference;
·
( b) The right to national independence and sovereignty;
2. Reaffirms also the inalienable right of the Palestinians to return to their homes and property from
which they have been displaced and uprooted, and
calis for their return;
3. Emphaslzes that fut,J respect for and the realization of these inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
are indispensable for the solution of the question of
Palestine;
1 ~ Resolution 2373

14 Official

4. Recognizes that the Palestinian people is a principal party in the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East;
5. Further recognizes the ri~ht of the Palestinian
people to regain its rights by all means in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations;
6. Appeals to all States and international organizations to extend their support to the Palestinian people
in its struggle to restore its rights, in accordance with
the Charter;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to establish contacts with the Palestine Liberation Organization on all
matters concerning the question of Palestine;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
9. Decides to include the item entitled "Question
of Palestine" in the provisional agenda of its thirtieth
session.
2296th plenary meeting
22 November 1974

(XXII), annex.

Records of tire Ge11era/ Assembly, Twe11n•-11i111/i
Sessio11, Plenary Meetings, 2282nd meeting, paras. 3-83.

3237 (XXIX). Observer status for the Pnlet1ti11e
Liberation Organization

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Palestine,
Taking into consideration the universality of the
United Nations prescribed in the Charter,
Recalling its resolution 3102 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973,
Taking into account Economic and Social Council
resolutions 1835 (LVI) of 14 May 1974 and 1840
(LVI) of 15 May 1974,
Noting that the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, the World
Population Conference and the World Food Conference have in effect invited the Palestine Liberation
Organization to participate in their respective deliberations,
Noting also that the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has invited the Palestine
Liberation Organization to participate in its deliberations l!.S an observer,
1. Invites the Palestine Liberation Organization to
participate in the sessions and the work of the General
Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2. Invites the Palestine Liberation Organization to
participate in the sessions and the work of all international conferences convened under the auspices of
the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
3. Considers that the Pa,lestine Liberation Organization is entitled to participate as an observer in the
sessions and the work of all international conferences
convened under the auspices of other organs of the
United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps for the implementation of the present resolution.
2296th plenary meeting
22 November 1974
