V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report prepared
by the Joint Inspection Unit, 31 and of the comments of the
Secretary-General thereon, 32 which_, inter a_lia, ~upport t~e
new directions of the United Nations Umversity and its
broader intellectual concerns as reflected in its medium-term
perspective ( 1982-1987) under the following five themes:
(a) Peace, security, conflict resolution and global
transformation;
(b) Global economy;
(c) Hunger, poverty, resources and the environment;
(d) Human and social development and coexistence of
peoples, cultures and social systems;
(e) Science and technology and their social and ethical
implications;
2. Notes with satisfaction that, with the adoption of the
medium-term perspective, a renewed emphasis has been
placed on the multidisciplinary and integrative appro~ch to
the search for solutions to urgent global problems, m accordance with the Charter of the United Nations University;
3. Also notes with satisfaction that, in keeping with its
philosophy of continuity with change, the (!nited N~ti?ns
University has maintained its momentum m the ongmal
programmes and enlarged on the foundations built in the
early years;
4. Welcomes the fact that research, post-graduate training and the dissemination of knowledge will be covered
under the medium-term perspective as a single programme
of the United Nations University with subprogrammes responding to the five themes;
5. Notes with satisfaction the increasing co-operative
activities of the United Nations University with the United
Nations, its organs and agencies, particularly United
Nations research and training institutions, and urges the
University to continue to strengthen its co-_ope_rati_on, and
the co-ordination of its activities, with those mstttuttons and
the appropriate organiz~tional units <;>f the. Un~ted Na~ions
Secretariat, as well as its collaborat10n with mtemat1onal
academic and scientific organizations;
6. Encourages the United Nations University to explore
and expand innovative, fruitful and varied institu~io~al relationships in accordance with its Ch_arter, to assist m ~he
effective implementation of the medmm-term pers_pec_tive
and achieve wider outreach and increased decentrahzat10n,
ensuring the continuing growth of vigorous .academi_c and
scientific communities everywhere and particularly m the
developing countries;
1. Welcomes the increased attention being given by the
United Nations University to the activities related to the
dissemination of knowledge, including its own research
findings, referred to in its Charter and, as a consequence,
the promotion of a more informed awareness of global problems among all sectors and levels <_)f the world co~mu!lity
through the use of the new information and commumcat10ns
technology now available;
8. Recognizes that, over the medium term, the United
Nations University needs to build up its Endowment Fund
and other contributions in order to increase its core income;
9. Earnestly appeals to all Member States to take cognizance of the important developments at the United Natio~s
University and to contribute urgently and gei:ierously to its
Endowment Fund and, additionally or alternatively, to make
operating contributions to the University to enable it to fulfil
effectively its global mandate.
109th plenary meeting
17 December /982

37/144.

Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/225 of 17 December 1981 : by
which it reaffirmed the mandate of the Office of the Umted
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and called for the
strengthening and improvement of the capacity and effectiveness of the Office,
Recalling also its resolution 35! l 07 of 5 ~ecember !980,
by which it reaffirmed the necessity of ensunng_ a contu~ued
sound financial basis for the Office of the Umted Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and extended until 31 December 1983 the term of the Trust Fund established pursuant to
its resolution 3243 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974 and modified under its resolutions 3440 (XXX) of 9 December 1975
and 3532 (XXX) of 17 December 1975 and by its decision
33/429 of 19 December 1978,
Recalling further its resolution ~4/55 of ~9 November
1979, by which it requested an m~r~ase m emergency
disaster assistance, with a normal ceiling of $30,000 per
country in the case of any one disaster,
Deeply concerned about the ad~itional e~onomi~ burden
placed upon the developing countn~s by th~ mci:easmg number of natural disasters and other disaster situations, as well
as the disruption caused to their development process,
Recognizing the contribution made by th~ _lJnited Natio~s
system to the relief of suffering and prov1s10n of h~mamtarian assistance in natural disasters and other disaster
situations,
Recognizing also that the primary responsibilities of a~ministration, relief operations and disaster p~eparedness he
with the affected countries and that the maJor part of the
material assistance and human effort in disaster relief comes
from the Governments of those countries,
Recognizing further the importance of the contribution of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, the League
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and appropriate
voluntary organizations,
Recognizing that, in order to attai~ an effe~tive ~oordination system of humanitarian and_ disaster rehef ass1~tance, it is essential to strengthen and improve the capacity
and effectiveness of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and the United Nations system
as a whole in order to enable the Office to respond to natural
disasters and other disaster situations speedily, efficiently
and effectively, thereby ensuring prompt delivery of concerted relief,
Recognizing that a major constraint o~ an effective response of the United Nations to natural disasters and other
disaster situations has been the shortage of resources,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator33 and of the statement
made by the Co-ordinator before the Second Committee on
2 November I 982; 34
2. Takes note of the progress made by the SecretaryGeneral and the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination
in initiating improvements in the management operati<_)ns of
the Office of the United Nations Disaster ReliefCo-ordmator
and in establishing modalities for the implementation of the
procedures, outlined in General Ass~~bly _resolution. 36/
225 and decision 1982/ I of the Admmistrat1ve Committee
on Co-ordination, for dealing with requests for disaster relief
A/37/235 and Corr. I.
Official Records of the Gn1era/ Assemhh· Thirr, ,. •
Second Commillee. 27th mcctrn,~. i' ,,,,, : ·
n
'

,2 A/37/111/Add. I.

117

4

118

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

from a disaster-stricken State and for dealing with complex
disasters and emergencies of exceptional magnitude;
3. Takes note of the appreciation expressed by the Governments of Chad and Lebanon for the activities undertaken
by the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator in those
two countries, and requests him to continue his action in
response to needs as they arise;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to facilitate, when
necessary, rapid appointment of temporary staff and procurement of supplies by the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator in order to permit a timely response to requests
for emergency assistance;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to raise the normal
maximum of $30,000 to $50,000, the additional $20,000
to come from voluntary sources, to permit the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to respond with grants to
requests for emergency disaster assistance up to a total of
$600,000 in any one year, with a normal ceiling of $50,000
per country in the case of any one disaster;
6. Authorizes the Secretary-General to permit the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to mobilize additional
voluntary resources to meet the needs presented by complex
disasters and emergencies of exceptional magnitude;
7. Decides to maintain, as from I January 1984, the
Trust Fund of the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator and its sub-accounts;
8. Reiterates, in particular, the appeals made in its resolutions 35/107 and 36/225 for increased contributions to
the Trust Fund established pursuant to its resolution 3243
(XXIX) and modified as indicated in the second preambular
paragraph and in paragraph 7 above;
9. Endorses the measures taken by the SecretaryGeneral and the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination
to implement General Assembly resolution 36/225 and calls
upon the Secretary-General, who will normally be represented by the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
to consult with the concerned agencies of the United Nations
system in order to develop concerted relief programmes as
a basis for united appeals for funds to be launched by the
Co-ordinator on behalf of the Secretary-General;
10. Reiterates its desire further to strengthen and improve the capability of the Office of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to take full advantage of information provided by existing early-warning systems and
to co-ordinate, to the extent feasible and useful, all relevant
early-warning systems, taking into account new technological developments in this field, including communications;
11. Urges all Governments and relevant organs and organizations to co-operate with the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator and to improve in particular their flow
of information on relief assistance, actions and plans;
12. Calls upon the specialized agencies and other
constituent organizations of the United Nations system, in
order to eliminate wasteful duplication of resources, to coordinate, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3
of General Assembly resolution 36/225, their efforts at all
stages of the response of the international community to
natural disasters and other disaster situations;
13. Reaffirms its belief that the strengthening and reinforcing of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator offers the most efficient and economic means
of effectively co-ordinating the relief activities of the United
Nations system as a whole in the interest of the survivors
of disasters, and requests the Secretary-General to assign a
higher priority to strengthening, preferably within the means
\! his disposal, the financial and manpower resources of the
Office;

14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 36/225, including a report on the implementation of the present resolution, to the Assembly at its
thirty-eighth session, through the Economic and Social
Council at its second regular session of 1983.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/145.

Assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the Central African
Republic

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 35/87 of 5 December 1980 and
36/206 of 17 December 1981, in which it affirmed the urgent
need for international action to assist the Government of the
Central African Republic in its reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development efforts and invited the international community to provide sufficient resources to carry out the programme of assistance to the Central African Republic,
Noting the statement made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Co-operation of the Central African Republic before the General Assembly on 13 October
1982, 35 in which he described the serious economic and
financial problems of the country and observed that the
situation had not improved, owing to the insufficiency of
financial resources, and that external assistance continued
to be essential,
Noting also the statement made by the representative of
the Central African Republic before the Second Committee
on 4 November I 982, 36 according to which the response of
the international community to the urgent appeal of the
General Assembly had not been adequate to meet the needs
of the situation,
Bearing in mind that the Central African Republic is landlocked and is classified as one of the least developed
countries,
Recalling the Substantial New Programme of Action for
the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, 37 which called
for increased aid to these countries,
Particularly concerned that the Government of the Central African Republic is unable to provide the population
with adequate health, educational and other essential social
and public services because of an acute shortage of financial
and material resources,
Noting with satisfaction the considerable efforts exerted
by the Government and people of the Central African
Republic for national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development despite the limitations confronting them,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 38
to which is annexed the report of the mission which was
present in the Central African Republic during the period
from 13 to 17 June 1982 to carry out a study of the economic
situation and the progress being made in organizing and
carrying out the special economic assistance programme for
that country, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 36/206,
Noting that, according to that report, the budgetary situation of the Central African Republic continues to make
35

Ibid., Plenary Meetings, 29th meeting, paras. 21-52.
lbid., Second Committee, 31st meeting, paras. 22-30.
"Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 1981 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A.
38 A/37/131.
36
