S/PV.7202

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7202nd meeting

Wednesday, 18 June 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Iliichev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Gálvez
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Adamu
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2014/403)

14-43403 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1443403*

S/PV.7202

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

(spoke in English)

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Mali (S/2014/403)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for
Foreign Affairs, African Integration and International
Cooperation of the Republic of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/403, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
following the publication of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Mali (S/2014/403). That
publication occurred while Mali suffered violent
clashes in the north that rocked not only the country
but also the already fragile political process. This new
outbreak of violence, concerning which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has already
reported to the Council, was followed by a suicide
attack against the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
on 11 June in Aguelhok, in which four of our soldiers
were killed and six others were wounded, demonstrating
yet again the precarious security situation in Mali. I
take this opportunity to convey once again our sincere
condolences to the families of those peacekeepers and
to the Chadian Government and people, and to wish the
wounded a speedy recovery.

2/7

18/06/2014

Despite the efforts of the international community
and Malian authorities over the past year, the tragic
fighting in Kidal and its aftermath, as well as the
general insecurity caused by the persisting presence
of terrorist groups across northern Mali, highlight how
much remains to be done to achieve lasting stability
in that country. A successful political process has
to be the cornerstone of that stability. All aspects of
the stabilization of Mali, including the restoration
of State authority, the re-establishment of security
and the protection of civilians, remain contingent on
the successful conclusion of peace talks between the
Malian Government and northern armed groups in the
framework of the Ouagadougou Agreement. The status
quo cannot stand. Progress in the political process is
urgent, and the time for peace talks is now.
After a promising start with the signature of
the preliminary agreement one year ago today, the
Government and the armed groups have made little
progress towards real, substantive dialogue. I think it
is fair to say that the lack of progress in the political
process led to the sharp deterioration in the security
situation in Kidal, where a military confrontation
between Government forces and armed groups resulted
in heavy casualties and the disorderly retreat of the
Malian forces from Kidal and much of the north-east
of the country. I condemn the atrocities committed
in the course of these hostilities. Armed groups have
now assumed effective military and, to an extent,
administrative control over Kidal and other northern
towns, in breach of the Ouagadougou Agreement.
The armed groups must understand that the presence
of parallel or competing administration is incompatible
with the spirit and the letter of the Ouagadougou
Agreement and with the Council’s goal of long-term
peace and stability in Mali. These events — along
with repeated attacks using improvised explosive
devices and indirect fire incidents against MINUSMA,
Malian forces and French Operation Serval — reflect
a serious deterioration of the security situation since
initial improvements in 2013, and have had a continued
impact on the political, human rights and humanitarian
situation.
A narrow window of opportunity has now opened.
Thanks to the joint good offices of President Ould Abdel
Aziz of Mauritania and of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Koenders, a ceasefire agreement

14-43403

18/06/2014

The situation in Mali

was signed on 23 May to end the hostilities in Kidal.
The modalities for the implementation of that agreement
were agreed in Gao on 13 June under the auspices of
the MINUSMA Force Commander and the head of
the Joint Technical Security Commission, which, as
Council members know, is the ceasefire management
body established by the Ouagadougou Agreement in
June 2013. The ceasefire recommits the parties to the
preliminary agreement and represents an important
step in the right direction.
In parallel, the armed groups meeting under
the auspices of Algeria in early June signaled
their willingness to enter into negotiation with the
Government to address the fundamental issues
at the root of the conflict through dialogue. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
MINUSMA of course stand ready to continue playing
a key role to encourage the launch of the peace talks
as soon as possible. But ultimately, it is for the Malian
parties to abide by their commitments and agree to the
launch of the peace talks. Let me say again that they
must do so at once.
Let me now turn to MINUSMA and its mandate, on
which the Council will be deliberating in the course of the
coming weeks. MINUSMA is now at an advanced stage
of deployment and is set to reach, by the end of this
month, 70 per cent of its envisaged civilian strength,
77 per cent of its military strength, and 83 per cent
of its police strength. All of MINUSMA’s authorized
military and police capabilities have been generated,
but the problem of the utility and armed helicopters
remains. Their actual deployment continues to be
delayed, however. About 90 per cent of the Mission’s
military assets are already based in the north.
My Department initiated a strategic review of
MINUSMA earlier this year, which sought to test
our original planning assumptions so as to inform
the Council’s debate on the way forward. As the
Secretary-General outlines in his report of 9 June,
we are formulating several main recommendations.
They are, first, to reiterate the central importance
of the political process and reframe and strengthen
MINUSMA’s political role; secondly, develop a shared
vision for the way forward between the Mission and
the Malian authorities; thirdly, maintain the troop and
police ceilings while expanding MINUSMA’s presence
and mobility in the north as part of an integrated
stabilization strategy; and fourthly, add or clarify

S/PV.7202

tasks, such as support for cantonment, local elections
and electoral reform, transitional justice and military
justice, and counter-trafficking capacity-building, as
well as enhanced support to the Malian military, subject
to the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy.
Recent events have highlighted the importance
of the central finding of the strategic review that the
extension of State authority and stabilization cannot be
uncoupled from the political process, which therefore
remains the top priority. It also requires a closer
partnership between the Government and MINUSMA
based on a shared understanding of the Mission’s
mandate and the roles of each partner.
The Mission’s concentration on the north will
require us to address very real and very severe security
and support constraints. A revised force laydown
of MINUSMA and deployment plan for uniformed
and civilian personnel will need to be developed.
MINUSMA will need to be innovative in how it further
decentralizes its presence, including through the use of
tools such as long-range patrols.
In order to implement its mandate, MINUSMA
must be in a position to identify, mitigate and deter
threats against Malian civilians and United Nations
personnel and assets. The Mission will have to make
maximum use of its capabilities to project its presence
beyond its bases of operation. In this regard, I take this
opportunity to signal to the Council our intention to
deploy unmanned aerial systems in order to enhance
the situational awareness of MINUSMA and its ability
to protect civilians and its own personnel. We are
gratified by the arrival in theatre of combat helicopters
that are capable of supporting long-range patrols and
deterrent action over a wide area. I would nonetheless
urge Member States that have pledged additional assets
or that are providing bilateral support to enhance the
capabilities of troop-contributing countries to deliver
on these pledges as quickly as possible.
(spoke in French)
The sustained political commitment of the Security
Council is essential to the successful stabilization of
Mali. Moreover, the bilateral partners and international
financial institutions need a consistent approach in
order to achieve progress in the areas that are essential
to stabilizing the country, such as governance and
security sector reform. That will also be indispensable
to the complete and successful implementation of the

14-434033/7

S/PV.7202

The situation in Mali

mandate of MINUSMA. We are relying more than ever
on the support and cooperation of all partners, including
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the European Union and all the friends
of Mali, in order to achieve the objective shared by all,
above all the people of Mali, of achieving a lasting, just
and inclusive peace that will allow the country to focus
on its top priority — development.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): At the outset, Sir,
allow me to express the appreciation of my delegation
at seeing your great country, the Russian Federation,
preside over the work of the Security Council for the
month of June.
I extend our warmest congratulations to the
Republic of Korea for its outstanding leadership of the
Council’s work last month.
I welcome the convening of today’s meeting devoted
to the consideration of the report of the Secretary-General
on the activities of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
It is no coincidence that the presentation of the report
under consideration (S/2014/403) is taking place today,
on the first anniversary of the signing in Ouagadougou
preliminary agreement on the the presidential elections
and the inclusive peace talks in Mali. This seems to us
to augur well, in spite of the abrupt deterioration in the
security situation in the north of our country following
attacks targeting Malian armed forces carrying out
their mission to provide security for the visit by Mali’s
Prime Minister to Kidal on 17 May.
On that day, Malian rebel groups, supported by a
mob of terrorists, decided to attack the Prime Minister’s
delegation and the Malian armed forces protecting him
inside the Kidal governorate. Those mixed armed groups
killed soldiers and coldly executed civilian prefects
and sub-prefects, simply because they symbolized the
attributes of Malian sovereignty in the Kidal region.
They also abducted and kidnapped several civilians,
before releasing them a few days later under pressure
from MINUSMA. In carrying out those actions, they
at least willfully violated the preliminary agreement
and committed serious violations of international
humanitarian law.

4/7

18/06/2014

The Republic of Mali welcomes the support of
the international community, particularly through
the Security Council’s statement of 20 May and the
final communiqué of the Summit of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) held on
31 May, which condemned the 17 May attack against
the Malian armed forces and reaffirmed the need to
preserve national unity, territorial integrity and the
secular and republican form of Government.
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government further
affirmed that the security threats Mali faced in 2012
were still present. The comingling of those posing the
threats has led to terrorists entering into pacts with
other actors carrying out crimes in the Sahel. They
also make pacts with the rebels. That was eviddent in
the assault against Mali’s armed forces on 17 May in
Kidal. Preliminary evidence indicates that the murders
committed against State officials in Kidal bore the
hallmarks of terrorist groups and organizations.
Because “peace has victories no less renowned
than war”, we chose peace. In spite of the barbaric
and unspeakable acts that we have suffered — acts
condemned by the international community, including
the Security Council, the African Union, ECOWAS
and several bilateral and multilateral partners — the
Government of Mali is more than ever driven by a
constant concern for Malians to reconcile with Malians.
To that end, Mali is putting all its resources behind
creating the best conditions for national reconciliation,
the restoration of social cohesion and the consolidation
of national unity.
It is in that spirit that His Excellency President
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita did not hesitate for a single
moment, and ordered Malian armed forces to observe
a ceasefire on 21 May, when the Secretary-General
asked for it. That gesture of appeasement greatly
facilitated the signing of the 23 May casefire agreement
between the Government of Mali and the armed
movements and groups, under the supervision of His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, President
of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and Chair of the
African Union. We welcome here his strong leadership
in the fight against terrorism and his desire to make
the Sahel a region of peace, security, development and
shared social well-being.
Since the signing of the ceasefire agreement,
achieved thanks to the involvement of the United
Nations and the African Union, the Government of

14-43403

18/06/2014

The situation in Mali

Mali has not stopped calling on groups and armed
movements to show good faith and to engage in the path
of dialogue.
To articulate his determination to peacefully
resolve the issue concering the situation in the north of
Mali, President Keita decided to appoint former Prime
Minister Modibo Keïta as his High Representative for
the Inter-Malian Inclusive Dialogue. His particular
mandate is to establish and maintain a climate of trust
among all parties involved in the dialogue, to facilitate
exchanges and to contribute to a rapprochement of views
in the interests of the people of Mali. He is authorized
to take any initiative conducive to the conclusion of a
final comprehensive peace agreement.
Also as part of his mandate, the High Representative
has already made contacts in Ouagadougou and
Nouakchott with all groups and armed belligerent
groups arrayed against the Government of Mali, so as
to signal the resolute determinaiton of the President and
the Government to prioritize dialogue on weapons and
to spare no effort to create the best conditions for the
conclusion of a final comprehensive peace agreement
on the crisis in north of Mali.
The High Representative has also urged the armed
groups and movements to reiterate their commitment to
the Ouagadougou preliminary agreement, which they
agreed to do. He is currently continuing the process of
making contacts with the Government of Mali and the
other national, regional and international actors involved
in the peace process. And he is working closely with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
with other special envoys of regional organizations.
With regard to the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation
Commission, esablished in March 2013 by the President
of the Transition in accordance with article 21 of the
Ouagadougou agreement, the National Assembly
adopted the law on its establishment last March. While
its members are yet to be appointed, the Minister of
National Reconciliation is actively working on that.
It goes without saying that those two
mechanisms — the High Representative and the
Commission — are complementary and mutually
reinforcing. The former is working on the conclusion
of a final comprehensive peace agreement; the latter
is working on reconciling hearts and minds, which of
course is a long-term undertaking.

S/PV.7202

Mali is willing to consider with its friends, partners
and many supporters any mechanism for emerging
from the crisis effectively and efficiently, in support of
its efforts. It is in that context that Algeria, to which we
pay tribute, undertook, at the request of the President of
Mali, to carry out exploratory consultations among all
armed groups and movements in the north to develop a
common platform to serve as a basic document, among
other things, to hold inclusive inter-Malian talks, which
are slated for the coming days. The Government of Mali
has reiterated its confidence in Algeria and asked it to
continue its efforts so that the talks can lead to a final
comprehensive agreement as soon as possible.
Part of that undertaking included the holding, at
Algiers on 16 June, of the third coordination meeting
for the Inter-Malian Inclusive Dialogue process, with
the participation of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
and heads of delegation of Algeria, Mali, Mauritania,
Chad, the Niger and Burkina Faso, a well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General — our friend
Albert Koenders, who is here and whom I commend for
his active participation and outstanding contribution to
the meeting — and former Burundian President Pierre
Buyoya, High Representative of the African Union for
Mali and the Sahel, who is seated next to Mr. Koenders.
Participants at the meeting welcomed the progress
made under the auspices of Algeria in creating conditions
conducive to Inter-Malian Inclusive Dialogue and noted
the broad convergence of views on the guidelines of the
agreed approach. They also noted that the conclusions
reached by the six armed groups and movements in
northern Mali — on 9 and 14 June, as well as those
adopted by the fourth meeting of the Algeria-Mali
strategic committee on15 June at Algiers — offer a
promising opportunity to be exploited without delay
in order to engage the stakeholders on the path of the
Inter-Malian Inclusive Dialogue.
They also stressed the importance and urgency
of conducting the initial phase of dialogue foreseen at
Algiers, in line with the time line and the modalities
agreed. Finally, participants expressed their readiness
to provide support and assistance to these efforts in line
with the objectives that the international community set
itself in resolution 2100 (2013), the relevant decisions
of the African Union and ECOWAS and the provisions
of the Ouagadougou agreement aimed at preserving
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Mali and
consolidating national unity.

14-434035/7

S/PV.7202

The situation in Mali

In that context, it was agreed with Algeria that
certain key principles would be respected in the process.
The first principle is that of inclusivity. All partners
with the necessary influence and capacities must
contribute to or be involved in the process. The second
principle is that of transparency. It is agreed that, to
the extent possible, the elements up for discussion must
be shared with all the partners with an interest in the
process. The third principle is the need for coordination
and consistency among all the intitiatives taken with
respect to Mali, and to ensure that these initiatives are
addressed as a whole and that a mechanism is found to
align the efforts launched in Algiers with the need for
enhanced input on the part of the parners, including the
United Nations, which we hope will maintain its central
role in the process.
The Government of the Republic of Mali’s agrees
with the Conference of Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS that, in order to help our country to
regain its sovereignty over its entire national territory,
including Kidal, the Security Council should strengthen
the mandate of MINUSMA and give it the means
and personnel to properly carry out its mission of
guaranteeing the implementation of the Ouagadougou
agreement of 18 June 2013. In that regard, we regret
that, a year after the establishment of the Mission and
in an especially volatile context, it does not yet have the
troops or resources necessary to duly fulfil its mandate.
I should now like to share the expectations of the
Government of the Republic of Mali in the context of
the renewal of the mandate of MINUSMA.
With respect to the stabilization of the northern
regions of Mali, my country would like to see the future
MINUSMA mandate contain a clear provision on the
Mission’s rapid deployment beyond the major northern
population centres, particularly around the villages
and nomadic lands. This proposal has the advantage
of taking into account the lifestyle of nomads from
the north who prefer to live outside of large cities. It
would fill the security vacuum in the gray or lawless
areas where people are most vulnerable to infiltration
by armed groups that have not signed the the
Ouagadougou agreement and may be affiliated to the
terrorist networks Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
the Mouvement pour l’unicité et le jihad en Afrique
de l’Ouest or Ansar Dine, and other drug-trafficking
groups, as was the case in 2012.

6/7

18/06/2014

My delegation also wishes to draw the Council’s
attention to the need to authorize the conduct of
joint Malian armed forces/MINUSMA operations to
optimally restrict the freedom of movement of armed
groups that are not signatories of the Ouagadougou
agreement and may be associated with terrorists and
drug traffickers. Similarly, Mali seeks MINUSMA
support in order to accelerate the process of cantonment
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), so as to isolate and disarm non-signatory armed
groups affiliated to networks that are wiping out the
security gains made in northern Mali by Operation
Serval and the Malian and Chadian armed forces.
In the same vein, Mali believes that it would be
advisable to include the following elements in the
Council’s future resolution on MINUSMA: the solid
support of MINUSMA for the strict implementation
of the ceasefire in all its components, for the return to
the positions held before 17 May, for the revitalization
and reactivation of the follow-up mechanisms of the
Ouagadougou agreement, and for the relaunch of the
peace talks; the strong support of MINUSMA for
the cantonment and DDR of armed groups that have
signed the Ouagadougou agreement; MINUSMA
support for the Malian State in the redeployment of the
administration and the reconstruction of the northern
regions; the substantial reduction of the MINUSMA
footprint in the south to the benefit of the regions
of the north, where there is a real and pressing need
for stabilization and reconstruction; the support of
MINUSMA and the international community for the
coming local and regional elections; the establishment
of the international commission of inquiry provided
for in the ceasefire agreement of 23 May; and the
establishment, in the resolution on MINUSMA, of a
benchmark for monitoring the implementation of the
new mandate.
On behalf of the grateful people and Government
of the Republic of Mali, I pay reverent homage to the
memory of all the brave soldiers, Malian civilians and
friends of Mali who have lost their lives in the fight
against obscurantism, terrorism and violent extremism
in Mali. Furthermore, on behalf of the people,
Government and President of Mali, Mr. Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, I express our deep gratitude to the
French and Chadian authories, the United Nations,
ECOWAS, the African Union, the European Union, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the countries
that contribute troops to MINUSMA. We commend

14-43403

18/06/2014

The situation in Mali

MINUSMA, its personnel and in particular Special
Representative Mr. Albert Gerald Koenders, as well as
all Mali’s bilateral and multilateral partners, for their
unwavering support at the height of the crisis and the
terrorist occupation we have suffered for the past year.
We convey our deep gratitude to them all.

S/PV.7202

The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

14-434037/7
