A /76/PV.42

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

42nd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 1 December 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Cedano
(Dominican Republic), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 39 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(А/76/35)
Report of the Secretary-General (А/76/299)
Note by the Secretary-General (А/76/309)
Draft resolution (A/76/L.14)
Mr. Alateek (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to express my delegation’s
thanks to the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
Ambassador Cheikh Niang, for his report (A/76/35),
whose issuance my delegation welcomes.
It has been more than 75 years since 1945, when the
United Nations was established, and almost 70 years
since the question of Palestine, entered the agenda of the
United Nations, making it the oldest item still on that
agenda. We reaffirm the legitimate inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination, regaining
their legitimate rights, including the legitimate right to
establish an independent State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital, pursuant to relevant Security Council

resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, which
developed a road map towards a two-State final solution,
with the establishment of the State of Palestine within
the 1967 borders. We also stress that the international
community must shoulder its responsibilities to compel
Israel to respect the resolutions of the international
community on ending its occupation of Arab territories
in Palestine, the Golan and Lebanon.
It is regrettable that the Israeli occupation
authorities continue to violate the rights of the
Palestinian people and commit the most heinous crimes
against them, using excessive force against defenceless
people. Continuously building Israeli settlements
despite the adoption of many resolutions that call for
an end to settlement activity is a violation and shows
clear disregard for the international community. The
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia therefore calls upon the
international community to assume its responsibilities
for protecting the Palestinian people and helping them
to regain their usurped rights.
We reiterate our rejection of all Israeli plans and
measures to confiscate Palestinian homes and put
them under Israeli sovereignty. We also reject raids
on Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which violate its sanctity and
attempt to obliterate its Arab and Islamic identity. These
aggressive Israeli measures will definitely undermine
the chances for peace.
The Israeli occupying Power’s policy of settlementbuilding and colonial expansion on Palestinian
territories will destroy the potential for peaceful
coexistence. Further, the unilateral measures adopted

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-36472 (E)

*2136472*

A/76/PV.42

by Israel on Palestinian territory will undermine
security and stability particularly in Palestine, as well
as regional security in the Middle East in general. We
therefore believe that the best means to achieve security
and stability is the resumption of negotiations towards
the establishment of the State of Palestine within the
1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and its successive
leaders have always taken the historical stance of
supporting the question of Palestine and the Palestinian
people, based on the premise that the question of
Palestine is a fundamental and essential one in our
foreign policy and will remain a pivotal and important
one until the Palestinian people regain their rights and
land, and until the goal of the establishment of the
Palestinian State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital
is realized.
I would like to thank the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) for its tireless efforts, despite the risks
and the difficult conditions in the occupied Palestinian
territories resulting from the crackdown by the
occupation authorities. I therefore call upon everyone
to provide the necessary support to UNRWA so that
it can continue to fulfil its humanitarian action in the
occupied territories.
In conclusion, I call upon the States Members of
the United Nations to support and sponsor the draft
resolution A/76/L.14, entitled “The peaceful settlement
of the question of Palestine” submitted by the sisterly
Republic of Senegal under the current agenda item.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate for this item.
I would like to remind members that the
consideration of draft resolution A/76/L.14 will take
place following the conclusion of the debate on agenda
item 38, “The situation in the Middle East”.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 39.
2/14

01/12/2021

Agenda item 38
The situation in the Middle East
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/76/194 and
A/76/299)
Draft resolutions (A/76/L.15 and A/76/L.16)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolutions
A/76/L.15 and A/76/L.16.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express Egypt’s appreciation for
holding today’s meeting on agenda item 38, entitled
“The situation in the Middle East”, which includes two
draft resolutions, “The Syrian Golan” (A/76/L.15) and
“Jerusalem” (A/76/L.16), which Egypt is submitting to
the General Assembly for consideration.
As we aspire to achieve the goals of the United
Nations on the occasion of the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the Organization, as well as those of the Charter of
the United Nations, which sets forth the principles of
respect for the sovereignty of States, non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States and supporting
regional integration, the Middle East has yet to fulfil
these Charter-enshrined principles and objectives. The
crises in the region should not divert attention away
from the core questions that represent the foundation
of stability in the Middle East, especially the issue of
liberating Arab territories occupied in 1967.
It will be impossible to stop the downward spiral
in the Middle East without respecting the rules of
international law and international resolutions. The
first step that must be taken in that regard is to end the
occupation of all Arab territories occupied on 5 June
1967, specifically the occupied Palestinian territories
and the occupied Syrian Golan.
The international community must take a serious
stance with regard to upholding international law
and the resolutions of international legitimacy, in
addition to the United Nations resolutions reaffirming
the inadmissibility of the annexation of territories by
force and the rejection of any unilateral measure or
demographic change in the territories under occupation.
The current developments in the Arab region run
contrary to every principle enshrined in the Charter.
Decades have gone by and the international community
remains unable to implement the resolutions that it has
21-36472

01/12/2021

adopted on the question of Palestine and the occupied
Syrian Golan.
In affirmation of its commitment to the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations
and the importance of achieving security, peace and
stability in the Middle East, Egypt has been submitting
a draft resolution on the Syrian Golan to the General
Assembly on an annual basis. This year’s draft
resolution (A/76/L.15) contains the same language
as last year’s resolution 75/24, with some technical
updates. It reaffirms Security Council resolution 497
(1981) and the principles of international law and the
Charter, especially with regard to the inadmissibility
of annexing territories by force. It reaffirms that the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949 applies to
the occupied Syrian Golan.
In addition, the draft resolution affirms that
settlement construction or any other Israeli activities
in the occupied Syrian Golan constitutes a change in
that area’s demographic nature. It also emphasizes that
Israel’s continued occupation of the Syrian Golan is
an obstacle to establishing a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the region. It calls on Israel to resume
peace talks and withdraw from the occupied Syrian
Golan up to the lines of 4 June 1967, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
It is self-evident that Jerusalem enjoys a special
status in the context of the question of Palestine and
is important to the Arab and Islamic world as the first
Qibla and the third holiest shrine in Islam. Neither peace
in the Middle East nor the settlement of the question
of Palestine will be possible without the inclusion of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif. Since 1947, all United Nations
resolutions have included provisions on the status of
the city. However, all those resolutions, whether they
were adopted by the General Assembly or the Security
Council, remain unimplemented, in flagrant violation
of international law and international legitimacy.
The most recent escalation between the two sides
last May demonstrated that developments in Jerusalem
can spark acts of violence at any time if the existing legal
and historic status of the city under the custodianship of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan over the holy sites is
not maintained. Owing to its historic commitment to the
question of Palestine and the importance of achieving
security and peace in the holy city, Egypt is pleased to
submit draft resolution A/76/L.16, entitled “Jerusalem”,
21-36472

A/76/PV.42

to the General Assembly this year, despite the fact that
it was not submitted in the past two years as we sought
cooperation with both the brotherly Palestinian and
Jordanian delegations to achieve the highest level of
consensus among Member States.
Overall, the current draft resolution retains the
language of resolution 73/22, submitted to the General
Assembly at its seventy-third session in 2018, with
limited amendments reflecting developments on the
ground since then. It refers to the previous General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions rejecting
any measure or law adopted by Israel to change the
character of the city and its current legal and historic
status. It also includes references to Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016) and its provisions on rejecting
any change to the 1967 borders, including in Jerusalem,
unless agreed by the two parties through negotiations.
The draft resolution also reaffirms the applicability
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949 to
the occupied territories, as well as the 2004 advisory
opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International
Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the
construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory (see A/ES-10/273 and A/ES-10/273/Corr.1).
It rejects the expansion of Israeli settlements, the
demolition of Palestinian buildings and homes
and the eviction of Palestinian families from East
Jerusalem, especially in the Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan
neighbourhoods. The draft resolution also rejects Israeli
excavations around and on the premises of holy sites. In
addition, it refers to the 2015 Security Council press
statement (SC/12052) on the situation in Jerusalem.
The draft resolution reaffirms that all measures
that have been taken to alter the character of the city
are null and void and must stop. It stresses that any
lasting solution for the city of Jerusalem should take
into account the rights of both parties and the freedom
of worship of the three monotheistic religions. It is
also important to end incitement, especially in areas
of religious sensitivity. Furthermore, it is important to
maintain the existing legal and historic status of the
holy city.
Egypt hopes that all Member States will vote in
favour of the two draft resolutions on the Syrian Golan
and Jerusalem, respectively, to collectively reaffirm
the importance of complying with international law,
rejecting the forceful annexation of the territory of
3/14

A/76/PV.42

others and upholding the United Nations resolutions and
the Charter so that peace and stability can be achieved
in the Middle East.
Mr. Adam (Maldives): I thank the President for
convening this important plenary meeting on the
situation in the Middle East.
Since its twenty-fifth session in 1970, the General
Assembly has considered the item on the situation in
the Middle East on a yearly basis. However, after more
than five decades of discussion in the Assembly, the
situation in the Middle East remains marred by conflict
and ongoing violence. The question of Palestine remains
unresolved and the conflicts in Syria, Yemen and other
parts of the region continue to cause devastation and
destruction. The international community must do
better to achieve a comprehensive and just peace in the
Middle East.
The question of Palestine has been before us for
decades. However, the Palestinian people have yet to
fully enjoy their basic rights and live lives of dignity
and freedom. The reports of the Secretary-General on
this agenda item highlight the further deterioration
of the political, security and social situations in the
Israeli-occupied Palestinian territory and the suffering
of civilians.
The Maldives once again reaffirms its long-standing
and steadfast commitment to Palestine’s efforts for selfdetermination, serenity and independence. We believe
that the establishment of an independent and sovereign
State of Palestine within its pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side-by-side with Israel
in peace and harmony is the only viable solution to the
question of Palestine.
The Maldives also remains deeply concerned
about the ongoing conflicts in Yemen and Syria.
The humanitarian toll of those conflicts has been
catastrophic, causing a displacement crisis in the border
regions. Millions of people have been forced to flee
their homes to find refuge in neighbouring countries.
As expected, those countries have faced several
challenges in absorbing millions of refugees. Without
the support of the international community, we cannot
expect those countries to be in a position to continue to
accommodate refugees in such large numbers.
A range of issues, from economic disparity to
ongoing conflicts, has also made it difficult to combat
the coronavirus disease pandemic in the region. That
4/14

01/12/2021

has also greatly impacted the vaccination rate in the
region. While some States of the region were among
the first in the world to receive vaccines, war-torn
States were not able to implement concrete plans for
procuring and distributing vaccines, despite their being
among the worst affected by the pandemic.
The international community simply must do better.
Talk is not enough. Humanitarian and economic support
is essential, but that too is not enough. Comprehensive
peace in the Middle East requires a political solution
and the political will to pursue it. We therefore renew
our heartfelt call on the international community to
intensify efforts to achieve a long-lasting and stable
political solution to the conflict in the region. That
is the only way to restore a sustainable international
order with prosperity and durable peace, for the peace
of the region.
Mr. Al Omoush (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the President once again for the able way in which he is
guiding this session. I will be brief and limit myself to
the following remarks.
First, the Israeli violations against the Al-Aqsa
Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif constitute an ongoing
breach of international law and the current legal
and historic status. We warn against the danger of
Israel’s actions against the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which
could have repercussions throughout world, as they
represent provocation to all Muslims. The Al-Aqsa
Mosque/ Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which spans an area of
144,000 square metres, is an exclusive place of worship
for Muslims.
The Jordanian Administration of Jerusalem’s
Awqaf and Al-Aqsa Mosque Affairs has the exclusive
legal authority to manage the Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
regulate access to it. The Hashemite custodianship
of Islamic and Christian holy sites in Al-Quds
represents a historical duty and responsibility that
we proudly uphold, and we will continue to shoulder
that responsibility under the guidance of His Majesty
King Abdullah II and to strengthen the resilience of
the citizens of Jerusalem. We also oppose all attempts
to impose a fait accompli or change the historical and
legal status of the holy sites, especially the Al-Aqsa
Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
Secondly, there can be no comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East without ending the occupation
of the Syrian Golan, in line with the resolutions of
international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative.
21-36472

01/12/2021

The position of the international community on the
Golan is clear and is underscored in Security Council
resolution 497 (1981), which rejects the annexation and
occupation of the Golan by Israel and considers the
laws and authority that have been imposed by Israel on
the Golan as illegitimate.
Mr. Al Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my honour to deliver this statement while the General
Assembly discusses agenda item 38, “The situation in
the Middle East”.
In light of my statement at this morning’s meeting
on the question of Palestine (see A/76/PV.41), I want
to specifically focus in this statement on the Syrian
Arab Golan. I would like to note that the SecretaryGeneral, in his report (A/76/194), calls on Israel, the
occupying Power, to withdraw entirely from the all
the Syrian Golan in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
In the Sultanate of Oman, we subscribe to the
international position that rejects the Israeli occupation
of the Syrian Arab Golan. We therefore consider that
all past and current measures taken by the occupying
Power are illegal and null and void and in contravention
of international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the international conventions and resolutions.

A/76/PV.42

The rightful position taken by the General
Assembly, in line with the principles and purposes
of our Organization, was emphasized by the Security
Council in resolution 497 (1981) which also rejected the
provocative unilateral decision of the occupying Power
to annex the occupied Syrian Golan. Moreover, the
resolution considered that decision null and void and
had no legal effect whatsoever.
However, the insistence of Israel, the occupying
Power, on not abiding by the relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions has led to an
unacceptable failure by the United Nations to compel
Israel to end its occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan.
That is due to the protection umbrella and impunity
provided by the United States of America and certain
other States to Israel, providing it with unlimited
support at the United Nations and beyond.
The continued defiance by Israel of the resolutions
of international legitimacy and the unlimited paralysis
of the United Nations with regard to the implementation
of its resolutions constitute real obstacles that prevent
the achievement of a just and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East, along with security and stability.
That only encourages the Israeli occupation authorities
to pursue their criminal policies and aggressive acts
against the Syrian Arab Republic.

Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I sincerely thank my brother, the
Permanent Representative of the sisterly Arab Republic
of Egypt, for introducing draft resolution A/76/L.15,
entitled “The Syrian Golan”, and draft resolution
A/76/L.16, entitled “Jerusalem”, under today’s agenda
item. Our thanks also go to all Member States that have
sponsored the draft resolution on the Syrian Golan.

My country, Syria, calls on the United Nations
to take firm and immediate measures to ensure the
implementation of its relevant resolutions in order to
end the Israeli occupation of the occupied Syrian Golan
and other occupied Arab territories. That would lead
in turn to an end to the violations committed by the
occupying Power against Syrian sovereignty, as well
as to its crimes of settlement expansion, demographic
change, stealing resources, confiscating territories
and property, killing, arbitrary detention, torture
and other serious violations that together constitute
the policy systematically implemented by the Israeli
occupying Power in the occupied Syrian Golan for
many decades now, while our people suffer every day
under the occupation.

For more than five decades and through its annual
resolutions, the General Assembly has continuously
called on Israel, the occupying Power, to end its
occupation of the Syrian Golan and reaffirmed that all
measures taken by Israel to impose its laws, authority
and administration over the occupied Syrian Golan are
illegal, null and void and have no legal effect whatsoever.

The Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms its strong
attachment to its right to recover the entirety of the
occupied Syrian Golan along the lines of 4 June 1967.
That right is not subject to a statute of limitations and
cannot be negotiated, nor can it lead to concessions.
Moreover, Syria reiterates that all decisions and
measures taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to

I also take this opportunity to reiterate the need to
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the sisterly Syrian Arab Republic. We reject
all forms of interference, regardless of the source, that
undermine the sovereignty and independence of our
brotherly Arab country.

21-36472

5/14

A/76/PV.42

change the natural landmarks or demography of the
Syrian Golan or to impose its laws and authority over
it are null and void. Such decisions have no legal
effect under international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
In that connection, I reaffirm once again, on behalf
of the Government of my country, our steadfast and
principled position regarding our support for the rights
of the Palestinian people to self-determination and
the creation of an independent State, with Jerusalem
as its capital. We reaffirm the importance of ensuring
the right of return of refugees to their homes under
international law, as well as the relevant United Nations
resolutions, foremost of which is resolution 194 (III) of
1948. Palestine must be also granted full membership
of the United Nations.
Most States Members of our Organization have, at
some point in their history, fought to free themselves
from foreign occupation of all kinds, to exercise
their right to self-determination and to achieve their
aspirations. We therefore call on the members of the
General Assembly to vote today in favour of the draft
resolutions contained in documents A/76/L.15, on the
Syrian Golan, and A/76/L.14, on the question of Palestine.
That will proudly reflect members’ commitment to the
principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations and, in particular, the fundamental
principle that forbids the annexation of territories by
force. That will also reflect their commitment to ending
the suffering of peoples living under occupation and to
supporting their right to freedom.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to express my
sincere thanks and appreciation to the States that will
vote in favour of the draft resolutions for their supportive
and principled stance to champion a just cause.
Mr. Pierre (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to extend my warmest congratulations to
the President of the General Assembly and the other
members of the Bureau on their election. The Haitian
delegation guarantees its full support and cooperation
in the successful fulfilment of his mandate.
The Haitian delegation commends the SecretaryGeneral for his action and dedication in the search for a
peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian crisis and has
taken note of his report on the peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine, contained in document A/76/299.
My delegation also commends the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
6/14

01/12/2021

People for its work in carrying out the tasks entrusted
to it under resolution 75/20 of 2 December 2020 and
takes note of its report contained in document A/76/35.
The President took the Chair.
In paragraph 2 of resolution 75/20, the General
Assembly requests the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to
“continue to exert all efforts to promote the
realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to self-determination
... and to mobilize international support for and
assistance to the Palestinian people.”
In the report prepared by the secretariat of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
on the economic costs of the Israeli occupation to the
Palestinian people, in particular, on poverty in the West
Bank between 2000 and 2019, it is stressed that
“[t]he Palestinian people’s right to statehood
cannot be replaced by humanitarian and economic
assistance, however, essential as those may be in
the interim” (A/76/309, para. 57).
Moreover, the report maintains that the United Nations
will continue to work towards the realization of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council and
other resolutions.
As the Haitian delegation has already affirmed
before the Assembly on many occasions, Haiti remains
committed to the founding principles of the United
Nations, in particular Article 1, paragraph 2 of the
Charter, which guarantees the right of peoples to selfdetermination. To that end, my delegation reiterates its
full support for a comprehensive approach that could
lead to a two-State solution in the context of IsraeliPalestinian relations.
Furthermore, we encourage the Israeli and
Palestinian States to overcome their differences in order
to build a better future for their respective populations.
The Haitian delegation calls on the international
community, actors in the region, the political leaders
and civil society of both States to join efforts in order
to reach a fair, sustainable, pragmatic and realistic
solution to a crisis that has lasted far too long.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
ideal solution to the conflict would be one that allows
the Israeli and Palestinian peoples to live side by side
21-36472

01/12/2021

in peace and security and to enjoy full sovereignty
and independence.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in the debate on this item. I would like to inform
members that action on draft resolutions A/76/L.15 and
A/76/L.16 will be taken after we take action on draft
resolution A/76/L.14 under agenda item 39, “Question
of Palestine”.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 38.
Agenda item 39 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolution (A/76/L.14)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/76/L.14. Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Erdman (United States of America): As
President Biden and Secretary of State Blinken have
repeatedly made clear, the United States believes that
Israelis and Palestinians deserve equal measures of
freedom, dignity, security and prosperity, both as
an end in itself and as a means to advance towards
a negotiated two-State solution. We are committed
to supporting good faith initiatives to achieve that
goal — in equal measures.
We believe that the practice of voting year after year
on the same resolutions in the General Assembly does
nothing to bring us closer to that goal. The majority
of those texts are unbalanced and, in many ways,
undermine the prospect of dialogue and cooperation.
In doing so, they also damage the credibility of the
United Nations.
I want to highlight one specific issue of serious
concern, which is the reference to the holy sites in the
Jerusalem text (A/76/L.16). The text only references
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, rather than Al-Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount, which is agreed terminology that
recognizes the shared and diverse history of the holy
site. The omission of that inclusive terminology is of
real and sincere concern.
It is morally, historically and politically wrong
for members of this organ to support language that
21-36472

A/76/PV.42

denies both the Jewish and the Muslim connections to
Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount. As such, the United
States will vote against the three draft resolutions
before us today and encourages others to join us in
supporting tangible and constructive measures to help
achieve peace.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
My delegation acknowledges the consideration of the
draft resolutions under agenda items 38 and 39, which
express strong support for the cause of Palestine, in
particular the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people.
In addition to the failure to hold the occupying
regime accountable for its crimes against the Palestinian
people, it is extremely unfortunate that, despite the
calls of the international community, no progress has
been made towards ending the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian lands over the past years. The question of
Palestine is the longest-standing crisis of our time, with
no feasible conclusion in sight.
After more than seven decades, the Israeli regime
continues to violate the fundamental human rights
and dignity of the Palestinian people and other Arabs
living under its occupation. As a result, not only are
Palestinians deprived of their land and property while
being forcibly evicted, but they are also subject to
violence, terror and intimidation.
Meanwhile, numerous initiatives have been taken
by various concerned countries, the United Nations
and other international and regional organizations
in order to address the crisis and reduce the miseries
of the Palestinian people. The adoption of numerous
resolutions condemning the occupying regime,
presenting different plans and initiatives, as well as the
establishment of fact-finding missions, have all been in
line with efforts to achieve that goal. Despite that fact,
the Israeli regime’s non-compliance with the relevant
international laws and regulations has prevented the
international community from finding a just solution
to the crisis.
The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that support
to the Palestinian people must continue until they are
able to realize their fundamental rights, in particular
the right to self-determination and the establishment
of an independent State of Palestine, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as it is capital.
7/14

A/76/PV.42

Historical experience and developments of recent
years have demonstrated that Palestinians have
no choice but to continue their resistance against
occupation, aggression and violations of their rights.
We are of the view that the return of Palestinian
refugees to their homeland and holding a referendum
for self-determination are the most effective solutions
to the Palestinian question. Through that referendum,
the Palestinian Muslims, Jews and Christians will be
able to choose their own political system and enjoy
their rights of fairly and equally.
Having stated our principled position today, my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolutions
submitted under agenda items 38 and 39 and considers
them a demonstration of the strong support of the
international community for the cause of Palestine, in
particular the realization of the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination.
Meanwhile, my delegation would like to reiterate
the Palestinian people’s inherent right to self-defence in
the face of the Israeli regime’s continued brutality and
hostility against them.
Regarding the occupation of the Syrian Golan by the
Israeli regime, we consider the Golan to be an integral
part of the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic.
We condemn all measures taken by the illegitimate
occupying regime to undermine the territorial integrity
of Syria and we express our deep concerns over the
grave deterioration of the human rights situation and
the increasing number of illegal Jewish settlements in
the occupied Syrian Golan.
While I have the floor, I would like to briefly respond
to the statement made by the representative of Israel
earlier today (see A/76/PV.41), which as usual, made
unfounded allegations against a number of countries,
including Iran. I have no intention of dignifying his
claims with a response. The Israeli regime, which is
the last apartheid regime and the only one in the world
that openly practices and has legalized racism, has the
longest history of opportunistic policies, misleading
others and diverting attention from its inhuman and
savage actions against innocent Palestinians and other
nations in the Middle East.
It is very ironic that the regime that is infamous
for its authorities’ apartheid policies and war crimes,
which are well-documented by various United Nations
bodies and agencies, can allow itself to continue making
false accusations against others and complain about the
8/14

01/12/2021

condemnation of its actions. Against the backdrop of
the shameful years of its history, the officials of the
Israeli regime should not speak of their intentions for
the type of settlement that they intend to arrive at with
the Palestinian people, which can be boiled down to
just a few words: occupation, brutality, massacres and
the flagrant violation of the norms of humankind. We
cannot ignore the fact that the Israelis’ occupation and
racism are the hurdle to overcoming all conflicts in the
Middle East.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolutions A/76/L.14, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/76/L.14: Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei
Darussalam, the Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, The
Gambia, Guinea, Indonesia, Kuwait, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, South Africa, the United Arab Emirates, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam and the
State of Palestine.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guyana, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
21-36472

01/12/2021

Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Hungary, Israel, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru,
Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Brazil, Burundi, Cameroon, Czech Republic,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Madagascar, Papua
New Guinea, Rwanda, Slovenia, South Sudan,
Uruguay Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/76/L.14 was adopted by 148
votes to 9, with 14 abstentions (resolution 76/10).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Henderson (Australia): The Australian
Government welcomes the condemnation in resolution
76/10 of rocket attacks against Israel. Terrorism or
support for terrorist acts is never justified and should
be condemned. Australia opposes one-sided resolutions
that single out Israel and encourages further changes in
language to the Palestinian package of resolutions.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
21-36472

A/76/PV.42

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 39.
Agenda item 38 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions (A/76/L.15 and A/76/L.16)
The President: The Assembly will now take
decisions on draft resolutions A/76/L.15 and A/76/L.16.
We turn first to draft resolution A/76/L.15, entitled
“The Syrian Golan”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
co-sponsors of draft resolution A/76/L.15: Bahrain,
Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei
Darussalam, the Comoros, Djibouti, Indonesia, Kuwait,
Malaysia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Somalia and the United
Arab Emirates.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
9/14

A/76/PV.42

01/12/2021

Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar,
Malta,
Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/76/L.15 was adopted by 94 votes
to 8, with 69 abstentions (resolution 76/11).
The President: We next turn to draft resolution
A/76/L.16, entitled “Jerusalem”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
Affairs and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
co-sponsors of A/76/L.16: Bahrain, Bangladesh, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam,
the Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq,
Libya, Malaysia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Senegal,
Somalia and Viet Nam.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
10/14

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
And Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia, Chad, Chile,
China, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guyana, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Guatemala,
Hungary, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Colombia, Croatia, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Fiji, Germany, Haiti, Honduras, India, Kenya,
Lithuania, Madagascar, Netherlands, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Romania, Rwanda, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Togo,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
21-36472

01/12/2021

A/76/PV.42

Draft resolution A/76/L.16 was adopted by 129
votes to 11, with 31 abstentions (resolution 76/12).

resolutions 76/11 and 76/12, which the General
Assembly has just adopted.

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

Brazil reiterates its support for a just, lasting and
peaceful settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
that is based on a two-State solution with Israel
and Palestine living side by side within secure and
internationally recognized borders.

Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom’s position on the status of Jerusalem is
clear and long-standing: it should be determined in
a negotiated settlement between the Israelis and the
Palestinians. The final determination of Jerusalem must
ensure that the holy city is a shared capital of Israel and
a Palestinian State, granting access and religious rights
to all who hold it dear. The United Kingdom opposes
unilateral action in Jerusalem in the absence of a final
status settlement and remains supportive of the historic
status quo.

Brazil recognizes and welcomes the efforts of the
Observer Mission of Palestine and other facilitators
to streamline their draft proposals and to reduce
the number of draft resolutions currently under
consideration in the General Assembly and its Second,
Third and Fourth Committees.

The United Kingdom recognizes that Jerusalem
and the holy sites at Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount
hold particular significance for many groups around
the world, especially the three Abrahamic faiths of
Christianity, Islam and Judaism. The United Kingdom
welcomes language in resolution 76/12, reaffirming
the special significance of the holy sites and the city
of Jerusalem for those three religions and calling for
respect for the historic status quo.

Brazil believes, however, that the language of any
resolution on Jerusalem should reflect the importance
and historical significance of the holy sites of Jerusalem
for the three monotheistic religions, especially
Temple Mount and Al-Haram Al-Sharif, and should
take into consideration their respective religious and
cultural sensitivities.

However, the resolution adopted today refers to the
holy sites in Jerusalem in purely Islamic terms, without
recognizing the Jewish terminology of Temple Mount.
The United Kingdom has made it clear for many years
that we disagree with that approach. While we welcome
the removal of the majority of those references, we are
disappointed that we were unable to find a solution to
the final reference.
On principle, the United Kingdom has therefore
changed its vote today from being in favour to abstaining.
If the unbalanced reference had been removed, the
United Kingdom would have been ready and willing
to vote in favour of it. The United Kingdom is clear
that that should not be misunderstood as a reflection
of a change in the United Kingdom’s policy towards
Jerusalem, but instead it is an important signal of our
commitment to recognizing the history of Jerusalem
for the three monotheistic religions.
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza (Brazil): Brazil wishes to
deliver the following explanation of vote regarding
21-36472

With regard to resolution 76/12, Brazil reiterates
its commitment to the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, as well
as to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): One of the resolutions
adopted today refers to the holy sites in Jerusalem
(resolution 76/12). Norway is concerned by worrying
developments and recurrent violent clashes at the Temple
Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Norway recalls the special
significance of the holy sites and calls for upholding
the historic status quo for Temple Mount/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, in line with previous understandings and
with respect to Jordan’s special role.
Norway welcomes the new language in the
resolution calling for respect for the historic status
quo at the holy places of Jerusalem. We understand
the language of the holy sites of Jerusalem to reflect
the importance and historical significance of both
the city of Jerusalem and the holy sites for the three
monotheistic religions and we continue to expect that
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
refer to Temple Mount and Al-Haram Al-Sharif in line
with that understanding.
Mrs. Breshanaj (Albania): I will be very brief. I am
taking the floor to explain our abstention in the voting
on resolution 76/12, just adopted, entitled “Jerusalem”.
11/14

A/76/PV.42

Albania’s position on the issues reflected in the
text are well known, documented and coherent and we
agree with its substance. Having said that, we would
have preferred a more balanced terminology on such
sensitive issues, namely the holy places in Jerusalem,
recognizing the shared and diverse history of the
people who live there so as to reflect the situation on
the ground and respect the sensitivities of all sides.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the vote.
We will now hear those delegations wishing to
make statements after the adoption of the resolution.
I give the floor to the representative of the European
Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The EU wishes to thank the Palestinian delegation
for the successful outcome of our negotiations on a
number of resolutions on which action has been taken
by the General Assembly. The EU welcomes the
Palestinian Mission’s decision to bi-annualize a number
of resolutions under the agenda item “Question of
Palestine”. The EU strongly encourages the Palestinian
Mission to further streamline the resolutions, including
by reducing the number of these resolutions and the use
of balanced language.

01/12/2021

and calls for upholding the status quo put in place in
1967 for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, in
line with previous understandings and with respect
to Jordan’s special role. The EU welcomes that the
language on the holy sites of Jerusalem now reaffirms
the importance and holiness of the city of Jerusalem
for the three monotheistic religions. At the same
time, the EU reiterates that, whenever referring to the
Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif in the “Jerusalem”
resolution, both terms, namely, the “Temple Mount”
and “Al-Haram Al-Sharif”, should be used. We
therefore reiterate our call not to exclusively use the
term “Al-Haram Al-Sharif” when referring to the
Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif in the “Jerusalem”
resolution and in other texts.
In this context, the EU calls on all sides not
to deny the historical ties of other religions to the
city of Jerusalem and its holy places in an attempt
to delegitimize their history. Any such steps would
undermine the achievement of a peaceful settlement of
the conflict.
Mr. Alvarez (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina voted in favour of resolution 76/11 because
it believes that the resolution’s essential character is
linked to the illegality of the acquisition of territory
by force. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the
United Nations prohibits the use or threat of use of force
against the territory or integrity of a State.

At this point in time, we would like to put on
record that with regard to all resolutions that are
adopted during the seventy-sixth session of the General
Assembly, the EU and its member States consider
that, whenever the term “Palestinian Government” is
mentioned, it is referring to the Palestinian Authority.
Furthermore, the use of the term “Palestine” in any of
these resolutions cannot be construed as recognition
of a State of Palestine and is without prejudice to the
individual positions of the member States on this issue
and therefore on the question of the validity of an
accession to the conventions and treaties mentioned in
such resolutions.

At the same time, I wish to clarify Argentina’s
position with respect to paragraph 6 of the resolution.
Our vote does not prejudge the content of that paragraph,
particularly the reference to the line of 4 June 1967.
Argentina considers it important to make progress
in the search for a solution to the Syrian-Israeli track
of the Middle East conflict in order to put an end to
the occupation of the Golan Heights. Therefore, the
Government of the Argentine Republic reaffirms once
again the importance of resuming negotiations to find a
definitive solution to the situation in the Syrian Golan
in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for peace.

Further, in relation to the resolution “Jerusalem”
(resolution 76/12), we would like to express the
following. The resolution adopted today makes
reference to the holy sites in Jerusalem. The EU is
concerned about repeated and severe violent incidents
at and around the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
The EU recalls the special significance of the holy sites

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): By now, I think it is
known to everyone that I am the representative of the
State of Palestine, and that I am also the representative
of the Observer State of Palestine in the United Nations
system. Hopefully, we will soon become a full member
within the United Nations system because it is our
natural and legal right. It is only a matter of time before

12/14

21-36472

01/12/2021

we see the General Assembly’s implementation of that
position, since it was with a two-thirds majority of
the Assembly that we changed our status to that of an
Observer State.
Be that as it may, allow me to thank all those
who voted in favour of the two resolutions related to
the question of Palestine, “Peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine “ and “Jerusalem” (resolutions
76/10 and 76/12). This overwhelming support by the
international community is extremely appreciated by
the Palestinian people, as has been reiterated over the
years. I believe that it is now time for us — for the
international community — to move from reiterating
a principled position, which we as the Palestinian
people and their leaders tremendously appreciate,
to implementing, after 75 years of the Al-Nakba
and 54 years of occupation, the overwhelming will
demonstrated through the two resolutions related to the
question of Palestine adopted this afternoon. We look
forward to working with the Assembly to move from the
theoretical position of reaffirming the minute details
of the rights of the Palestinian people to beginning the
process of the implementation.
No country represented in the United Nation
should be above international law and above the wish
of the overwhelming majority of nations that are saying
that occupation has to end, that the independent State
of Palestine should be established, and that the twoState solution should become a reality on the basis
of international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the global
consensus on how to resolve this issue. I believe that
the international community signalling the beginning
of a process in that direction would send the appropriate
message to the Palestinian people.
With regard to the resolution entitled “Jerusalem”,
it is a very appropriate resolution needed by the
international community to give hope to and support
the Palestinian people who steadfastly remain in the
Holy City of Jerusalem, who are trying very hard to
avoid descending into religious confrontation.
The position of the international community on
Jerusalem, whether in the General Assembly or in the
Security Council, is well known. It is important to note
that resolution 76/12 purposefully contains language
that reflects a position unanimously adopted by the
Security Council. At any rate, we are grateful for what
the General Assembly has done today and what the
21-36472

A/76/PV.42

Assembly’s major committees did in days preceding
today’s adoption.
I can assure you, Mr. President, and all of my
colleagues in this Hall, that Palestine is committed
to peace. However, peace cannot be implemented by
merely reiterating wonderful principles and reaffirming
and legislating resolutions. We need to move in the
direction of beginning to implement these resolutions
in order to put an end to the tragedy of the Palestinian
people and to create a new chapter in the Middle East,
a chapter in which two States can live side by side in
peace and tranquillity with each other on the basis of
4 June 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as our
capital. We will then begin a new journey in which the
two States and all States in the Middle East, the region
beyond and the whole world will begin a process of
starting to relate to other that is different than the way
we relate now.
We will never accept to continue living under
occupation in an apartheid system. We deserve freedom
and dignity in our homeland, in our own sovereign
independent State, and we thank the Assembly for
helping us to bring that into reality.
But tomorrow is another day. Tomorrow, let us begin
the journey of the implementation of the overwhelming
will of the international community.
It was a long day, but it was a fruitful, positive day
that will help the struggle of the Palestinian people and
the cause of peace in the Middle East.
The President: The exercise of the right of reply
has been requested. May I remind members that
statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and five
minutes for the second intervention and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ajeeb (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I have asked for the floor first, to thank the
Member States for their steadfast and principled support
for the right of Syria to the Syrian Golan and for ending
Israeli’s occupation thereof while considering all its
measures null and void.
Secondly, I wish to respond to the lies and
misleading campaign launched by the representative of
the Israeli occupation who, instead of being ashamed
13/14

A/76/PV.42

of the military occupation by the Israeli authorities of
Arab territories, including the Golan, along with their
criminal and aggressive practices, tried to deflect
attention by hurling false accusations against other
States, including my country. He played the role of
victim and blackmailed the feelings of the audience
while the Israeli authorities continue to perpetrate all
kinds of grave violations against international law.
In conclusion, the representative of the occupation
authorities should be the last person to speak about

14/14

01/12/2021

wasting the resources, efforts and time of our
Organization, which could have avoided wasting its
efforts for seven decades had his authorities committed
themselves to international legitimacy resolutions,
which have been reiterated today.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 38.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

21-36472
