S/2014/332*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 May 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2048
(2012) and 2103 (2013), and covers major political, security, human rights,
humanitarian and socioeconomic developments in Guinea -Bissau since my report of
14 February 2014 (S/2014/105).

II. Restoration of and respect for constitutional order
A.

Political situation

1.

Overview of the political situation in the country
2.
The reporting period was marked by significant progress in efforts to return
the country to constitutional order, in particular through the holding of legislative
and presidential elections on 13 April.
3.
Following the delayed conclusion of the voter registration process on
10 February, the Transitional President, Manuel Serifo Nhamadjo, held
consultations with political parties and other national stakeholders to determine a
new date for the elections, originally scheduled for 16 March. On 21 February, the
Transitional President issued a presidential decree announcing that the general
elections would take place on 13 April. On 6 March, the National Assembly held an
extraordinary session to ratify the new electoral timelines proposed by the
Transitional President.
4.
On 3 March, the Transitional President announced publicly that he would not
contest the presidential election. The announcement put an end to controversy over
his possible candidacy, which had been prohibited under the transitional political
pact of May 2012.
5.
During the period under review, internal divisions over leadership persisted
within the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC).
On 21 February, a group of nine supporters of Braima Camará, a leading candidate
for the PAIGC leadership, lodged a complaint with the Regional Court of Bissau
* Reissued for technical reasons on 19 May 2014.

14-32232* (E)

190514

*1432232*

S/2014/332

regarding the process utilized during the party’s national congress to select members
of the Central Committee, the Political Bureau and the legal department. On
24 February, those supporters accused the new PAIGC leader, Domingos Simões
Pereira, and the chair of the national congress of nepotism and bias against other
supporters of Mr. Camará. They argued that, although they were not contesting
Mr. Simões Pereira’s victory, they had been forced to take legal action because of
his unwillingness to promote dialogue. On 4 March, the Regional Court of Bissau
rejected the complaint on the grounds that the plaintiffs had failed to utilize the
party’s dispute resolution mechanisms.
6.
On 3 March, the PAIGC Central Committee elected José Mário Vaz, former
Minister of Finance in the deposed government and former Mayor of Bissau, as its
presidential candidate. Mr. Vaz was elected from among eight other candidates,
including former Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Júnior. The Cen tral Committee also
approved the final list of PAIGC candidates in the legislative election. On 5 March,
PAIGC submitted to the Supreme Court its lists of candidates for the presidential
and legislative elections. The next day, the Prosecutor General petit ioned the
Supreme Court to disqualify Mr. Vaz as the PAIGC candidate, on the grounds that a
criminal investigation had been conducted into corrupt activities allegedly
committed by Mr. Vaz in February 2013. On 12 March, the Supreme Court rejected
the request of the Prosecutor General on the basis that Mr. Vaz had not been
convicted of any crime. The Supreme Court concluded that Mr. Vaz was entitled to
his full political rights, stating that there were no legal impediments to him running
in the elections. On 13 March, PAIGC filed a request in the Bissau Court of Appeals
to lift the travel restrictions imposed on Mr. Vaz by the Prosecutor General in
February 2013.
7.
On 18 March, the Supreme Court released a list of 15 eligible political parties
that would participate in the legislative election and 13 eligible presidential
candidates, five of whom were independent candidates. Eight presidential
candidates, including one woman, were not endorsed owing to their failure to meet
some administrative requirements outlined in the electoral law.
8.
On 20 March, 12 presidential candidates, including Abel Incada of the Social
Renewal Party (PRS), Mr. Vaz (PAIGC), Nuno Gomes Nabiam (independent) and
Paulo Gomes (independent), signed an electoral code of conduct that had b een
advocated by civil society organizations, religious leaders and trade unions. The
code of conduct, which was developed with the support of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), was also signed by
10 political parties, including PAIGC and PRS. The 21-day electoral campaign was
officially launched on 22 March.
9.
On 20 March, a PRS delegation led by the party’s president, Alberto Nambeia,
informed my Special Representative in Guinea-Bissau and Head of UNIOGBIS,
José Ramos-Horta, that a PRS candidate to the parliament, Mário Fambé, had been
abducted by armed men that day and was being detained in the armed forces
headquarters in Amura, Bissau. Following démarches by the PRS leadership, the
Transitional Prime Minister, Rui Duarte de Barros, and key international partners in
Bissau, Mr. Fambé was eventually released on 21 March. He was subsequently
hospitalized for injuries reportedly sustained from beatings while in detention. The
PRS presidential candidate, Mr. Incada, condemned the intimidation of PRS leaders
in a press conference on 20 March. He also denied rumours that he had withdrawn

2/11

14-32232

S/2014/332

from the presidential race and that he was in talks with the independent candidate
Mr. Nabiam.
10. On 21 March, my Special Representative convened a meeting of the African
Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the European Union to discuss
the prospective post-election environment, as well as the detention of Mr. Fambé.
On 22 March, my Special Representative, along with the special representatives of
the African Union, CPLP and ECOWAS, met with the Transitional President to
convey the concerns of international partners regarding acts of political intimid ation
in the country.
11. On 25 March, the Transitional President convened a meeting of the Supreme
Council for National Defence, at which discussions were held on, inter alia, the
abduction and detention of Mr. Fambé. The Transitional President subsequent ly told
the media that the military had informed him that it considered Mr. Fambé to be a
deserter and that it had arrested him to prevent him, as a serving military officer,
from running in the elections. The Transitional President stated that, in his vie w,
there could be no justification for the violence that had been inflicted on Mr. Fambé.
He added that the military had reaffirmed its commitment to zero tolerance for any
disruption of the elections and to ensuring security during the electoral process.
12. On 4 April, former President Koumba Yalá died of a heart attack at his home in
Bissau. Mr. Yalá had been actively campaigning on behalf of independent
presidential candidate Mr. Nabiam. On the same day, the Transitional Government
issued a decree announcing that there would be a three-day period of national
mourning, accompanied by a suspension of electoral campaigning. The Transitional
President also announced, on 4 April, that Mr. Yalá would be granted a State funeral
after the elections. At a press conference held on the same day, my Special
Representative called for calm in the country, requested that Mr. Yalá’s death not be
politicized and urged Mr. Yalá’s supporters to show respect for the former leader’s
legacy by maintaining peace during the electoral process.
13. On 13 April, the elections were held as scheduled. The international election
observer missions, which included the African Union (led by former President of
Mozambique Joaquim Chissano), ECOWAS (led by former interim President of
Liberia Amos Sawyer), the International Organization of la Francophonie (led by
former President of Cabo Verde António Mascarenhas Monteiro), CPLP (led by
former Minister of Foreign Affairs Leonardo Simão of Mozambique), the European
Union (led by member of the European Parliament Krzysztof Lisek) and the West
African Economic and Monetary Union (led by member of the parliament of Côte
d’Ivoire Lassana Dosso) unanimously assessed the elections to have been peaceful,
free, fair and transparent despite minor technical problems.
14. On 16 April, the President of the National Electoral Commission announced
the provisional results of the elections. The PAIGC presidential candidate, Mr. Vaz,
had obtained 40.98 per cent of the votes and the independent candidate,
Mr. Nabiam, had obtained 25.14 per cent of the votes. In accordance with the
electoral laws, since no candidate obtained at least 50 per cent plus one vote, the
two candidates with the highest number of votes, in other words Mr. Vaz and
Mr. Nabiam, will compete in a presidential run-off election. On 18 April, the
Commission announced that PAIGC had won the two seats allocated to the diaspora
in the legislative election, bringing the party’s total number of seats to 57 (of a total

14-32232

3/11

S/2014/332

of 102 seats). PRS had 41 seats, the Democratic Convergence Party (PCD) had
2 seats and the New Democracy Party (PND) and the Union for Change Party had
one seat each.
15. While the PAIGC and the PRS leadership expressed their acceptance of the
results, the leaders of PCD and PND announced that they would not accept the
results of the legislative election, arguing that their parties had won more seats than
those indicated by the National Electoral Commission. On 18 April, PND lodged a
complaint with the Commission regarding the election results. On 22 April, the PCD
leader told the press that, in the interest of peace, his party would not pursue its
complaint.
16. On 23 April, the National Electoral Commission announced the final results of
the elections, confirming the leading position of PAIGC in the legislative election
and the results of the two front-runners in the presidential election. The Commission
also announced a record voter turnout of 89.29 per cent. Since no candidates or
political parties had submitted an appeal within 48 hours of the announcement of the
provisional results, the Supreme Court of Justice did not have to intervene in the
process. As a result, the Commission announced that the second round of the
presidential election would take place on 18 May.
2.

Overview of the human rights situation in the country
17. No significant progress was made in the areas of human rights protection and
the fight against impunity. On the contrary, there were new cases of politically
motivated violence and intimidation against election candidates, as well as of
interference in the administration of justice.
18. On 17 March, four of the eight men detained by the Judiciary Police in
connection with the murder of a Mauritanian shopkeeper in Bissau on 29 January
were formally indicted by the Office of the Prosecutor General. Five of the suspects,
who had initially been detained at the armed forces headquarters, lodged a criminal
complaint with the Judiciary Police for injuries sustained while in military
detention.
19. On 17 March, the Regional Court of Bissau postponed, for the fourth time, the
trial of 12 suspects accused of the murder of a Nigerian national on 8 October 2013.
While the accused had been detained since 12 December 2013, neither their
preventive nor pretrial detention were in accordance with national law.
20. On 19 March, a lawyer representing former employees of the port authority of
Guinea-Bissau who had been accused of diverting public funds allegedly offered the
investigating prosecutor a bribe of approximately $20,000 and later another of
$100,000 to file away the investigation. The lawyer was detained by the Judiciary
Police but released on 20 March without charge. On 21 March, the investigating
prosecutor reported that his life had been threatened and requested protection and
support to leave the country. He left the country on 24 March but returned a few
days later.
21. During the reporting period, the suspect arrested on 18 November 2013 for the
severe beating of the Minister of Transportation and Communications of the
Transitional Government was released. Eight other suspects who had been
interrogated between 12 and 15 November 2013 were never arrested.

4/11

14-32232

S/2014/332

22. On 3 April, candidates and parties participating in the general elections signed
a manifesto on the adoption of a new agenda for the rights of the child in
Guinea-Bissau immediately following the elections. The manifesto was promoted
through a national awareness-raising campaign that was launched in December 2013
with the support of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) (see
www.republicadimininushoje.org/). The campaign brings together more than 350
children and youth organizations representing all regions of Guinea -Bissau,
including the National Children’s Parliament, the National Youth Council, the
Network of Children and Young Journalists and the Confederation of Associations
of Students of Guinea-Bissau. The manifesto, which was endorsed in December
2013 by various eminent persons and more than 100 alliances of national and
regional organizations, states that the fulfilment of the rights of the child cannot be
postponed.
3.

Regional and international efforts towards the restoration of and respect for
constitutional order
23. On 28 and 29 March, the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and
Government held its forty-fourth ordinary session in Yamoussoukro. During the
meeting, which was attended by the Transitional President and UNIOGBIS, the
Authority decided to extend the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea -Bissau
(ECOMIB) until 31 December 2014 and to extend the transition period until the
inauguration of the legitimate authorities. In a communiqué issued at the end of the
meeting, the Authority cautioned members of the defence and security forces, as
well as politicians, against carrying out any acts that may disrupt the smooth
conduct of the electoral process. In addition, it encouraged the political parties, the
candidates and their supporters to resort exclusively to peaceful and legal means in
seeking to redress any grievances. Finally, it urged the Afr ican Union and the rest of
the international community to expedite the lifting of sanctions imposed on
Guinea-Bissau and to unite with ECOWAS in facilitating the adoption and
implementation of a consensual post-electoral programme aimed at reforming State
institutions.
24. During the period under review, my Special Representative focused his good
offices mainly on promoting regional and international cooperation to create a
political and security environment conducive to the general elections. In this rega rd,
he engaged in successive consultative meetings and participated in other forums
with regional and international partners, both in Bissau and abroad.
25. My Special Representative also continued to liaise with international
stakeholders, including the Peacebuilding Commission, to ensure that the
international community sustains its engagement in Guinea -Bissau beyond the
elections. In his discussions with international partners, he shared information on
the work of the National Commission for Planning and Strategic Coordination
(NCPSC), which was created in July 2013 to define the priorities for the remainder
of the transition and its immediate aftermath. Moreover, my Special Representative
continued to facilitate the development of a governance efficacy a melioration
programme aimed at promoting the rebuilding of State institutions in consultation
with ECOWAS, NCPSC, the United Nations country team and other international
partners. With the support of the United Nations in Guinea -Bissau, NCPSC is also
preparing for a post-election donor pledging conference that will be convened as
soon as possible following the elections.

14-32232

5/11

S/2014/332

26. On 1 April, the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
issued a press statement emphasizing that elections were o nly the first step towards
the restoration of constitutional order in the country, and that the polls would need
to be followed by essential reforms to ensure lasting stability and democratic
consolidation. The configuration expressed concern about recent episodes of
political violence and condemned any attempt to use fear and intimidation as
political tools. The configuration further reaffirmed its readiness to serve as a
coordinating platform to help devise medium and long -term resource mobilization
strategies in support of nationally led initiatives that advance key peacebuilding
objectives. Moreover, the configuration took note of my Special Representative’s
proposal for a governance efficacy amelioration programme and acknowledged the
important, leading role being played by ECOWAS in support of the modernization
of the defence and security sectors in Guinea-Bissau.
27. As the Peacebuilding and Recovery Facility of the Peacebuilding Fund
remains suspended, the Fund has provided approximately $5 million un der the
Immediate Response Facility for projects to help create an environment conducive
to the conduct of elections. That financial contribution has enabled the United
Nations to support the work of NCPSC, promote labour-intensive employment for
women and youth, support the National Electoral Commission, strengthen electoral
security, enhance the watchdog role of the national media and promote women’s
participation in the elections as candidates, voters and monitors.
28. On 10 April, the President of Ghana, John Dramani Mahama, visited Bissau in
his capacity as the Chair of ECOWAS and as part of efforts by subregional
organizations to assist in defusing political tensions and promoting peaceful and
credible elections in Guinea-Bissau. During his visit, he met with the transitional
authorities, the armed forces leadership and international partners and told the
media that the military leadership had given him total guarantees that they would
not interfere in the electoral process.
4.

Efforts towards a democratic electoral process
29. Following the conclusion of the voter registration process on 10 February, the
government technical electoral support office printed and displayed the provisional
voters’ list from 18 February to 4 March, in accordance with the legal requirements
related to the exhibition of and challenges to the list. On 18 March, the support
office handed over to the National Electoral Commission the final voters’ list
containing 775,508 voters, of whom 402,966 were women and 22,312 were
members of the diaspora. The list consisted of 95.6 per cent of the estimated voter
population.
30. While the voter registration and nomination processes for presidential and
legislative candidates were being conducted, the National Electoral Commission
continued its efforts to make logistical preparations for the polls. The United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) provided technical and financial support
to the Commission through the multi-donor basket fund in support of elections.
Arrangements for the printing and dissemination of ballot papers and miscellaneous
election documents were completed on 31 March, allowing for their delivery to
Bissau on 3 April. Following the completion of a mapping exercise of polling
stations throughout the country, prepared with the support of the regional electoral
commissions, the National Electoral Commission finalized the electoral map of

6/11

14-32232

S/2014/332

polling stations. The map provided for 3,018 polling stations in the country and 54
polling stations in the diaspora.
31. On 15 March, the National Electoral Commission launched a civic education
campaign in all regions of the country with the support of UNDP. The campaign
focused on emphasizing the reasons to vote given that most national actors involved
in election preparations were of the view that voters already knew how to vote. The
campaign included door-to-door activities and the broadcasting of programmes on
community, private and public radio stations and on national television. In March,
the Commission led the training of trainers of polling station officers, regional
trainers and polling station officers, with the support of UNDP.
32. UNIOGBIS too provided continuous support to national stakeholders. On
21 March, at the beginning of the electoral campaign, my Special Representative
had a message calling for peaceful elections broadcast regularly on four national
radio stations until 11 April. He also had a video message broadcast on national and
international television and by news agencies at the end of the electoral campaign
period. UNIOGBIS produced seven radio programmes, including on voter
registration, the electoral code of conduct, electoral security, women in politics,
environmental protection, the role of the international community and the United
Nations.
33. On 2 and 3 April, UNIOGBIS held a two-day training workshop for election
agents, organized in partnership with the National Electoral Commission and the
Faculty of Law of the University of Bissau. A total of 35 participants representing
12 political parties and 9 candidates attended the workshop.
34. UNIOGBIS and ECOMIB provided technical support to the joint command of
the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of Defence of the Transitional
Government, which was established to monitor the implementation of the natio nal
electoral security plan for 2014. At the request of the Transitional Government,
UNIOGBIS conducted training courses on the electoral security process for 1,672
police and military personnel. One police officer and one military adviser from
UNIOGBIS were co-located with the joint command to assist with the planning,
monitoring and coordination of election security arrangements in Bissau and in the
country’s regions, in close cooperation with the African Union and ECOMIB.
35. The international partners of Guinea-Bissau deployed eight election observer
missions to the country, comprised of 542 international election observers, including
32 long-term observers. The missions were from the African Union (56), CPLP (57),
ECOWAS (273), the European Union (59), the European Parliament (13), the
International Organization of la Francophonie (16), the non-governmental
organization Ideal (4), the joint Timor-Leste and New Zealand mission (26), the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (10), the United States of
America (16) and the West African Economic and Monetary Union (12). Although
there is no statutory provision for domestic election observation, national civil
society organizations deployed some 880 monitors nationwide to observe the
process from outside the polling stations.

14-32232

7/11

S/2014/332

B.

Security situation
36. During the reporting period, the security situation remained relatively stable.
At the end of the meeting of ECOWAS chiefs of defence staff held in Bissau on
19 February, the Guinea-Bissau Chief of General Staff of the armed forces, General
António Indjai, promised zero tolerance for fraud in the general elections. The
media also quoted him as saying that the elections would be transparent and security
would be total.
37. Notwithstanding the commitment by the armed forces’ leadership to ensuring
security during the electoral process, concerns remained about the security of
presidential and legislative candidates. On 6 March, Faustino Imbali — a former
Prime Minister, leader of the Party of the People’s Manifest and an aspiring
presidential candidate — informed UNIOGBIS that, on 5 March, five uniformed
military personnel had confiscated a vehicle allegedly given to him by General
Indjai. Mr. Imbali explained that the five individuals had justified their action by
stating that he had not complied with a request from General Indjai that he withdraw
from the presidential race in order to favour Mr. Nabiam.
38. According to the approved national electoral security plan, the military were
on call and had a reserve capacity role for contingency situations. Although the
police and the National Guard were expected to provide security to all candidates,
some of the candidates who had expressed concern about harassment by the military
requested and received protection from ECOMIB.

III. Socioeconomic and humanitarian situation
39. The socioeconomic situation in Guinea-Bissau continued to be very
challenging during the period under review, especially as the country did not receive
any budgetary assistance in the first quarter of 2014.
40. On 13 February, a delegation from the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
completed a three-day mission to Bissau. In a communiqué issued at the end of the
mission, the IMF delegation noted that the economy had not recovered from the
economic and political consequences of the coup d’état of April 2012, and estimated
that the economy would grow at a rate of only 0.3 per cent in 2013. The IMF
delegation also noted that low levels of revenue-gathering and of international
financial assistance had led to a build-up in salary arrears owed to civil servants,
accounting for 1.2 per cent of the gross domestic product.
41. A high-level delegation of the Group of Seven Plus fragile States, visited
Guinea-Bissau from 5 to 15 March to conduct a preliminary assessment on the
implementation of the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States. The delegation,
which was led by the president of the Group, the Minister of Finance of
Timor-Leste, Emília Pires, met with the Council of Ministers of the Transitional
Government, parliamentarians and representatives of the private sector and civil
society organizations. The delegation worked in close partnership with NCPSC and
the Ministry of the Economy. On 10 March, Mrs. Pires briefed the international
partners of Guinea-Bissau in Bissau on the mission and outlined proposals for a
fragility assessment to be conducted after the elections, with a view to assisting the
national authorities in determining national priorities to be presented at a donor
pledging conference.

8/11

14-32232

S/2014/332

42. Although a social pact for the education sector was signed by the Transitional
Government and teachers’ unions in December 2013, strikes continued owing to the
fact that an agreed operation to confirm and produce a single list of teaching staff
had not been completed. The single list was intended to facilitate the disbursement
of payments to teachers from World Bank funds. The health union announced a
5-day strike and the teachers’ union announced a 30-day strike, to be held starting
on 1 April.
43. The number of reported cases involving the issuance of illegal fishing licences
and of illegal logging, deforestation, land expropriation and the excessive
exploitation of natural resources increased during the reporting period. In an
interview with the news agency Lusa on 25 March, the Director of the International
Union for Conservation of Nature in Bissau warned that the exploitation of heavy
sands and logging in the country had reached alarming proportions. On 29 March,
the Director of Tiniguena, a national environmental non-governmental organization,
stated on a radio programme in Bissau that the logging activities contravened the
forestry law of 2011, while also noting that logging revenues in Guinea -Bissau were
drastically low compared to those on the international market. He added that civil
society organizations planned to lodge a complaint in court to stop logging exports
and to call on the elected authorities to impose a moratorium on logging.
44. In the light of concerns over the possible spread of the Ebola virus in West
Africa, the Transitional Government developed a contingency plan aimed at
preventing and controlling an outbreak of the virus, with the support of the World
Health Organization, UNICEF and other development partners. T he plan includes
measures to strengthen the overall epidemic surveillance system, reactivate
epidemic management committees at all levels, establish and equip sites to isolate
suspected cases at all levels, including at border points, and disseminate infor mation
and key messages to the population. No suspected cases of Ebola virus infection
were reported in Guinea-Bissau during the period under review.

IV. Observations
45. The high voter turnout (almost 90 per cent) in the first round of the
presidential and legislative elections was a historic achievement, clearly
demonstrating the determination of the people of Guinea -Bissau to restore
constitutional order in their country through democratic means. I commend all of
them, including the transitional authorities, the election management bodies,
political parties, the defence and security forces, civil society organizations,
religious leaders and women’s groups, as well as youth, for their remarkable
commitment to completing the transition process.
46. I would also like to extend my appreciation to the international partners of
Guinea-Bissau, in particular the African Union, ECOWAS, the European Union,
CPLP and the Governments of Nigeria and Timor-Leste, for their invaluable efforts
throughout the electoral process. Their financial and security assistance, as well as
their steadfast political and moral support to the people of Guinea -Bissau,
significantly contributed to ensuring that the situation in the country did not
deteriorate into an intractable crisis.
47. In the same spirit that prevailed during the first round of the presidential
election, I urge the people of Guinea-Bissau to go out in large numbers to cast their

14-32232

9/11

S/2014/332

votes for their preferred candidate during the second round, scheduled to be held on
18 May. I also encourage them to continue to exercise the restraint and calm that
they have demonstrated so far in the electoral process.
48. Following the completion of the electoral process, it will be critical for the
newly elected Government to deliver tangible dividends that will be immediately
reflected in the lives of all the citizens of Guinea-Bissau. In order to achieve this
and, in particular, to ensure the functioning of State institutions, the provision of
public services and the prevention of a further deterioration in the prevailing
difficult socioeconomic situation, the new Government will require urgent
budgetary support. The Government will have to agree on immediate and medium term goals for the country’s stability and prepare for a donor ple dging conference in
close cooperation with development partners. For its part, the international
community must make every effort to address the urgent needs of the citizens of
Guinea-Bissau by pledging and delivering on promises to provide the country wit h
financial support in the identified priority areas.
49. In the medium to long term, it will be critical for the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau to manage efficiently the resources derived from tax revenues and
international assistance to ensure the sustainable functioning of State institutions,
the regular payment of salaries to civil servants and the timely delivery of basic
services to the population. In this regard, I welcome the ongoing dialogue among
national and international partners on the governanc e efficacy amelioration
programme, which is aimed at promoting the rebuilding of State institutions in
Guinea-Bissau. I encourage all stakeholders to support the finalization and
implementation of the programme. I also call upon the Security Council and th e
international community as a whole to lend support to the envisaged donor pledging
conference to secure the necessary funds for its implementation.
50. The elected authorities will need to promote inclusive dialogue and
transparency to ensure that the new Government is based on merit, competency and
gender equality. They will also need to strengthen the institutions in the defence,
security and justice sectors to enable them to fulfil their constitutionally defined
roles and maintain constitutional order.
51. The promotion and protection of human rights in Guinea -Bissau remains a key
priority to achieve long-term stability in the country and boost socioeconomic
development. It will therefore be critical for the new Government to commit to
protecting the human rights and freedoms of all the people of Guinea -Bissau, to end
the culture of impunity by ensuring the conduct of independent, impartial and
transparent investigations into gross human rights violations and to implement the
United Nations human rights due diligence policy.
52. During the past two years, destruction of the country’s forests and natural
reserves has reached unprecedented levels, with negative consequences for the
environment and the livelihood of the population. The maritime resources of
Guinea-Bissau have been under threat for years as the State has been unable to
protect its own waters and fight corruption. The reported issuing of illegal fishing
licences in total disregard of sustainable fisheries, if confirmed, must be stopped.
The income generated from the exploitation of natural resources should be for the
benefit of the entire population and future generations, not just for a few
individuals. The new authorities will have to work closely with relevant Member
States, civil society organizations, private companies and investors to make

10/11

14-32232

S/2014/332

transparency in natural resources management a key national priority. I urge
international partners to assist the country in establishing best transparency practices
in this area.
53. A return to full constitutional order will provide the people of Guinea-Bissau
with an opportunity to turn a new page in their country’s history. I call upon them to
take advantage of this new start and to stand guard against any potential reversal of
the democratic gains already made by, inter alia, promoting and practising
accountable governance, establishing harmonious civil-military relations and
ensuring the protection and realization of fundamental human rights without
discrimination.
54. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the staff of UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations country team, under the leadership of my Special Representative,
as well as to the regional and international partners of Guinea -Bissau for their
contributions to the efforts to restore constitutional order and promote peacebuilding
in the country.

14-32232

11/11
