S/PV.7516

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7516th meeting

Monday, 31 August 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Casimiro
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-26817 (E)
*1526817*

S/PV.7516

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
cannot begin my intervention without expressing, on
behalf of the Chilean Government and on my own
behalf, our most sincere condolences on the passing
away of the Force Commander of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, Lieutenant General José
Luiz Jaborandy, Jr. — to the Government of Brazil,
to General Jaborandy’s family and to the members of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. For those
of us who were privileged to know and work with the
General Jaborandy, we knew well of his leadership
and his commitment to peace and security in Haiti.
Yesterday we lost a great soldier of peace.
We congratulate you and your team, Madam
President, for the outstanding conduct of the work of
the Security Council during the month of August.
We appreciate this public wrap-up session, which
is an important practice to continue. I should like to
mention a few issues that we believe merit follow-up: the
use of the veto, the process of the selection of the next
Secretary-General, sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict, and the unity of the Security Council with
regard to the peace and non-proliferation agreements of
recent months.
Unfortunately, in the month of July, the exercise
of the right of the veto (see S/PV.7498) prevented the
Council from adopting a product relating to the crime
of genocide. We reiterate the call to the members of
the Council who hold veto power to refrain from
making use of it when it comes to war crimes, crimes
against humanity or genocide. We support the code of
conduct proposed by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group to those ends, and we hope that
many other countries will join the initiative as well as
similar ones in that vein.

2/20

31/08/2015

We value the informal discussion of the Council on
its working methods and the use of the veto — held
during the presidency of New Zealand — as well as
the consultations regarding the selection process of the
Secretary-General, whether that be a man or a woman.
With such openness and transparency, we expect that
the Council will contribute harmoniously to the the
taking of that decision within the General Assembly as
well.
Regarding sexual violence and gender-based
violence in conflict, on August 24 the United States
of America and Chile co-chaired the first Security
Council Arria Formula meeting on targeted attacks by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant on lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender persons. That meeting allowed
for the gathering of first-hand information on issues of
peace and security, including combating terrorism and
protecting civilians belonging to vulnerable groups.
The meeting also set a precedent on the issue not only in
the Council but throughout the United Nations system,
as evidenced by the high level of participation on the
part of Member States and civil society.
The consultations we held with the SecretaryGeneral on allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
by troops from the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic served to highlight the need for contingents
to receive training in human rights and for ensuring
the strict enforcement of the zero-tolerance tolerance.
That should be done while also ensuring that those
responsible are brought to justice and that the victims
are compensated and reintegrated. The system should
adequately address that matter, with particular focus on
the challenges faced by troop-contributing countries.
In addition to the information provided by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zainab Hawa
Bangura on her visit to the Middle East, we have seen
that sexual and gender-based violence must be addressed
in the various reports of the Secretary-General to
the Council, as well as in consultations — whenever
necessary — and not solely in the framework of an open
debate on the subject. One might add, as an additional
thought, that gender advisers should be included in
missions as a preventive measure, among others, to
avoid the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war or
terror.
The adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), on
non-proliferation, and of resolution 2235 (2015), on

15-26817

31/08/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

chemical weapons in Syria — as well as the treatment of
South Sudan — shows that the Council can be effective
if it acts in a unified and timely manner. The joint
action exercised by the Council to decisively influence
the signing of the agreement putting an end to the
20-month period of armed conflict in South Sudan is
the most recent proof that, when there is willingness
and a great deal of flexibility, it is possible to find a
basis for agreement to deal with items on the agenda
of the Council, even when legitimate differences may
exist. That is the approach that we feel should be
used to deal with other cases. The spirit of working
constructively should prevail, so that the Council can
assume its responsibility flowing from the Charter of
the United Nations.
We feel that other issues dealt with over recent
months have inded been very useful. However, we
would like to suggest that “Other matters” should also
include dynamic dialogues with briefers as well as
penholders — before the expected product — in order
to favour receiving information or an additional product
over repetitive rhetoric.
Finally, we wish the Russian Federation every
success in its presidency in September, and we reiterate
our support and commitment to cooperate with the
presidency in a constructive manner.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I want to begin,
as Cristián did, by expressing condolences both to
the leadership of the United Nations and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and to the Government of Brazil for the tragic death of
General Jabornady of MINUSTAH.
I also want to echo what Cristián just said in
thanking you, Joy, and your team for delivering a
successful month of August. It was a busy month, but
I think that, as President, you brought some welcome
unity to the Council on several important issues, most
notably on Syria.

S/PV.7516

security, on the importance of security-sector reform
in sustainable peacebuilding and on the vital need to
learn from last year’s Ebola outbreak, recommitting to
reaching a level of zero infections. I am pleased that
under your presidency, Madam, you have continued
to bring diverse issues such as those to the Council’s
attention. But it is this month’s discussions on Syria
that I want to focus on.
Resolution 2235 (2015), on the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, represents a much-needed step towards
accountability for the barbaric use of chemicals
as weapons in Syria. For too long, the Council has
been less effective than we would like in the face of
continuing reports of the horrific use of chlorine and
mustard gas against civilians. We look forward to the
urgent implementation of the resolution in the coming
weeks. Reports of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant using chemical weapons are worrying, and they
must be investigated. But they do not make any better
the Syrian regime’s continued use of such weapons.
Through the presidential statement on the work
of Special Envoy De Mistura (S/PRST/2015/15), the
Council recommitted to a political solution in Syria
based on the implementation of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). That was the first united signal on
that issue from the Council in 18 months. Those are two
overdue steps. The disturbing attacks on Duma and the
harrowing Arria Formula meeting on the persecution of
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons showed
just how much more work lies ahead, but we should not
be deterred by the scale of the challenge. Those two
small steps felt out of reach at our most recent wrap-up
session, in June (see S/PV.7479). Let us therefore seize
the momentum and unity of this month and redouble
our efforts to draw to a close more than four years of
fighting.

I want to focus on three sets of issues today. First
of all, I would like to use this session to reflect on our
successes this month and on how we can build on them.
Secondly, I will have a look at where we were unable
to find agreement, including some of the events in July.
And, finally, I will look back on our working methods
and assess whether they delived as best they could.

We know what we can achieve when our diplomatic
efforts are aligned. Last month’s resolution 2231 (2015),
on the Iran nuclear deal, clearly showed how a united
Council, working closely with regional organizations,
such as the European Union, can really make a difference.
In a world of escalating threats to international peace
and security, it was immensely satisfying to tackle
that one. I want to pay tribute to Gerard and his team
from New Zealand for their vital stewardship of that
important issue through the Council.

This past month, the Council covered a wide
breadth of issues: on the role of regional and subregional
organizations in our work on international peace and

Sadly, July also showed the dire consequences of
division. We had the chance to bring justice to those
tragically killed on Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. And

15-268173/20

S/PV.7516

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

we had a unique moment to remember those murdered
in the Srebrenica genocide and to advance the cause of
reconciliation in Bosnia. On both occasions, we were
denied by the actions of one Council member. That
cannot continue if the Council is to retain its credibility.
We faced wider challenges to our collective credibility
over the past months. We cannot, and must not, shy
away from the shocking allegations that emerged about
sexual exploitation and abuse committed by United
Nations peacekeepers. Those horrific reports must be
investigated urgently and decisively. I welcome the
responsiveness of the Secretary-General in briefing the
Council so quickly after the allegations emerged.
It is that responsiveness that demonstrates that
the Council’s impact is not always determined by its
products, but also by its working methods. I applaud
you, Madam, for your creative use of the item “Other
business” to address issues from Burundi, to GuineaBissau and Burkina-Faso. I also commend you for
humanizing the impact of Ebola by inviting to the
Council a briefer who worked in the field. And I
commend you for your dedication to agreeing to strong
and clear press elements so that we may communicate
our work to the world at large. Your efforts have been
a welcome continuation of the steps taken by Gerard
to bring more interactivity and informality to our
consultations.
Let me conclude, Madam President, by welcoming
the fact that you are holding this session in public. It is
important that we should share our successes and be
frank about our shortcomings to the widest possible
audience. By working together in this way, we can
help improve our effectiveness in future and tackle
the challenges ahead. I look forward to doing so in the
coming month under the Russian presidency.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me pay tribute to the Force Commander of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
to express my condolences to his family and loved ones.
I warmly thank Ambassador Joy Ogwu and all the
Nigerian team for their work. You managed perfectly
the agenda during an intensive month in the heart of
a New York summer, with pragmatism, talent and a
spirit of availability. I also wish to pay tribute to your
mindfulness for summaries and explanations of the
work done. You placed the issue of peacekeeping at
the heart of your programme, thus preparing for the
collective thinking that we owe the Organization for its

4/20

31/08/2015

seventieth anniversary. In particular, I will remember
the excellent debate (see S/PV.7505) organized on
regional organizations and contemporary challenges
to global security. The recommendations of the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, as the
Secretary-General stated, encourage us to strengthen
partnerships, with the strict application of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, with regional
organizations, in particular the Union African and the
European Union.
The month of August also saw its own positive
developments. Certainly, we cannot rest on our laurels,
but I want to highlight several issues.
To begin with, the Council was able to reach
unanimity on the Syrian dossier with the adoption
of resolution 2235 (2015), which establishes an
investigative mission to attribute responsibility for
the use of chlorine as a chemical weapon in Syria,
which shows that there will be no impunity in the face
of such serious crimes. That hope was extended and
bolstered by the adoption of a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2015/15) on 17 August in support of the
political process relaunched by Staffan de Mistura.
Now we have that framework in place; henceforth we
must not forget the situation of civilian populations
who have paid too high a price in this conflict. From
18 August, air raids that struck Douma indiscriminately,
with about a 100 deaths and numerous injured, remind
us what the Syrian authorities are doing to their own
population. As we wait for a political transition to be
set up, the international community must remember
that, first and foremost, States have the responsibility
of providing security for their populations. France will
continue to work tirelessly to ensure the protection of
civilian populations against the most deadly attacks, in
particular indiscriminate bombings by the regime using
barrels bombs, and to ensure that a political solution,
which everyone very much wants, will be set up. One
does not go without the other.
I also want to speak about another development,
Madam, that took place under your presidency, namely,
the signing of the peace agreement on South Sudan.
The presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/16) adopted
on August 29 invites the parties to honour their
commitments in full. That important moment, while
the security and humanitarian situation continued
to deteriorate, shows, if it was needed, in connection
with Nigeria’s general debate, the key mediating role

15-26817

31/08/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

of regional organizations and of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in the crisis in South Sudan.
Peacekeeping, which has been the thread running
through your presidency, Madam, involves the renewal
of the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Through resolution 2236 (2015), we renewed
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, which plays a key role in Lebanon to preserve
the ceasefire. The presidential statement of 29 August
on the South Sudan (S/PRST/2015/16) confirms the
desire of the Council to adapt the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan to implement
the recently signed agreement.
I want to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the courageous action of the soldiers and personnel
involved in peacekeeping. We saw this, for example,
with the efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to restore calm
on the ground during serious armed clashes in the Kidal
region, in violation of the agreements signed on 15 May
and 20 June in Mali. They cannot see their reputation
tarnished by abuses carried out by some of them. This
month of August saw the list of allegations of sexual
abuse in the Central African Republic expand. The
Council was able to express its emotion and anger, and
support the decisive action of the Secretary-General
to implement the zero-tolerance policy. I want to
assure Council members once again of the wholesale
determination of France to shed light on the allegations
concerning French soldiers. We want to lend our
full support to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and
the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, in that
painful but crucial time for the political transition in
the Central African Republic.
My statement would not paint a realistic picture if
I did not talk about the tense situations that civilians
suffer from first and foremost. First of all, Burundi has
been caught up in a spiral of violence since the elections.
From now on only one thing is needed — the resumption
of dialogue. However, it is lagging behind, at a risk for
the worse and of regional contagion. Let us get back
once again to the role of regional organizations in crisis
prevention and management. That will be crucial. The
East African Community is in the front line, but the
African Union and the United Nations must give their
support. Inaction does not equal stability, and we must
do everything we can collectively and individually

S/PV.7516

to bring the parties together to find agreement and
a consensus-based solution. In Burundi as in other
theatres of political and security crises, the inclusive
nature of dialogue will be a key to a solution.
The appeal we are making also concerns GuineaBissau. The Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
have noted an increase in tensions, steeped in obstacles
for the country and its population, that might undermine
the significant achievements that the country has
attained since 2012. The unity of the Council and the
international community sends a strong message to
the authorities of Guinea-Bissau to urge them to opt
for dialogue over confrontation, with the support,
once again, of regional organizations, in particular the
Economic Community of West African States.
In Yemen, Stephen O’Brien returned from his
trip with a report and very alarming figures on
the humanitarian situation in the country. France
recalls that resolution 2216 (2015) urges all parties
to fully respect international humanitarian law and
international human rights law that applies. We reiterate
our appeal to implement an unconditional humanitarian
pause, if necessary with a monitoring mechanism, and
an immediate resumption, without preconditions, of a
truly inclusive inter-Yemeni dialogue, under the aegis
of the Special Envoy.
Finally, on Libya, the Council has been sufficiently
patient, and it is time for dialogue to happen very
soon with the formation of a Government of national
consensus. Otherwise, the threat of terrorism will
continue to expand, and we will not be able to bring
a sustained response to the migration challenges that
affect the country. We are bringing our full support
to the Special Envoy Bernardino León in this decisive
moment, and we stand ready to bring our full force to
bear to dissuade those who are intransigent and refuse
to sign an agreement.
We must not forget that this month has been
overshadowed by terrible bombings and terrorist
attacks in several countries, including yours, Madam
President, because of Boko Haram, but also in Saudi
Arabia because of Daesh. Unfortunately, the list is
too long. Our determination to combat the scourges
of terrorism and radicalism is full-fledged. More than
ever, the unity of the Council is crucial to block the
fanatics. Following up from the ministerial debate of
27 March (see S/PV.7419), on 8 September France will
organize a conference in Paris on the preservation of

15-268175/20

S/PV.7516

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

diversity and pluralism in the Middle East. We are
convinced that we cannot protect populations from the
ethnic and religious violence that Daesh has made its
trademark, unless States are based on the coexistence
among the different groups within their communities.
On the eve of the opening of the seventieth session
of the General Assembly of the United Nations, we
note that enormous challenges face us, and the unity
and mobilization of the Council for peacekeeping are
more than ever crucial. August, thanks to you, Madam
President, really did a kick-off under the emblem of
mobilization and hope.
In conclusion, I want to warmly thank the Nigerian
presidency again, and wish Russia every success. Of
course Russia can count on our full support.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking you, Madam President, and the Nigerian
team for the calm and collected manner in which you
managed and guided the Council’s work in August. We
appreciate the decision to hold this wrap-up session.
Mindful that New Zealand had intended to hold a
similar session during its presidency of the Council,
my statement will also briefly consider the Council’s
work in July.
We appreciate the keen focus that Nigeria sought to
bring to certain issues during its presidency, including
to regional organizations and to the current challenges
of global security, security sector reform, Ebola and
sexual violence in conflict, particularly in the Middle
East region, as well as the consideration of numerous
country-specific situations. In my delegation’s view,
August was especially productive for the Council with
regard to its ongoing efforts to address the dire and
dismal situation in Syria. The unanimous adoption
of resolution 2235 (2015), on the establishment of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism to
identify perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian conflict is, in our view, an important step
towards establishing accountability for the perpetrators
of such vile crimes.
On a related note, Malaysia also believes that
adoption of a presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/15),
which, inter alía, outlines the proposals by Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura on the implementation of
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), presents
a unique opportunity for the Council and the Syrian
parties to work in better coordination while fully

6/20

31/08/2015

respecting the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria and of all other affected
States. We also reiterate that there can be no military
solution to the Syrian conflict and that all parties to the
conflict must abide by the relevant Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 2165 (2014), which calls for
immediate and unhindered access for the provision of
humanitarian assistance directly to those affected by
the conflict.
At the same time, Malaysia believes that the
working methods with regard to that particular
presidential statement could have been improved.
While fully cognizant of the prerogatives of the
permanent members, we are of the view that, on this
particular issue, non-permanent members should have
been brought on board from the outset. Looking ahead,
we look forward to the operationalization of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism. In that regard, we hope that
the terms of reference can be speedily agreed upon.
South Sudan was another highlight in the
month of August. We are greatly encouraged by the
constructiveness and flexibility that led to the Council’s
unified stance, as reflected in presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/16. The conclusion of the agreement to
end hostilities by all parties to the conflict in South
Sudan is an opportunity to chart a new path for the
country, and we look forward to its implementation. In
that regard, Malaysia reaffirms its support, alongside
that of other Council members, the United Nations and
other interested partners and stakeholders, for this new
start for the people of South Sudan.
The theme of sexual violence in conflict was
also the subject of the Council’s attention in August:
first in the context of allegations of sexual abuse and
sexual violence by peacekeepers of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (see S/PV.7500),
and subsequently in the closed briefing by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zainab
Bangura on her recent visit to the Middle East region,
during which the horrific sexual and violence and abuse
suffered by women and girls in the context of ongoing
conflicts in Syria and Iraq was brought to light, as
reflected in the Security Council press statement
SC/12027. On that issue, Malaysia believes that there
is a further role for the Council in ensuring that such
crimes not go unpunished.
The issue of terrorism and terrorist attacks
continues to be a scourge on international peace and
15-26817

31/08/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7516

security, as evidenced by the number of attacks that the
Council has addressed in various press statements. In
that connection, my delegation wishes to offer belated
congratulations to Lithuania and Spain for successfully
organizing and hosting the special meeting of the
Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee held
on 28 July in Madrid.

We would like to join others in congratulating you,
Madam President, for the constructive and successful
management of the work of the Security Council during
the month of August and for the leadership you have
shown in dealing with the complex issues that have
come before us this month. This month was marked by
significant events.

Before concluding, allow me to briefly review the
Council’s work in July under the presidency of New
Zealand.

On 7 August, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2235 (2015), creating the Joint Investigation
Mechanism between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to
investigate the chlorine gas attacks in Syria. Venezuela
welcomes the achievements of the Government of Syria
in implementing resolution 2118 (2013) and destroying
99 per cent of its chemical weapons, now outside its
territory. However, we were concerned about the recent
news that chemical weapons had been used by terrorist
groups. Venezuela voted in favour of resolution 2235
(2015) because we were convinced that the use of toxic
chemical agents as weapons constitutes a war crime. In
that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s letter
of 27 August in which the terms of reference are set
out to guide the work of the Mechanism, including the
importance of maintaining close cooperation with the
Government of Syria. It is our hope that the work of
the Mechanism will provide an impetus for the peace
process in Syria and the region.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to once again express our highest appreciation to
Ambassador Van Bohemen and the New Zealand team
for their superb handling of the Council in what was a
very busy month. As a non-permanent member of the
Council, we greatly appreciate New Zealand’s efforts
to reinvigorate the Council’s working methods and for
taking up difficult issues, such as the veto.
The strong and unified Council position on
resolution 2231 (2015), adopted under New Zealand’s
watch, clearly demonstrated the Council’s capacity to
come together. That is something we should always
aspire to achieve. Indeed, the Council’s unity on the Iran
nuclear issue, South Sudan and the Joint Investigative
Mechanism in regard to Syria demonstrates the value of
dogged pursuit of diplomacy, dialogue and negotiations
with a view towards making positive, and hopefully
durable, contributions to international peace and
security.
I take this opportunity to wish Ambassador Churkin
and his team all the best in assuming the Council’s
presidency in September. I wish to reaffirm Malaysia’s
commitment to engage constructively with the presidency
and all Council members with a view to discharging the
Council’s mandates in the most effective and efficient
manner.
Finally, I also wish to express my delegation’s
sincere condolences on the passing away of Lieutenant
General José Luiz Jaborandy, Jr., Force Commander of
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, we would like to express our
condolences on the death of Lieutenant General José
Luiz Jaborandy, Jr., Force Commander of United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, and to extend our
condolences to his family, friends and the Government
of Brazil.

Venezuela is committed to a political solution to
the conflict in Syria and fully supports the efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, in that regard. That is why my country
joined the consensus in the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/15 of 17 August 2015. However,
as we clearly stated, Venezuela does not subscribe to
paragraphs 8 and 10 of that statement, which promote
a political transition, including the establishment of a
transitional Government, without the consent of the
Syrian Government, which violates the sovereignty,
political independence and self-determination of its
people.
Our country has emphasized the need to avoid
repeating the serious political mistakes made in Iraq
and Libya, where the change of Government by coercion
resulted in the collapse of State institutions, worsening
violence in the Middle East and Africa and creating
conditions for the emergence and strengthening of
terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida and the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria (ISIS).

15-268177/20

S/PV.7516

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

As a non-permanent member of the Council, we
demand that the undemocratic practice of excluding
elected members of the Security Council from
negotiations, which characterized the negotiation
process of that presidential statement, cease once
and for all. The unity of the Council requires the full
participation of all its members in building international
peace and security.
With regard to the war in Yemen, Venezuela also
advocates a political and peaceful solution to the crisis
in that brotherly country. In that connection, we fully
support the mediation efforts of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
We regret that, as a result of the conflict, thousands of
civilians have lost their lives or been wounded, while
more than 1 million people have been compelled to
abandon their homes in search of shelter, as indicated
by Mr. O’Brien in his various briefings. We note with
deep concern the deliberate attacks by all parties to the
conflict against civilians, houses, hospitals, schools
and roads. We urgently call for putting an end to the
indiscriminate bombings, which began on 25 March.
We demand the implementation of a humanitarian
pause, which has long been discussed in the Council.
Venezuela hopes that peace and security will return
to South Sudan. We believe that the agreement reached
between the parties to the conflict represents a major
milestone in the long and complex negotiation process
that has been promoted by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the IGADplus configuration, including the United Nations and
the African Union. It is now up to the leaders of South
Sudan to implement the terms of the agreement, as part
of an inclusive dialogue with a view to reconciliation
and the rebuilding of the country. We hope that the
parties to the conflict, who are now responsible for
peace, will know how to live up to this historic moment
and join their efforts to achieve a lasting peace.
We welcome the fact that it was African countries
and their regional organizations that have been able to
bear the brunt of the responsibility in the peace process.
In that regard, we recall a phrase from the statement
delivered by you, Madam President, during the open
debate (see S/PV.7505) on regional organizations
and contemporary challenges of global security of
18 August, in which you said “it is evident that the
regionalization of global security is rapidly gaining
remarkable momentum”. The role of the United Nations
should be focused on providing sustained attention

8/20

31/08/2015

and assistance to the development and strengthening
of the capacities of regional organizations so that
they can assume the tasks of resolving conflicts and
peacekeeping on behalf of the international community.
In that regard, we support the proposal to establish an
ongoing cooperation mechanism between the United
Nations and regional organizations that would hold
regular meetings with the aim of promoting cooperation
between those organizations and the United Nations.
It is also important to keep in mind the importance
of having the Security Council’s authorization for the
operations carried out by regional organizations and
coalitions in which the use of force is planned, as it is
only by adhering to the Charter of the United Nations
that international legitimacy can be given to the use of
coercive measures.
Venezuela joins those countries that have vehemently
condemned the cases of sexual abuse and violence in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We support
the zero-tolerance policy in all investigations into such
cases in the Central African Republic. We support
all legal and administrative measures necessary to
punish such unacceptable abuses against the civilian
population, which must be protected and assisted by
United Nations Blue Helmets.
With regard to security sector reform, the Council
should have a more comprehensive discussion of
the security experiences in countries that have been
affected by foreign military invasions and interventions
that have led to the collapse of all State institutions. The
traumatic and terrible experiences that we are seeing
in Iraq and Libya should lead us to think deeply about
this. The collapse of institutions in those States, which
is the result of foreign military intervention, and the
fragmentation of society, which was used as a policy of
occupation and domination of the population, including
sexual and sectarian violence as a means of punishing
and terrorizing sectors of the population that were
accused of supporting the former regime, in addition
to the terrible social and humanitarian effects of the
war, have led to the terrible phenomenon of terrorism
and extremism, such as ISIS and other violent groups,
which today represent the main threat to peace and
security throughout the entire Middle East and North
African region.
In conclusion, my country wishes to draw the
Council’s attention to an outstanding issue on the
Council’s agenda: the conflict between Palestine and

15-26817

31/08/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

the occupying Power, Israel. So long as we continue to
postpone the two-State solution, we will be nurturing a
culture of violence and extremism. It is urgent that the
Council renew its efforts to bring about a peace process
and promote a political solution to put an end to Israel’s
illegal occupation of Palestinian territory. We hope to
welcome Palestine as a full State Member of the United
Nations at the seventieth session.
Finally, we would like to wish every success to, and
express our support for, the presidency of the Russian
Federation of the Council during the upcoming month
of September.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Let
me begin by joining colleagues and expressing our
deepest condolences in connection with the passing
away of the Force Commander of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, Lieutenant General
José Luiz Jaborandy, Jr. I know that his presence and
leadership will be greatly missed by all who knew and
worked with him in the Mission.
In the approximately 70 years since the Security
Council was first created, we and our predecessors before
us have convened in various forums focused on various
vulnerable populations impacted by conflict — children
and armed conflict, women and peace and security.
We have also taken action by adopting products aimed
at protecting things — important cultural artifacts
endangered by conflict in general, and the barbarity
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
in particular. Even as we have acted to respond to
ISIL’s barbaric attacks on some of our civilization’s
great cultural artifacts, we had not acknowledged
ISIL’s gruesome targeting of people it perceived to
be different, people it perceived to be gay. Last week
that changed. If ancient relics deserve our focus — and
they do — certainly so too do vulnerable populations
being specifically targeted for stoning, torture and
execution in conflict. This is not a cause of the West or
a campaign of the left. To advance the protection of the
rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT)
persons in conflict is to live up to our obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations. To borrow the recent
words of the highest court of this country, “the nature
of injustice is that we may not always see it in our own
times”.
Fighting the injustice of human rights abuse is a
cause to which all of our nations have committed. It
is now time for us to both recognize what that means

S/PV.7516

in its entirety and to champion it. The founders of the
Organization envisioned — indeed, mandated — that
the United Nations, in the words of the Charter, “be
determined to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person”.
Last week, by convening, with Chile, the first discussion
of the Security Council under the Arria Formula on
ISIL’s targeting of LGBT persons, we collectively
took an important step towards realizing the Charter’s
ambition and living up to our responsibilities to stand
up for those who are vulnerable in conflict. The first
step of doing so is being willing to speak openly about
it. Last week we began that important conversation.
This month we joined United Nations Special Envoy
for Syria Staffan de Mistura and Under-SecretaryGeneral Stephen O’Brien in condemning the Al-Assad’s
regime’s deadly air strikes against a market in Duma,
a suburb of Damascus, one that came almost two years
to the day after the regime used chemical weapons in
the same area. The latest attack was appropriately the
subject of the Council’s focus, and the latest victims
joined of thousands of innocent Syrians who have been
killed by the Al-Assad regime’s deliberate targeting
of civilian areas, including mosques, schools and
hospitals.
In South Sudan, we have worked together to ensure
that a peace agreement was signed by the relevant
parties in support of the regional efforts made in that
regard. We heard from the Deputy Secretary-General,
to whom we express our gratitude for his leadership,
and we worked to ensure that all actors were well aware
of what the Council was prepared to do if progress on
advancing peace was not made.
On 26 August, due to the unified message of
the international community, including the Security
Council, a peace agreement the South Sudanese have
been seeking for more than 20 months was finally
signed. That, in and of itself, is not enough. Now
begins the hard work of implementing the agreement.
The Security Council must maintain the unity we
have demonstrated on this issue over these past weeks
and ensure that all the parties know there is only one
path ahead, namely, the full implementation of the
agreement that has been signed. Any derogation from
this path must be met with a resolute and firm response.
That is how we can collectively and best support this
young nation at this critical time, as it has the chance to
walk away from a bloody war.

15-268179/20

S/PV.7516

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

This month we have also been confronted by
multiple horrific reports of sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers sent to protect some of the
world’s most vulnerable people. Those reports require
us to grapple with the shortcomings in how the
Organization and some of its Members deal with the
problem. If zero tolerance is to mean anything, we have
to change our tolerance for the results of our collective
efforts thus far. There is clearly much more that needs
to be done, and done urgently.
In Burundi, the United States continues to express
its deep concern about the absence of any meaningful
dialogue. The Government of Burundi continues to
dangerously frustrate restarting an open, comprehensive
dialogue. This rejection of talks, coupled with the
Government’s obstructions of the activities of the
African Union human rights and disarmament monitors
and its divisive rhetoric, is extremely dangerous.
It is time for the Government of Burundi to actively
de-escalate the rhetoric and begin to advance peace
through dialogue. The parties concerned, including the
East African Community, agree that an inclusive and
comprehensive political dialogue is the only credible
route to re-establishing peace and stability in Burundi.
I would like to thank you, Madam President, and
your delegation for convening the 13 August briefing
on Ebola (see S/PV.7502). The United States welcomes
the collective efforts of the region and beyond to
combat Ebola and its ongoing impact on communities
across West Africa. We remain committed to getting to,
and staying at, zero, as well as to helping the affected
Governments rebuild and recover. We were especially
moved by the briefing of Liberian epidemiologist and
community activist, Dr. Mosoka Fallah, who spoke
about the compassion and determination with which
ordinary Liberians confronted the Ebola virus head on.
Finally, I would like to thank the Nigerian delegation
for its leadership of the Security Council this month.
Madam President, by my team’s count, this is your fourth
time at the helm of the Security Council. One would
have to go back to former Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright’s tenure as the United States Permanent
Representative to find a Permanent Representative who
has overseen the Council’s operations as many times
as you have yourself. We have benefitted from that
wisdom and experience and we thank you, Madam, and
the Nigerian delegation, for your leadership.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank Nigeria for
scheduling today’s meeting and we join colleagues in
10/20

31/08/2015

expressing condolences over the passing away of the
Force Commander of United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
We wish to comment today on the Security
Council’s work in August and in July, when we had
our presidency. We see the wrap-up sessions as an
opportunity to critically examine how the 15 Council
members can work together more effectively to
deliver better results from the broader United Nations
membership that we represent.
Over the last two months, not everything has gone
the way we would have liked. But we have seen some
striking examples of what the Council can do when we
achieve unity. The unanimous adoption of the resolution
2231 (2015) on 20 July (see S/PV.7488), endorsing the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran’s nuclear
programme, demonstrated this fact, on an issue of
great importance to international peace and security.
On 17 August, we adopted a critically important
presidential statement on Syria (S/PRST/2015/15),
expressing support for the United Nations Special
Envoy’s approach on the way forward (see S/PV.7504).
It was an all too rare example of the Council coming
together on an issue of the highest priority.
To achieve unity and the strongest outcomes,
all 15 Council members should be able to contribute
fully. Each of us has interests and perspectives that can
add value. We are not naive about the dynamics that
persist among permanent members and the difficulty
in reaching consensus, but we believe that an inclusive
approach to decision-making maximizes the chances of
achieving unity and of having the Council speak with
one voice.
New Zealand supports looking at how to improve
the Council’s decision-making practices. During
our presidency, we encouraged interactive and frank
discussions on a range of topics, including in informal
formats outside of the United Nations. We convened a
working breakfast for Permanent Representatives at the
start of July and hosted a separate informal discussion
where we encouraged members to speak freely about
Council decision-making.
In the Consultations Room, in addition to the
scheduled programme of work, we believe Council
members should talk about matters as the need arises.
One of the most dynamic discussions we have had
since joining the Council was a discussion in July on
the Secretary-General appointment process. We know

15-26817

31/08/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

there are different views within the Council, which is
one of the reasons that we raised it.
We appreciated the Secretary-General briefing
members in person on his response to the latest
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. We
encourage strongly such updates by the SecretaryGeneral on issues of high importance.
One of the features we saw in July and this
month has been the value of discussions under “Other
matters” — for example, of Burundi and GuineaBissau. Some of those discussions were initiated by
Council members, others by the Secretariat. We see
that both as good use of the Council’s time and as a way
to ensure the Council’s close monitoring of situations.
These can become substantive discussions, and it is part
of efforts to improve our working methods. We would
be interested in considering how to make optimal use of
the time available under “Other matters”, and for there
to be more transparency when topics have been raised
for discussion in advance.
Finally, we congratulate you, Madam President, on
your presidency. We consider the month to have been
very well run and we have appreciated the tone and
interactivity of the discussions. For the coming month,
we wish the Russian Federation every success with its
presidency.
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates the important roles that New Zealand
and Nigeria played during their presidencies of the
Security Council in July and August, respectively.
With regard to the work of the Security Council, I
would like to focus on three points.
First, on South Sudan, thanks to joint efforts
by all parties, the parties to the conflict in South
Sudan signed a peace agreement earlier this month,
laying a solid foundation for the restoration of peace
and stability in the country. As a member of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development-plus
configuration, China undertook efforts to advance the
peace talks by multiple means and pushed the parties
concerned to meet each other half way. China sincerely
hopes that the parties to the conflict in South Sudan
will honour their commitments, achieve a ceasefire,
stop the violence and fully implement the agreement.
China stands ready to work with all sides to actively
support the South Sudan peace process and continue to
make unremitting efforts for lasting peace and stability
in South Sudan.

S/PV.7516

Secondly, with regard to Syria, the Security
Council recently adopted resolution 2235 (2015), on the
question of chemical weapons in Syria (see S/PV.7501),
as well as a presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/15)
on the Syrian political process (see S/PV.7504). China
welcomes those developments. China consistently
believes that on the Syrian question the international
community must adhere to an approach towards a
political solution, respect the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria, honour the
Syrian people’s right to decide on the future of their
own country, and support the Syrian people’s efforts
to advance an inclusive political process on the basis
of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). China
will continue to vigorously support the Syrian political
process and the mediation efforts by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and his Special Envoy, Mr. De Mistura,
and actively contribute to an early, comprehensive,
lasting and proper solution of the Syrian question.
Thirdly, on relevant African questions, the
Security Council has recently held multiple rounds of
deliberations on hotspot issues and thematic agenda
items on Africa. China believes that the international
community should respect the wishes of the countries
of Africa and fully support the peace efforts of the
African Union (AU) and other regional organizations.
The Security Council should give priority to supporting
the role of the AU in solving regional issues. As always,
China believes that the challenges and difficulties that
some African regions face will not hold back Africa
on its path towards peace, development and progress.
As an unwavering friend and partner of Africa, China
is ready to work with African countries and the
international community in continuing to contribute
actively to the continent’s peace, stability, development
and prosperity.
Lastly, China would like to wish the Russian
Federation every success in its presidency of the Council
for next month. We trust that under its leadership the
Security Council’s work will achieve positive results.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank you, Madam President,
and the entire Nigerian delegation, for your capable
leadership of the Security Council in August, and we
would also like to express our appreciation for the work
of the New Zealand presidency in July. We would also
like to join the rest in offering our condolences for the
sudden death of the Brazilian peacemaker.

15-2681711/20

S/PV.7516

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

We have done a pretty good job this month. We gave
a great deal of attention to the Middle East and North
Africa. Sadly, the state of affairs there leaves much to
be desired. The region is unstable, there are bloody
conflicts everywhere and the prospects for solving
them are dim. In August we have traditionally tried to
tackle the still unresolved Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
which continues to pose risks of increasing tension and
radicalization. The uncertainty of the situation around
the Gaza Strip compounds the continued absence of
intra-Palestinian unity.
Unfortunately, the situation in Libya also remains
extremely problematic. The gross violations by some
Council members of the Security Council resolutions
on Libya adopted in 2011 continue to result in serious
damage with new and tragic effects. One such is the
recent wave of illegal immigrants attempting to flee the
chaos of Libya for the shores of Europe. Despite the
cautious optimism expressed last week (see S/PV.7512)
by Mr. Bernadino León, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, regarding the prospects of the work
being done on a political agreement, there are many
reasons for concern. The longer the State continues its
collapse, the more that will be exploited by terrorist
organizations, including the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL). They continue to expand their
presence on Libyan soil.
We had a detailed discussion of Yemen, where
violent clashes continue and the humanitarian situation
is worsening. Civilians are dying almost daily.
Yesterday it was reported that a single air strike killed
at least 13 people. There is currently no light visible at
the end of that tunnel. We urge that the bloodshed cease
immediately and call on all sides to adopt a constructive
attitude in the negotiations being conducted under the
the auspices of Ismail Ahmed, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General.
The issue of Syria was once again a major item on
the Council’s agenda. It was encouraging that we were
able to adopt several important documents, including
a political statement by the President of the Security
Council on Syria (S/PRST/2015/15) urging Syrians to
engage urgently with the diplomatic efforts of Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura. On 7 August we adopted
resolution 2235 (2015), which establishes the Joint
Investigative Mechanism on incidents involving the use
of toxic chemicals in Syria, which we hope will work
professionally and impartially. That is particularly
important in view of the fact that, as the Council’s work

12/20

31/08/2015

on this subject has shown, various members of the
Council are prepared to shield terrorists in pursuit of
their own political aims. We are concerned about recent
reports on the growing numbers of cases in the region
where ISIL fighters have been using not only toxic
chemicals such as chlorine but also chemical warfare
agents and mustard gas in particular. There is evidence
that ISIL has been given access to the relevant technical
documentation and has been attracting experts from
abroad to work on synthesizing such agents in labs on
territory they have captured. The nature and extent of
the threats emanating from ISIL and other terrorist
organizations have reached unacceptable levels.
At the same time, in just the past few days, and
after the adoption of resolution 2235 (2015), on the
establishment of the Joint Investigative Mechanism,
there have been reports of ISIL’s increasing use of
chemical weapons in Syria’s neighbour Iraq. Any
failure to attend to such incidents is both unacceptable
and extremely dangerous. In that regard, the Russian
delegation believes the Security Council should adopt
a draft resolution extending the mechanism’s mandate
to Iraq, and we have begun working on that. We believe
that such a resolution is urgent, even if it represents
only one brick in the wall needed for a foundation for
settling the region’s worst problems, which have left
a number of countries in the Middle East and North
Africa facing real threats to their territorial integrity.
The proliferating conflicts fuel the potential risks
of terrorism. ISIL’s fighters are trying to bring ever
greater expanses of territory under the control of their
quasi-State.
It has become ever more critical that we undertake
a comprehensive analysis of the nature of the conflicts
in the Middle East and North Africa with the aim of
deciding the direction of our collective work on the
basis of the Charter of the United Nations. We must
find the common denominators and form a shared
understanding of both the reasons for the current
massive security crisis in the region and the political
and other factors that are compounding it. That is
the only way that the international community, with
the Security Council playing a key role, can achieve
the measures agreed on for preventing the region’s
growing potential for conflict and terrorist activity.
On 30 September we plan to hold an open debate at
the ministerial level on the subject “Maintenance of
international peace and security: settling conflicts
in the Middle East and North Africa and the fight

15-26817

31/08/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

against the terrorist threat in the region”. Based on
its conclusions, we plan to adopt a draft presidential
statement highlighting the urgent measures we need to
take to resolve and end the conflicts in the Middle East
and North Africa, as well as possible further steps for
mitigating the risks of terrorism in the region. We are
hoping for the broad participation of Member States at
a high level. We believe the topic’s relevance has been
fully affirmed by the work of the Council in August,
in which we have attempted to unravel the Middle
East’s knotty problems strand by separate strand. That
experience has shown that we can restore the region
only through a comprehensive approach on a firm basis
of international law, without double standards and
founded on the prerogatives of the Security Council.
In conclusion, I would like to express our thanks
to all the members who have promised their support to
the Russian presidency of the Council for the month of
September.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Before
I begin my statement, on behalf of the delegation of
Chad, I would like to offer our sincere condolences
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
the United Nations as a whole, the Government of
Brazil and the bereaved family of General José Luiz
Jaborandy, Jr.
I would first like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your and your team’s excellent leadership
of the Council for the month of August. I would also
like to thank you for organizing this meeting under
presidential note S/2010/507. The month of August has
been very busy and all the scheduled meetings, along
with many others dictated by circumstances dictated,
were appropriately held, a fact that we welcome.
We noted with satisfaction that under the Nigerian
presidency the Council adopted by consensus resolution
2235 (2015), creating the Joint Investigative Mechanism
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the United Nations designed to identify
persons and entities in the Syrian conflict who may be
using chemical weapons or products, including chlorine
and other toxic substances. In view of the fact that the
civilian population of Syria continues to be the target of
attacks involving such banned weapons and substances,
this resolution is of major importance.
On 17 August the Council also unanimously adopted
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/15) in support of
the initiative of Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy

S/PV.7516

of the Secretary-General for Syria, aimed at launching
political negotiations around the four areas covered
by the corresponding working groups. The efforts of
Mr. De Mistura should be unreservedly supported
with a view to helping the parties to the conflict to end
hostilities and engage in a peaceful political process.
There is no military solution to the Syrian crisis. We
welcome the adoption of the presidential statement,
even though we regret the lack of transparency
surrounding the drafting of the document without the
involvement of the Council’s non-permanent members.
In that connection, we share the concerns expressed by
some delegations with regard to such exclusions and
stress the need for cohesion in the Council beyond its
members’ status, two thirds of whom are guided by the
mandate of the General Assembly.
This month, the Security Council also considered
the role of regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security (see S/PV.7505).
Regional organizations are uniquely suited to
addressing the multifaceted threats to international
peace and security. We look forward to the African
Union remaining a strategic partner. It must receive the
support it deserves. Moreover, we believe that relations
between the African Union and the United Nations have
not yet reached the desired strategic level, and we stress
the need to support the African Union in its efforts to
complement the work of the United Nations through
sustainable, predictable and more flexible funding.
On 13 August, the Council also considered the
Ebola virus pandemic (see S/PV.7502). We recall that
the epidemic that ravaged the three most affected
countries — Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone — was
a real threat to the entire planet, as it affected many
other countries, including countries outside Africa.
We welcome the international community’s consistent
mobilization to address the pandemic, and we call on it
to provide all the necessary support to the countries most
affected in order to stem the disastrous socioeconomic
consequences of the pandemic on their development.
The Council also addressed security sector
reform in post-conflict countries (see S/PV.7508). We
emphasize that United Nations support for security
sector reform is essential; however, national ownership
and the priorities of the country concerned, depending
on its particular needs, must be taken into account.
The Council must also improve its interaction with
the African Union, which has already established a

15-2681713/20

S/PV.7516

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

strategic framework on security sector reform, so as to
better assist African States.
Furthermore, we note that the Council adopted a
presidential statement on South Sudan (S/PRST/2015/16)
following the signing of the peace agreement by all of
the parties concerned. Chad welcomes the signing of
the agreement and calls upon all signatory parties to
implement it in good faith in order to end the suffering
of the people of South Sudan.
Libya, Guinea Bissau and the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, among
others, were also the subject of Council consultations.
The security and humanitarian situation in Libya
remains a source of great concern, and the lack of a
solution to the political and institutional crisis not only
affects the future of that country but also threatens
security and stability throughout the Sahel owing to the
terrorist and criminal activities developing there. We
call upon the United Nations to work closely with the
African Union and the League of Arab States to bring
all Libyan stakeholders to participate consistently in
the political process in order to silence the weapons and
ensure a Government of national unity in the country.
The institutional crisis in Guinea Bissau is also
alarming. The international community must make
every effort to support efforts along the difficult path
towards a democratic process, as well as the momentum
towards socioeconomic recovery and the reforms
needed to ensure the country’s lasting stability. In that
regard, we call for respect for the Constitution of the
country, and we underscore the need for the army to
stay out of the crisis.
The Palestinian crisis is, as usual, at an impasse,
without a glimmer of hope for the Palestinian people
under occupation. We reiterate that the status quo is not
an option. The international community must assume
its responsibilities in finding a lasting solution to the
conflict, which has lasted too long.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
congratulations to you, Madam President, and to
the entire Nigerian team, for your outstanding work,
the relevant topics that you have addressed and your
excellent conduct of the Council’s work this month. I
also take this opportunity to wish every success to the
entire team of the Russian Federation on its assumption
of the presidency for the month of September, and
we wish to assure it of the support of the Chadian
delegation.

14/20

31/08/2015

Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to join others in expressing our condolences over the
passing away of the Force Commander of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
I thank you, Madam President, and your team for
your successful conduct of the work of the Security
Council during the month of August. Allow me to
address the following specific points.
The Nigerian presidency has focused on the same
issues this past month as did in April 2014, during its
prior presidency of the Council, including security sector
reform. We believe that has effectively contributed
to the follow-up on the subject and has ensured the
Council’s effective involvement in, and a review of,
the practical implementation of its resolutions on the
subject. It is our hope that this will become a recurrent
method on the part of those members that are provided
the opportunity to preside over the Council for more
than one month.
The complicated conflicts and humanitarian,
security and political situations of the past decades have
regrettably led to the fact that issues in our region have
taken up a large part of the Council’s agenda, without
any real progress in their consideration, particularly
regarding the question of Palestine, which represents
the core of the conflict in the Middle East. We reiterate
the need for the Council to shoulder its moral and legal
responsibilities in order to help the Palestinian people
to achieve their legitimate right to live in freedom and
dignity in an independent State.
Concerning the Syrian conflict, we welcome the
unity of purpose in the Council, as exemplified by
the adoption of the important presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/15, in support of the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, towards a political solution based on the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), as well as the
adoption of resolution 2235 (2015), which establishses
the Joint Investigative Mechanism to address the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. However, we wish to stress
that unity is not merely about the Council adopting
a resolution or a presidential statement. Unity is also
about the working methods of the Security Council,
in particular when it comes to the adoption of such
products. We also stress that the Security Council
should not concentrate merely on the political or
security issues related to the Syrian crisis. It should
also focus on the humanitarian ones — in the light of

15-26817

31/08/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

the serious deterioration in the humanitarian situation
in Syria — as well as the grave, unprecedented
repercussions on neighbouring countries, owing in
particular to the outflow of Syrian refugees.
It is very important that the Security Council
remain informed about all of those issues in the Middle
East. We believe that the Security Council resolutions
and its meetings with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
provide a useful opportunity for members of the Council
to learn more about the plight of civilians in Syria and
Iraq, as well as about violations of human rights.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
delegation of the Russian Federation on its assumption
of the presidency of the Council next month, and we
pledge our full support and cooperation.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Along with the other delegations, I would like to express
my condolences to the family of the Force Commander
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), whom I had the honour to know. I extend
my condolences to the family of General Jaborandy, to
Brazil and to all of the MINUSTAH staff in general.
I would also like to commend you, Madam President,
for the outstanding manner in which you have led the
Security Council during the month of August, which is
not always an easy month.
I would like to refer, first of all, to the relations
between the Secretary Council and the General
Assembly and the efforts that we have made to improve
them. Secondly, I would like to highlight the lessons
learned during these past two months — and I think
there are three lessons.
The presidencies of both Nigeria and New Zealand
made great efforts with regard to relations between the
Security Council and the General Assembly. Under
the New Zealand presidency, I would characterize as
exemplary the debate on the process of electing the
Secretary-General, which affects not only the Security
Council but also the General Assembly. Turning to
the Nigerian presidency, I recall the constant efforts
of the President — at the end of each meeting — to
pull together the common threads of the discussion for
presentation to the press. I think that is a fundamental
task for all presidencies, and I hope that, when Spain
assumes the presidency of the Council, that will also
be our approach. As to working methods, the issue

S/PV.7516

is fundamental. During our presidency in October,
therefore, Spain will organize a debate on that subject.
We are working intensively with Angola to prepare that
debate, and we are confident that it will have a very
satisfactory outcome.
I said that I was going to come back to the lessons
learned over these past two months. The first pertains
to the unity of the Council, the second to prevention,
or the preventive tasks of the Council, and the third to
the relevance of addressing new threats. With regard
to the first lesson learned, namely, the unity of the
Council — and many have said this before me — it would
not have been possible without that unity to adopt four
absolutely fundamental decisions. The first of those
was the nuclear agreement with Iran — resolution 2231
(2015). The second was the adoption of resolution 2235
(2015), on Syria. And the third was the support given
to Special Envoy De Mistura via presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/15. Fourthly, the agreement with South
Sudan would not have been possible without everyone
having been on the same wavelength.
Concerning the second lesson learned — I am
referring to the preventive action of the SecretaryGeneral — I think that we can be proud of the way
in which the Council reacted in a deft and effective
manner to the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, the electoral
process in Burkina Faso and the situation in Myanmar.
The preventive function of the Council, which I need
not point out, is absolutely fundamental for maintaining
our credibility.
Finally, there is the importance of being innovative
and of addressing new threats to peace and security.
As a preview to that innovation, I will mention the
activities undertaken by Spain on climate change under
the Arria Formula — those are subjects that are not
frequently discussed in the Security Council — and the
open debate that I had the honour of organizing with
New Zealand in relation to small island developing
States (see S/PV.7499). I think that the Security
Council should be ahead of the curve and decisively
address such new threats. Accordingly, I would like
to focus on the last 60 days — which have marked an
unprecedented success — when, for the first time in
history, the Security Council took up the particular
vulnerability of people belonging to the lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender community. Clearly, it is also
important that the Council discuss sexual violence in
conflict, as that has become a constant tactic of war,
particularly in crises such as those in Syria and Iraq.

15-2681715/20

S/PV.7516

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Spain will follow closely all of those new threats.
In that context, we will count on the cooperation of
the United Kingdom in paying particular attention
to resolution 1325 (2000) and the numerous aspects
addressed in that very important resolution. Many
of them have not yet been sufficiently implemented
or analyzed by members of the Council, or by the
Organization in general.
In conclusion, I would like express my full support
for the upcoming presidency of the Russian Federation,
as well as to commend the presidency of Nigeria. In all
sincerity, I think that each presidency gives the best of
itself, and I think that, on the topic of working methods,
each of us is laying an additional brick in the wall that
we are trying to build for us all.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): On this last day
of your presidency, Madam President, I would like to
thank you for your wise stewardship of the Security
Council during the month of August.
I would like also to join my delegation’s voice to the
condolences that have been expressed with regard to
the tragic death of the Force Commander of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, to his family
and to all those who knew him and will suffer that loss.
I shall try to touch upon two thematic issues that
link both the July and the August activities of the
Council: the aspect of prevention and the aspect of
accountability.
While the work of the Council is often constrained
by mandate cycles, and most of the open debates that
we organize are held on a certain number of important
issues, New Zealand’s open debate (see S/PV.7499)
on the peace and security challenges facing small
island developing States (SIDS) was, in my opinion, a
welcome breath of fresh air. We hope that the Council’s
engagement with SIDS regarding the specific security
challenges those countries are facing will continue, that
it will include follow-up and that the rare opportunity
for preventive action will not be missed by the Council
on such crucial challenges as managing the effects of
climate change, climate-induced displacement and
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons,
among others.
A sharper focus on prevention is more urgent than
ever. The Council’s close monitoring of the situations in
Guinea-Bissau, Burundi, Burkina-Faso and Myanmar
goes in that direction. While not all of our signals

16/20

31/08/2015

have been heard by the political actors on the ground,
the very fact that the Council follows such situations
closely puts it in a better position to react quickly and
effectively, if and when needed. However, that is not
enough. The Council should take advantage of more
opportunities, and more substantive steps need to be
taken in prevention in general. I look forward to that
issue being developed by the presidencies that will
follow until the end of the current year, and beyond.
Although we will no longer be members of the Security
Council in 2016, Lithuania will of course follow with
keen interest issues relating to prevention.
At the beginning of this month, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2235 (2015), which
establishes the Joint Investigative Mechanism in
Syria of the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, which will be
mandated to identify those responsible for attacks
involving chemical weapons. That is an important step,
albeit only the first, towards establishing accountability
in that country. That is indispensable if we are truly
committed to stamping out the use of chemical weapons
everywhere once and for all. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his recommendations with regard to the
establishment of the Mechanism, and we urge the
Council to go ahead with full support for that body and
its activities.
Besides that particular mechanism, however,
impunity certainly reigns elsewhere. Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bangura’s
briefing on sexual violence in the Middle East (see
S/PV.7428) reminded us of that in the starkest possible
terms. Justice and accountability cannot be relegated to
some time later, because, for many of those affected, that
“some time later” may never come. Tackling impunity is
crucial, be it in Syria, Darfur, South Sudan, the Central
African Republic, Iraq, Yemen or any other conflict
area where crimes against humanity, war crimes and
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law have been perpetrated. Whoever
the perpetrators may be, holding them to account
would contribute to reconciliation and healing, build
stronger foundations for peace and ensure justice for
the victims. Importantly, it would also send a strong
deterrent message to would-be rapists, marauders and
murderers.
In that respect, my delegation was profoundly
disappointed with the outcome of the votes last July on
the draft resolutions on Srebrenica and on establishing

15-26817

31/08/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7516

an international tribunal on the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17. Vetoing resolutions that address
the issue of justice and accountability is an affront to
the memories of the victims of those crimes and to
the pain of their families. It also, dangerously, sends
a very wrong signal on how we deal with issues of
accountability and impunity.

transform it from its role of protector to that of predator.
While the United Nations does not have the authority
to prosecute crimes of sexual abuse and exploitation
committed by peacekeepers, it can certainly do more
to promote a climate of accountability in other ways by
building a durable, pervasive culture of accountability
from top to bottom and from bottom to top.

On the other hand, the situation in July concerning
those two vetoes only highlights the urgency of
addressing the Council’s use of the veto. Today,
other delegations preceding me spoke about that. We
appreciate the fact that the New Zealand presidency
organized an informal discussion on the topic in July.
Lithuania supports such efforts, the political statement
on the suspension of the veto in case of mass atrocities
presented by France and Mexico, as well as discussions
on a code of conduct developed by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group.

We welcome the strong position that the SecretaryGeneral has taken on the matter, and we hope that a
zero-tolerance policy, which we so often preach, will
finally become a fact rather than just a mere expression.
We also hope that the Council does not have to meet
again to debate the shameful behaviour of a few
peacekeepers 10 years from now.

On the issue of accountability, the Council should
certainly remain strongly and continuously engaged on
the problem of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by peacekeepers. If ignored, such abuses will continue
undercutting the credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping, and of the United Nations itself. The
problems certainly did not start with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. It keeps reappearing ever
so often. If we remember, back in 2006, in the wake of a
sexual exploitation scandal in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the former Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Marie Guéhenno, said,
“We dishonour these brave men and women
when we fail to prevent or punish those from
within their ranks who victimize the very people
peacekeepers are meant to protect and serve.”
(S/PV.5379, p. 3)
Several thousand peacekeepers have died in the
line of duty over the years — let us remember that.
Peacekeeping missions are becoming more and more
complex and dangerous. Many peacekeepers and civilian
staff serve in truly difficult conditions, of which I had
a glimpse myself last week during a trip to the Central
African Republic. To serve under such conditions takes
endurance and commitment. It is therefore even more
imperative that justice be done, in the interests of those
thousands of peacekeepers and mission staff who serve
with dedication, by going with full force after those few
transgressors who have used a peacekeeping mission to

Mr. Casimiro (Angola): We, too, take this
opportunity to join other Security Council members in
expressing our sincere condolences to the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and to the Brazilian
Government and its people for the demise of the
Force Commander of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
Allow me, at the outset, to commend the delegation
of Nigeria for an efficient and productive presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August. We
continued to face significant challenges this month,
and I wish to commend you, Mrs. Ogwu, for your poise
and professionalism in guiding the work of the Council
during August 2015.
I would like to focus my remarks for today’s wrapup session on the open debate on regional organizations
and on contemporary challenges to global security and
the subsequent briefing on security sector reforms. As
we mentioned during the debate on the role of regional
organizations (see S/PV.7505), it is certain that global,
continental and subregional cooperation are critical to
the achievement of international peace and security and
sustainable development. We are all aware that security
issues cannot be tackled by one organization alone,
particularly in Africa. Somalia represents an example
of productive collaboration, while in South Sudan much
more has to be done.
The ability of a united Security Council to
meet its heavy responsibilities would be greatly
improved if we had better arrangements with regional
organizations. Therefore, continuous and increased
engagement, interaction and consultation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, such as
the African Union, are crucial to developing a shared

15-2681717/20

S/PV.7516

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

understanding of the root causes of conflicts, and to
establishing appropriate prevention and response
mechanisms. Efforts to strengthen both long-term and
quick-reaction capacity to address emerging threats in
Africa are essential, including the operationalization
of the African Union’s African Standby Force. That
would enable the reinforcement of conflict-resolution
capacities on the continent and further support the
operations of the United Nations.
In 2013 the African Union launched the process
for establishing an implementation mechanism for the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises.
While the technical aspects of that are not yet fully
defined, we believe that, with the support of African
States and United Nations States Members, that
mechanism would add much value to efforts to deal
with current and future threats to international peace
and security. To date, the threats of foreign terrorist
fighters, maritime insecurity, organized crime, illegal
migration, climate change and energy issues, among
others, have shown us that our primary objective must
remain strengthening regional bodies that can address
those issues.
Key elements for sustainable development include
security sector reform based on national ownership,
and the prerequisite that a legal framework for national
capacity be built through cooperation with the United
Nations. While there have been cases of successful
security sector reform, such as in Timor-Leste, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, too many States still have fragile
security structures, which can threaten the security and
stability of their neighbours.
In that regard, we applaud the signing of the
agreement on 26 August by South Sudan President
Salva Kiir to resolve the conflict in that country. We are
of the view that the Security Council needs to quickly
update the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan in order to support the implementation of
some of the key tasks in the agreement. We commend
the work done by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), as well as the recently expanded
efforts of the IGAD-plus arrangement, including
the United Nations and the friends of South Sudan
from Africa and abroad, to develop and achieve a
comprehensive solution that establishes conditions for
delivering peace to South Sudan.
Last but not least, we must address the situation
in the Middle East, which continues to be plagued

18/20

31/08/2015

by an escalation of conflicts. Groups associated with
Al-Qaida, such as Daesh, continue to spread their
violent extremist ideology and actions across the region.
In Syria, for example, the Council has not succeeded in
influencing the parties at war to agree on the elements
of a political solution. With the destruction of the
education and health systems and other basic services,
we have to wonder how many traumatized children will
be recruited by radical groups. It is therefore important
that we continue to support humanitarian efforts, which
aim to deliver aid to the millions of people in need, but
we must also push for a political solution to the fractious
conflict. We reiterate our willingness to work with
international partners on devising new strategies for
dealing with violent extremism, which has an impact
on so many civilians, including women and children as
well as religious and ethnic minorities, throughout the
region.
Finally, let us continue to work for unity within the
Council in order to promote real and lasting political
solutions to the many current conflicts threatening our
collective peace and security.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Nigeria.
I, too, want to lend my voice to those who have
expressed condolences on the death of General José
Luiz Jaborandy, Jr., of Brazil. As Force Commander
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
he demonstrated astute leadership and contributed
significantly to the achievement of the Mission’s
mandate.
I want to take my colleagues back to 1599, when
Shakespeare wrote in the play Julius Caesar that the
eye sees not itself but by reflection. Today in 2015, it is
not any different. My delegation believes that periodic
reflection on the work of the Security Council can
contribute significantly by either shaping or modifying
the Council’s response to the issues under our purview.
That is why we have convened this public wrap-up
session.
In July, the Council presidency of New Zealand
was as innovative as it was bold. New Zealand built a
foundation for the discussion of issues that are not so
commonplace on the agenda of the Council. We thank
them for providing valid points of departure.
During our presidency, we have sought to focus
attention on three key issues that we considered not

15-26817

31/08/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

only of contemporary significance, but also especially
interlocking and interdependent. We convened a
briefing that took up the international response to the
Ebola outbreak (see S/PV.7502); another briefing aimed
at giving practical effect to resolution 2151 (2014), the
first stand-alone resolution on security sector reform
(SSR) (see S/PV.7508); and an open debate on the role
of regional and subregional organizations in addressing
contemporary security challenges (see S/PV.7505).
Let me commend the Council for the focused
attention given to the debate on Ebola. We believe that it
offered an opportunity to highlight the roles of various
stakeholders in mobilizing a global, rapid, coordinated
and sustained response to the Ebola outbreak in West
Africa. In the words of Margaret Chan, DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization, the “world
has learned from the Ebola experience.” (S/PV.7502, p.
3) It is our hope that we will use what we have learned
to collectively improve our response to future outbreaks
of pandemics. In our view, the debate was successful
in underscoring the need for sustained engagement
with the countries most affected by the virus. As the
world tries to bring the rate of Ebola virus transmission
to zero, the international community must remain
vigilant and ensure sustained technical, operational and
financial support to the affected countries.
On security sector reform (see S/PV.7508), Council
delegations affirmed that the successful implementation
of resolution 2151 (2014) would ultimately depend on
improved coordination of efforts within the United
Nations system and between the United Nations and
the relevant stakeholders. States have the primary
responsibility for their own security within their
borders. They must therefore endeavour to provide
the political leverage needed to facilitate the required
external support in meeting specific SSR targets.
The discussion on regional organizations
underscored the importance of utilizing the comparative
advantages of the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Regional organizations
have demonstrated their relevance through preventive
diplomacy, mediation and other collaborative efforts.
Specialist regional knowledge, which is invaluable
in conflict resolution, can be provided by regional
organizations by virtue of their in-depth knowledge
of regional actors and their sensitivities to local,
historical and cultural factors. As strategies for placing
more emphasis on the role of regional and subregional

S/PV.7516

organizations evolve, it is important to periodically
assess our options so as to give a more central role to
those entities. Let me commend the Member States
that participated in the open debate. I believe that their
contributions greatly enriched our debate.
The overarching principle of our thematic debates
during the past month underscored the imperative of
collective action in the maintenance of international
peace and security. States must collaborate with
regions, which in turn must collaborate with the United
Nations. Nigeria is greatly concerned about recent
occurrences that have been revealed in the context of
United Nations peacekeeping operations in the Central
African Republic, in particular the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic. The briefing by the
Secretary-General on 13 August on the allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse perpetrated by
peacekeeping personnel in that country was quite
sobering. The Council’s response underscored the
imperative for the highest standards of conduct to be
upheld in United Nations peacekeeping operations. We
must remain steadfast in our support of the SecretaryGeneral as he investigates those allegations. We count
on the relevant troop- and police-contributing countries
to offer the needed support in this investigative process.
As we reflect on the trouble spots across Africa,
the Middle East and Asia, and particularly Burma,
as we did on Friday, it is clear that nation-building is
greatly impeded by sectionalism and ethnicity. The
lack of inclusiveness often breeds dissent and conflict.
My experience is that we tend to employ a fire-fighting
approach to conflicts. Is it not possible for the Council
to develop theoretical perspectives, or, indeed, a context
in which we can all place those patterns of conflict,
and thus provide the best opportunity for strategic
solutions? Is that possible?
Even more significant, I would like to urge the
Council to firmly establish what I have often referred
to as the cause-and-effect relationship between the
dire humanitarian situations that we confront in areas
of conflict and the political process. Yes, we are
right — Mr. O’Brien has briefed us many times in the
Council this month — about our feeling of urgency on
humanitarian issues. But if we continue to diverge on
what gives effect to a humanitarian situation, I believe
we cannot succeed. Let us together treat the symptoms
as well as the causes. We tend to treat symptoms rather
than causes. We must address the root causes of conflict.

15-2681719/20

S/PV.7516

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

I would like to end where I began, by offering
the wisdom of Shakespeare. On the matter of unity
in dealing with political situations, in Act I, Scene i,
Shakespeare said in Henry VI, Part II, “Join we together,
for the public good”.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Before I adjourn the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
August — I hope — I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of Nigeria to the members
of the Council, especially my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives and their respective staffs, as well
as to the entire secretariat of the Council, for all the

20/20

31/08/2015

support they have offered to us. Quite unexpectedly, it
has been a very busy month — and one during which
we all rallied to consensus on several issues within
our purview. We could not have done it alone. Thanks
to God, we were not isolated. Without the hard work,
support and positive contributions of every delegation
and of the representatives of the Secretariat, as well as
other relevant Conference Services Officers, it would
have been difficult.
As we end our presidency at midnight, I know that I
speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation
of the Russian Federation every good fortune as it
assumes the presidency during the month of September.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

15-26817
