S/PRST/2005/32

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 July 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5227th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 July 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms all its previous decisions concerning the
situation in Somalia, in particular the statements by its President
(S/PRST/2004/43) dated 19 November 2004, and (S/PRST/2005/11) of 7 March
2005.
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
16 June 2005 (S/2005/392), reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia and its respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
“The Security Council is encouraged by the relocation now under way of
the Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) to Somalia, urges further progress
in this regard and calls upon the Somali leaders to continue to work towards
reconciliation, through inclusive dialogue and consensus-building within the
framework of the TFIs, in accordance with the Transitional Federal Charter of
the Somali Republic adopted in February 2004.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the recent disagreements
and increased tensions among Somali leaders, which threaten the viability of
the TFIs. The Security Council calls on all leaders in Somalia to exercise
maximum restraint and take immediate effective steps to reduce tension.
Violence or military action by any members of the TFIs or other parties is
unacceptable as the means for dealing with the current differences within the
TFIs. The Security Council reiterates that any members of the TFIs or other
parties who persist on the path of confrontation and conflict, including military
action, will be held accountable.
“The Security Council urges the Transitional Federal Institutions to
conclude without delay a national security and stabilization plan, to include a
comprehensive and verifiable ceasefire agreement leading to final
disarmament, and welcomes the willingness of the United Nations to provide
advice in this regard.

05-42154 (E) 140705

*0542154*

S/PRST/2005/32

“The Security Council commends the commitment of the African Union
(AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) in support
of the TFIs’ relocation to Somalia and reiterates its support for those efforts in
assisting the process of transition in Somalia. The Security Council welcomes
the readiness of the AU and IGAD to reinforce their continued support for the
establishment of a functioning central government of Somalia, including the
possible deployment of a Peace Support Mission to Somalia, and encourages
the AU Peace and Security Council (PSC) to keep the Security Council
informed of all developments. The Security Council expects the AU and IGAD
to work out a detailed mission plan in close coordination with and with the
broad consensus of the TFIs and consistent with a national security and
stabilization plan.
“The Security Council takes note of the PSC’s request to the Security
Council for the authorization of an exemption on the arms embargo imposed
against Somalia by resolution 733 (1992) of 23 January 1992, contained in the
AU’s PSC Communiqués of 12 May and 3 July 2005. The Security Council
stands ready to consider this matter on the basis of information on the mission
plan mentioned in paragraph 6 in due course.
“The Security Council further reminds all parties in Somalia, including
all members of the TFIs, as well as all Member States, of their obligation to
implement and enforce the arms embargo imposed by the Security Council
under Resolution 733 (1992). Continued non-compliance with this measure
undermines the efforts of those who seek to establish peace in Somalia. There
can be no effective and lasting progress in Somalia as long as arms and
ammunition flow unchecked across Somalia’s borders. A stable and secure
environment in Somalia is essential to the future success of the national
reconciliation process.
“The Security Council welcomes the continued engagement of donors in
supporting the establishment of a functioning government in Somalia through
the mechanism of the Coordination and Monitoring Committee (CMC) and in
fulfilment of the Declaration of Principles. The Security Council encourages
donor countries, regional and subregional organizations to continue to
contribute to the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Somalia, in particular
through the mechanism of the Rapid Assistance Programme and efforts
coordinated by the United Nations.
“The Security Council stresses that improving the humanitarian situation
is an essential component of support for the peace and reconciliation process.
The Security Council reiterates that ensuring humanitarian access to all
Somalis in need and providing guarantees for the safety and security of aid
workers is an immediate priority and obligation of the TFIs. The Security
Council further welcomes the ongoing efforts and work of the business
community, humanitarian organizations, non-governmental organizations, civil
society and women’s groups to facilitate the demilitarization of Somalia.
“The Security Council deplores the recent hijacking of a vessel off the
coast of Somalia that had been chartered by the World Food Programme
(WFP) and was carrying food aid for tsunami victims, and notes the
subsequent decision by the WFP to suspend all shipments of humanitarian
assistance to Somalia. The Security Council expresses its concern at the

2

S/PRST/2005/32

impact of these developments, and calls for the quick and appropriate
resolution of this incident. The Security Council condemns in the strongest
terms the brutal murder of Somali peace activist Abdulkadir Yahya Ali on 11 July
in Mogadishu. The Security Council calls for the incident to be investigated
immediately and for those responsible to be held fully accountable.
“The Security Council welcomes the steps being taken to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) and
reaffirms its strong support for the leadership of the Secretary-General Special
Representative (SRSG) in his efforts in fostering inclusive dialogue among the
leaders of the TFIs. The Security Council calls upon all Somali parties and
Member States to extend to him their fullest cooperation in this regard.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for the peace process in
Somalia and the commitment of the United Nations to assist the regional and
subregional efforts in this regard.”

3
