S/PV.7831

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7831st meeting

Monday, 12 December 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Catalá/Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Barro
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
International Judicial Cooperation in countering terrorism
Letter dated 2 December 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Spain to
the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/1030)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-43144 (E)
*1643144*

S/PV.7831

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
International Judicial Cooperation in
countering terrorism
Letter dated 2 December 2016 from
the Permanent Representative of Spain
to the United Nations addressed to the
SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/1030)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Serbia, Slovakia, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Tunisia and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. JeanPaul Laborde, Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate; Ms. Dorcas Oduor,
Deputy Director of Public Prosecutions in Kenya;
and Mr. Robert Strang, Executive Secretary of the
International Institute for Justice and the Rule of Law.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

12/12/2016

Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Malta, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Senegal,
Serbia, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America and Uruguay.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution has received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2322 (2016).
I now give the floor to Mr. Laborde.
Mr. Laborde (spoke in French): Terrorism is a
global threat that requires a comprehensive response.
In that context, the first task for the international
community is to not tolerate impunity in any way and
to bring terrorists to justice whenever possible so that
honour and dignity can be restored to the victims. The
successful implementation of that line of action must
rely on the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the 19 universal counter-terrorism instruments.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
to document S/2016/1030, which contains a letter dated
2 December 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Spain to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

That is why I welcome the Council’s adoption
today of resolution 2322 (2016). In the framework of
its mandate and with regard to the political guidelines
provided by the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Executive Directorate is absolutely determined to
provide the Council, especially through the Committee
and as directed by it, all the necessary support for the
implementation of the resolution.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2016/1047, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Albania, Angola, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,

It must be said that international commitment is
essential, for we continue to face a complex, decentralized
and dynamic threat that is not limited to any region.
Our policies and methods must go beyond traditional
security measures and employ a broader perspective

2/25

16-43144

12/12/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

based on enhanced international cooperation — not
only among Member States but also with specialized
organizations and regional organizations.
Of course, to help States bring terrorists to justice
and to maintain international cooperation on criminal
matters and on the financing of terrorism, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate is already
collaborating closely with the International Association
of Prosecutors, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
the International Organization of La Francophonie, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the League of Arab States, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), to mention but a
few of those organizations. I have certainly forgotten
some. Moreover, as we clearly noted at the 1 December
special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
the Committee and its Executive Directorate have
established links of cooperation with some of the
largest players in the private sector, as well as with
key representative of civil society, in the context of
preventing and fighting the exploitation by terrorists of
information and communications technologies.
That cooperation and those agreements on mutual
legal assistance will further strengthen the capacity
of central authorities to support prosecutors and
investigators in their efforts to obtain digital data
in a timely and effective manner. Thanks to those
partnerships and the projects we develop together,
we are contributing in a very practical way to the
implementation of the standards developed by the
Security Council that enable international cooperation
on criminal matters to yield results. Rest assured,
Mr. President, that for the resolution on international
cooperation on criminal matters, which follows
the original resolution on the matter — resolution
1373 (2001) — we, along with the members of the
Council, with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and with the organizations I mentioned, will have
better communication and cooperation with a view to
bolstering efforts in that sphere.
The most striking example is Kenya — a case I will
leave to Ms. Dorcas Oduor to address more fully — where
we have proposed collaborative solutions between
police and prosecutors, and where UNODC, through
its work, has truly supported the country in the fight
against terrorism and, above all, in bringing terrorists
to justice. We have also supported the organization
by partnering on workshops of the same type, and we
will continue to do so in South and South-East Asia

S/PV.7831

and in Nigeria to promote that type of cooperation in
criminal matters. In sum, we will continue the work
we are doing in the Counter-Terrorism Committee in
everything related to joint investigations.
In that connection, I should mention an existing
regional mechanism, which represents a good practice,
and that is the Additional Protocol to the Council of
Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism. It
stipulates the establishment of a network of contact
points for prosecutors that operates around the clock,
seven days a week, but also for police, with the
police aspect being piloted by INTERPOL, which is
working closely with us on that project. The Executive
Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
has contributed to that initiative from the start, by
supporting and encouraging the Council of Europe up
to the moment when the representative of the Council
of Europe, at the 1 December special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, announced that the
network was operational. We will continue that work
with other organizations, on the basis of the Security
Council resolution. We call on regional organizations
to follow that model by making them aware that we are
ready to provide any necessary advice, and now with
the support of resolution 2322 (2016).
Another good practice is the participation of many
regional or specialized organizations in the independent
assessment missions carried out by the Executive
Directorate on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, particularly INTERPOL and UNODC
in the assessment visits. It goes without saying that
Executive Directorate is ready to support INTERPOL
in the implementation of its new counter-terrorism
strategy, recently adopted and implemented, and to aid
Member States, specialized organizations and regional
organizations to enhance international cooperation
among intelligence services and police services and,
indeed, among the various services in the criminal
justice system. As you have so aptly pointed out today,
Mr. President, justice must be present. It must be in the
middle of that international cooperation and must be
one of the major players in it.
I welcome Spain’s initiative today to advance this
aspect of the fight against terrorism, one which is
too often neglected but is the only way to effectively
respond to the needs of the victims and to expedite
legal proceedings, all while respecting the rights of the
individual. In that regard, the Spanish Government has

16-431443/25

S/PV.7831

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

spared no time or effort in enabling us to take explicit
measures in that area.
Thanks to your action, Mr. President, and that of the
Spanish Ministry for Foreign Affairs, we have been able
to establish these procedures based on the principles of
Madrid, for which your Government should be warmly
thanked. Faced with the terrorist organizations that act
with agility, speed and flexibility by using financial
means, the Internet and social media, we can and must
meet this challenge.
As Albert Camus said in The Rebel, true generosity
towards the future consists in giving our all to
the present.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Laborde for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Oduor.
Ms. Oduor: First, I would like to congratulate Spain
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December, and also to commend
you, Mr. President, for the manner in which you have
conducted its affairs. I thank you as well for inviting
me to brief the Council on this very important subject
and for providing a detailed concept note (S/2016/1030,
annex) to guide today’s timely meeting.
Today’s technological advances have made
the world a single, vast global village. Crime is no
longer a national phenomenon, but has taken on a
transnational dimension. The emergence and expansion
of transnational crime confronts all justice systems
with some new challenges. Criminal offenders,
including terrorists, are mobile and often seek to evade
detection, arrest and punishment by operating across
international borders. They avoid getting caught by
taking advantage of those borders and playing on the
frequent reluctance of law enforcement authorities to
engage in complicated and expensive transnational
investigations and prosecutions. The weak capacity of
any one country to address effectively some of those
new threats and challenges translates itself into an
overall weakness in the entire international regime of
criminal justice cooperation.
Article 3 of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime gives a clear definition
of what constitutes a transnational organized crime.
Although the 19 universal conventions and protocols
relating to terrorism do not contain such a definition
regarding terrorism, nevertheless, they apply only to
4/25

12/12/2016

transnational terrorism. Because of its transnational
nature, like all transnational organized crime terrorism
poses serious problems for national justice systems.
It is the national courts that try perpetrators since
there is no international court that is competent to try
terrorism cases.
I grant that it is difficult for criminal justice officers
to investigate or institute criminal proceedings against
persons suspected of terrorism when such persons are
outside their territory or where key evidence, witnesses,
victims or the proceeds from the crime are located
outside the country’s jurisdiction or where the legal and
judicial systems, with which they must cooperate are
different from those of their own country. Practitioners
of criminal justice cannot realistically work within the
confines of national borders. They have no choice but
to cooperate with their foreign counterparts in order to
bring the perpetrators of such offences to justice.
Terrorism and transnational organized crime
require a coordinated international response that calls
for more efficient and faster cooperation between
Member States. Current multilateral, bilateral and
national measures against transnational organized
crime, including terrorism are rapidly evolving to
keep pace with the new technologies. The evolution
over the past decade or so reflects the determination of
Member States to work more closely with each other to
face the growing threat of terrorism, organized crime
and corruption.
Allow me to apprise the Council of Kenya’s efforts
to promote international judicial cooperation against
terrorism and what we believe should be the priorities
of the international community moving forward. The
terrorist threat in Kenya emanates mainly from the
Al-Shabaab terrorist group in Somalia, an affiliate of
the Al-Qaida terrorist network. The threat manifests
mainly through continued radicalization and violent
extremism within its borders that has resulted in an
inflow and outflow of foreign terrorist fighters and
terrorist attacks, including the 1998 United States
embassy bombing, the Paradise Hotel bombing of
2002, the Westgate Mall attack of 2013 and the Garissa
University attack of 2015, alongside scores of other
attacks over the years.
Kenya responded to the threat, among other
initiatives, by adapting various international statutes
into domestic laws, including the 2012 Prevention
of Terrorism Act. It also sought deeper counter16-43144

12/12/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

terrorism cooperation with other partner States,
particularly on the investigation and prosecution of
terrorism cases. Kenyan law enforcement agencies
have worked with regional organizations including
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
East African Community, the African Union and the
broader international community, including the United
Nations, the United States and other bilateral partners,
to increase its counter-terrorism capacity and secure
land, sea, and air borders.
Since 2012, Kenya’s primary contribution to
regional counter-terrorism efforts has been its
significant troop contribution to the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
It has also hosted numerous trainings involving law
enforcement professionals from neighbouring countries
to build counter-terrorism capacities and to increase
regional cooperation.
Following the enactment of a new Constitution
in 2010, an independent office of Director of Public
Prosecution was created within which is a specialized
division on international cooperation. Its target is to
give effect to all requests within seven days. Similarly,
in 2014, security laws were amended to strengthen
the country’s legislative framework against terrorism
that resulted in an enhanced legislative framework,
inter-agency coordination and cooperation against
terrorism particularly between the law enforcement and
justice sectors.
As a front-line State against international terrorism
over the years, Kenya has learnt several lessons regarding
the evolving threat. I will mention but a few. First,
although enforcement of the law is the responsibility
of the sovereign State, mainly to bring perpetrators
to justice, a coordinated international response and
close regional cooperation are vital. That is because
more rapid success in fighting terrorism is achieved
when Member States exhibit international cooperation,
good faith and honesty. AMISOM’s continued success
in Somalia against Al-Shabaab is clear testimony of
that as is the Lake Chad Basin Initiative against Boko
Haram in West Africa.
Secondly, terrorist groups move rapidly across
national lines and normally find sanctuaries in
countries with the weakest links. That is paradoxical
since no country can seal its own borders, or rely on
self-defence alone, and participate in today’s economy
effectively. To resolve the paradox, regional and

S/PV.7831

international judicial cooperation against terrorism
using well defined standards are vital. International
conventions and initiatives such as the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the Secretary
General’s Plan of Action to prevent violent extremism
provide parameters to set such standards through which
Member States can adapt their national strategies based
on their own unique national circumstances.
Thirdly, terrorists and other criminals have shown
the ability to adapt to law enforcement efforts to
apprehend them. They have devised the means to travel
freely throughout the world, under false identities
using stolen and fraudulent travel documents, raise
finances through crimes such as drug trafficking,
human trafficking, ivory smuggling and corruption
as a key enabler. More than ever before, such trends
call for strong national coordination and sustained
international cooperation to manage and eradicate.
Fourthly, ordinary citizens in many societies like
Kenya’s are demanding much better service from law
enforcement agencies through more prosecutions and
convictions. Raising the awareness of citizens and their
involvement in the prevention of terrorism and violent
extremist ideologies is crucial in winning the war
against terrorism while upholding human rights.
International judicial cooperation against terrorism
is hampered by many challenges, such as the diversity
of law enforcement structures, the absence of channels
for the exchange of information, divergent approaches
and priorities among nations, language, human rights
and privacy issues, issues regarding the criminal and
criminal procedure code to ensure that the appropriate
criminal acts are extraditable, ensuring that sensitive
information received via international cooperation
is kept confidential and the varied procedural
requirements of each jurisdiction.
In conclusion, to achieve greater international
judicial cooperation against terrorism, we need to
further encourage the convergence and compatibility of
national legislations, to introduce complex procedural
reforms, and generally to develop a much greater
investigation and prosecution capacity at the national
level and strengthen the capacity to cooperate at the
international level. We need to build capacity for
international cooperation of Member States within
their own criminal justice system. We need to come
up with more instruments that set standards for best
practices and cooperation. We need to institutionalize

16-431445/25

S/PV.7831

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and expand cooperation, the sharing of intelligence and
data, training and technology and organization that can
be shared without compromising national capabilities.
We need to encourage and deepen existing informal
cooperation and other arrangements among law
enforcement agencies worldwide, including through the
Interpol, financial intelligence units and other regional
networks, which is crucial to achieving and sustaining
formal cooperation.
Finally, it would be remiss of me if I did not
mention the important role played by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism
Department in enhancing capacity in Kenya and in the
region. Because of the them, we have been exposed and
are able to ensure much better cooperation than before.
Terrorism is a challenge that we all need to tackle in
solidarity. No country can do it alone.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Oduor for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Strang.
Mr. Strang: I thank the you, Mr. President,
for giving me the opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the important issue of international judicial
cooperation in terrorism cases in connection with
resolution 2322 (2016).
Terrorism cases are almost inevitably transnational
in nature, and therefore efforts to bring these
individuals to justice within a civilian rule of law
system require the sharing of evidence across
jurisdictions. That is particularly true for those cases
involving the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters,
whether those individuals are travelling to conflict
zones or returning to their own country or to a third
country, where there will inevitably be evidence with
third countries, including evidence related to their
travel, evidence related to the financing of their travel,
evidence related to their communications and evidence
related to their recruitment or efforts to recruit others
through social media, and of course any victims can be
of any nationality. These important pieces of evidence
will be located with immigrations officials, travel
agencies, airlines, banks or on computer servers, in
different jurisdictions, where international cooperation
between judicial authorities will be required to ensure
that relevant evidence can be gathered in a form that
can be used in court.
6/25

12/12/2016

I would like to focus on today on a key part of making
that system work — the role of central authorities, which
is recognized in paragraph 13 of the resolution. Central
authorities are the national entities responsible for any
mutual legal assistance — the sharing of evidence and
extradition of individuals. At the International Institute
for Justice and the Rule of Law (IIJ) in Malta, we have
gathered together representatives of central authorities
from North, East and West Africa, the United States
and the Middle East, Senegal and Egypt. We have had
civil law, common law and other legal traditions present
to discuss and agree on some basic principles and best
practices. My briefing today reflects the collective
wisdom of a variety of Member States, as well as my
own experiences as a career prosecutor.
First, all members must establish a central authority.
Various United Nations conventions expressly call
upon each Member State to designate a central
authority within their government to facilitate mutual
legal assistance requests and extraditions. Sometimes
States attempt to create multiple central authorities for
different crimes — one for terrorism, one for corruption.
We find that this is generally not a helpful approach.
It is better for Member States to designate a single
central authority in order to concentrate experience
and resources, reduce bureaucracy and overlapping
authority, and ensure visibility and accountability for
all incoming and outgoing requests. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and others have encouraged
the creation of regional criminal information-sharing
platforms. These can be helpful, but it remains critical
that Member States joining such platforms name their
existing central authority as their point of contact to
the platforms.
But it is not merely enough for a Member State to
establish an office that is called a central authority. A
central authority must be able to function effectively.
Without proper resources and dedicated expert and
administrative personnel, the work of a central
authority will be ineffective. Central authorities
should serve to ensure that requests for mutual legal
assistance from domestic law enforcement and judicial
authorities are sufficient and comply with the terms
of applicable law, treaty or convention before such
requests are transmitted. While staffing needs will
vary, some Member States receive and send thousands
of requests each year, and others far fewer, but there
still must be experienced practitioners — emphasis on
practitioners — assigned to the central authority.
16-43144

12/12/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Success in the area of judicial cooperation among
Member States is naturally based on trust. That trust
is built on experience and relationships. Member
States must encourage their respective central
authorities to have regular and direct discussions with
their international counterparts. Moreover, direct
communication among central authorities permits
international counterparts to discuss the status of
pending requests and to seek together to overcome
challenges that may arise in satisfying such requests.
That experience builds trust.
Investigations and prosecutions in terrorism
cases in particular demand quick and confidential
assistance between national authorities. It is therefore
a good practice to send such draft requests to receiving
central authorities to allow them to begin reviewing
that request. Such direct communication can often
be made effectively initially through e-mail or by
telephone. The use of diplomatic channels, however,
can sometimes delay effective investigations and the
collection of evidence for use in court, and therefore it
was the sense of the central authorities participating in
our programme that it should be discouraged.
A central authority should maintain the confidentiality
of mutual legal assistance and extradition requests in
order to protect the integrity of terrorist investigations
and prosecutions. Naturally, premature disclosure of a
request may not only disrupt a terrorist investigation,
including inadvertent notification to the targets of the
investigation, who could hide or destroy evidence,
move the proceeds of crime or flee the jurisdiction.
Therefore, Member States must take steps to treat each
request as a confidential matter. If the receiving central
authority is required under its own domestic law to
notify a party of a request, it should certainly notify the
sending authority in advance to avoid compromising an
ongoing investigation.
Member States should actively determine whether
or not they need to adjust their domestic law to
ensure that such notification is not legally required.
Member States should also empower their respective
central authorities to take action directly or lead
the coordination of the execution of requests. A key
component of an effective central authority is its ability
to act with authority to ensure the prompt execution of
requests. If a central authority lacks the competence to
act, then efforts at effective cooperation will be quickly
frustrated. Member States therefore should empower
their central authorities to execute requests directly

S/PV.7831

wherever possible or, when they lack legal authority to
execute the request directly, central authorities should
coordinate directly with the other competent entities
within their Government to execute such requests.
A word about what central authorities should not do.
They should not limit the police to police or other forms
of cooperation between governmental law enforcement
entities. Instead, they should support it. Some forms of
assistance will inevitably require formal requests for
mutual legal assistance in order for the information
received to be used in court. Where formal mutual legal
assistance is not required, central authorities should
encourage, where possible, the use of other channels of
law enforcement sharing, such as those mentioned by
my colleague from Kenya, including police to police
channels, INTERPOL and others. Central authorities
should be able to discern when formal versus alternative
channels to gather evidence or provide assistance are
appropriate, and facilitate assistance through formal
mutual legal channels without limiting assistance
through other law enforcement channels. The goal is
to provide evidence that can be used in a court of law.
Let me add a word about extradition. It is naturally
a little more complicated than the sharing of evidence,
as countries often have greater restrictions on
extradition, particularly of their own citizens. Requests
for extradition must comply with relevant treaties and
domestic law, including requirements, such as dual
criminality, which is not always necessarily present in
the case of mutual legal assistance requests. But here,
too, the strong central authority has a role to play. It
should be able to ensure that extradition requests from
domestic law enforcement and judicial authorities are
sufficient and comply with applicable law, treaty or
convention before such requests are transmitted.
Member States should also empower their central
authorities to facilitate the judicial aspects of extradition
requests. Extradition proceedings typically involve
a judicial phase for which legal expertise is vital.
Member States therefore should empower their central
authorities to permit them to facilitate the judicial
aspect of extradition. Otherwise, efforts at effective
cooperation will be soon frustrated. Central authorities
should therefore act as a node of coordination at a
minimum within the Government to follow the status of
pending extradition requests and regularly advise their
international counterparts on developments.

16-431447/25

S/PV.7831

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We at the International Institute for Justice and the
Rule of Law have developed 10 general principles in
support of developing strong central authorities, but
let me emphasize, in conclusion, what is and is not at
stake. Effective international cooperation in terrorism
and in other criminal matters does not threaten
national sovereignty; it ensures that it continues to
work. Therefore, I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to speak today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Strang for his briefing.
On behalf of all the members of the Security
Council, I would like to thank our three briefers for
their useful and informative reports.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of Justice of Spain.
Allow me to begin my statement by expressing,
on behalf of the Government of Spain, our firm
condemnation of the recent attacks taking place in
Istanbul, Cairo, Mogadishu and Aden. These crimes
elicit our most vigorous condemnation. We share the
pain of the victims and extend our condolences to their
families. Our best tribute to them, besides solidarity
and accompaniment, is that of bringing the perpetrators
to justice.
I thank Mr. Laborde, Ms. Oduor and Mr. Strang
for their briefings. I am also grateful for the support of
the 51 sponsors of resolution 2322 (2016). I welcome
this resolution and I congratulate all the members of the
Security Council on its unanimous adoption.
On Saturday, on the occasion of Human Rights
Day, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon recalled that
those rights, together with peace and sustainable
development, are the foundations of societies that are
based on justice and the rule of law. Terrorism is one of
the greatest threats to international peace and security.
It is an affront to the fundamental pillars on which our
societies are based and to fundamental human rights.
Spain has long experience in this area because of what
it has suffered owing to terrorism, both within its
borders and in the international arena. Spanish society
and its public authorities have also fought that scourge
with efficiency and determination. It is unfortunately
an experience that many of us have shared. For that
reason, we have made combating terrorism one of the
priorities during our term as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council.
8/25

12/12/2016

Spain’s experience a testament to the fact that,
with measures based on respect for the rule of law, a
united society can confront and defeat terrorism. Such
was the case in Spain. Faced with violent extremism
and terrorism, comprehensive strategies are needed
to address all aspects of this threat. In that context,
international cooperation is an absolutely essential
instrument for effectively combating all types of
transnational organized crime. That is especially true
in the context of today’s terrorism, because, as we all
know, it is a global threat. But we must also bear in mind
that terrorism is constantly evolving. We therefore need
to continuously fine-tune and update the tools available
to us to counter terrorism.
On 17 December 2015, the Council adopted
resolution 2253 (2015), which complements resolutions
1267 (1999), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015). The resolution
that we have adopted today is a milestone, another tool
in the succession of tools with which the international
community is equipping itself to confront the terrorist
threat. Globalization is such that States now have to
face the challenge of developing a comprehensive
response to a criminal scourge that transcends national
borders, because the frontiers of justice no longer
coincide with territorial borders. If we do not do so, we
will facilitate impunity.
Resolution 2322 (2016) updates the tools of
international judicial cooperation and extradition that
are available to us as an international community
and urges us to fully make use of them so as to apply
them to transnational organized crime and crimes of
terrorism. Similarly, all Member States are called upon
to designate and appoint central authorities to deal with
requests for cooperation. With that measure, we will
create a network of focal points with resources, training
and authority to take action on terrorism-related crimes.
The resolution also calls upon States to consider the
possibility of developing a system to deal electronically
with requests for cooperation in order to carry out
all such processes more quickly and effectively. It is
important, in demonstrably urgent situations, to accept
requests electronically without affecting the subsequent
transmission of such information through traditional
avenues, where appropriate.
Without a doubt, the new telecommunications
and information technologies, the Internet and social
networks provide outstanding forums for freedom,
for trade, for the economy, for the expression and
dissemination of ideas and for education. But is
16-43144

12/12/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

certainly also true that terrorists have stepped up the
use of technologies, which, without any doubt, entails
an increasing challenge for our societies, the rule
of law and public safety. We who are fighting them
cannot be left behind. Consequently, we must devise
legal frameworks to combat the abuse of the Internet by
terrorist groups. We must also strengthen international
cooperation to respond to the threat.
Today a great part of the evidence linked to terrorist
attacks is obtained through the Internet and related
technologies. Many crimes involving recruitment,
organization and the preparation of attacks are carried
out through those means. We must make progress
in harmonizing the standards concerning the use
of electronic evidence. We also need to ensure that
the goal must be to ensure that evidence obtained in
investigations carried out in one State can be used in
another when we undertake cooperative judicial or
extradition proceedings. The coordination, for instance,
that we have afforded ourselves within the sphere of
the European Union can serve as a example for the
international community in general.
Along with international judicial cooperation, we
also need to maintain and consolidate more effective
law enforcement cooperation. Resolution 2322 (2016)
calls for consolidating and strengthening an invaluable
tool, that is, INTERPOL’s I-24/7 network for secure
communication among law enforcement agencies. All
States must strengthen their capacity to participate
in that network and ensure that the their response
centres are provided with the proper training to combat
terrorism and the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters. We also acknowledge the value of the I-24/7
network, which was established under the Additional
Protocol to the Council of Europe Convention on the
Prevention of Terrorism in May 2015.
We must also reiterate the importance of
cooperation within the framework of the United
Nations and its various bodies, whom this presidency
thanks for their substantial contributions, including
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, its Executive
Directorate, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, INTERPOL and the entire Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.
The resolution also includes a paragraph specifically
dedicated to the victims of terrorism. Their memory
must always guide our work in combating terrorism,
which is a fight aimed at achieving justice. States must

S/PV.7831

come up with measures to ensure support to the victims
in the wake of terrorist acts and throughout the entirety
of criminal proceedings.
We therefore believe that it is very relevant and
consistent with the law that, following its reaffirmation
of our solidarity with the victims and their family
members, the sixth preambular paragraph also recalls
the importance of States redoubling their efforts to
ensure that victims and family members are afforded
the necessary assistance to overcome the subsequent
loss and pain. Ensuring justice, which means preserving
the memory of the victims of terrorism and ensuring
that they receive the support they deserve, will always
serve as a moral point of reference for the document
that we have adopted today.
In conclusion, I strongly believe that we have taken
a great step forward today towards modernizing the
network of contacts among law enforcement focal points
to make more agile our international judicial cooperation
and our existing law enforcement mechanisms. We
have strengthened existing instruments in the fight
against terrorism and transnational organized crime,
which is a critical objective that unites all of us. We all
have reason to be satisfied. However, that satisfaction
must not lead us to become complacent. The fight
against terrorism and international crime is always an
ongoing one. We must ensure that we are always taking
steps forward and that we never lag behind those who
do not wish to see peace and the peaceful coexistence
between States. This resolution will undoubtedly help
us in that endeavour.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers
for their interesting updates.
I must begin by offering my sincerest condolences
to Mr. Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, following the horrific bombing
in Cairo on 11 December. This attack is yet another
reminder of the unrelenting cruelty and barbarity of
the terrorist threat that we face. Today, we grieve with
Egypt. However, in truth, terrorism threatens us all.
Too many of us around this table have experienced the
savagery of these groups in recent years. They are a
clear threat to international peace and security, and

16-431449/25

S/PV.7831

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

12/12/2016

they are threat that we must tackle together. It is a fight
that requires our fullest cooperation — cooperation
between our police and security forces, between our
diplomats and, as we are discussing this afternoon,
between our judicial institutions.

countries. We should not underestimate the complexity
of such a task. In the United Kingdom, each terrorism
investigation brings with it on average 10.7 terabytes
of data. Put another way, that is 4.4 billion pages or 35
miles of paper.

Today we have shown our shared commitment
to that cooperation through the welcome unanimous
adoption of resolution 2322 (2016). I would like to pay
tribute to you, Mr. President, and to your excellent
delegation for your initiative in bringing this important
issue before the Council because when terrorists act
without any regard for international borders — without
any regard for the laws of one country of the next — we
must work together to ensure that justice crosses borders
in response. My country saw this sadly when terror
came to the streets of London in July 2005. One of
the attempted bombers, Mr. Osman Hussain, fled the
United Kingdom on 21 July 2005 after his bomb failed
to detonate on the London Underground. Thanks to our
cooperation with Italy, Mr. Hussain was arrested eight
days later in Rome and extradited to the United Kingdom
less than two months later. He is now serving a 40-year
minimum sentence. Sadly, since 2005, there has been
a steady increase in the need for similar cooperation.

In the pursuit of that evidence, we cannot allow
ourselves to undermine the freedoms that the terrorists
want to destroy. Restrictions on social media, abuses
of online privacy and any type of censorship are
simply not the answer. We also need to recognize that
evidence is not only to be found in the Twitter feeds
and emails of foreign terrorist fighters. It is also found
in the liberated towns of Iraq at the scene of the terrible
crimes of Da’esh. Preserving and sharing that evidence
is just as important if we are to see justice finally being
delivered. That is why the British Foreign Secretary,
Mr. Boris Johnson, alongside the Foreign Ministers
of Iraq and Belgium, launched an initiative on Da’esh
accountability here in September.

With the rise of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters, the complexity of such cases has grown. Let us
take the case of a French national who traveled to Syria
join Al-Nusra in January 2014. By May 2014, he had
fled to the United Kingdom. He was arrested on 9 May
2014 and extradited to France just over a month later.
His case follows an increasingly common pattern — a
national of one country commiting a crime in another
country before fleeing to a third country. Yet, there
are countless returning fighters who have yet to face
justice in the way that that French national has. Let
us use all the tools at our disposal to ensure that there
is no impunity for any of them. Those tools should
include even more cooperation on extraditions, even
greater mutual legal assistance and more engagement
with INTERPOL. To underpin such efforts, we face
new challenges gathering the evidence needed for the
extradition, arrest and prosecution of terrorist suspects.
The Internet is now a front line in the battle against
terrorism. Twitter, Facebook and other social media
channels are sadly hijacked as a recruiting ground for
extremists. In turn, we must also use those networks to
find the evidence needed to stop their hateful activities.
That requires closer cooperation with tech companies
and greater, faster information-sharing between
10/25

As a first step, we look to the United Nations to
take action to gather and preserve evidence of the
crimes carried out by Da’esh in Iraq. The Government
of Iraq is clear that it would welcome international
support to complement their efforts. Together, experts
of the United Kingdom and Iraq have been working on
a proposal to that end and we look forward to bringing
it to the United Nations very soon.
Ms. Sison (United States of America) I thank
the Minister of Justice of Spain for convening this
meeting. We especially welcome your participation,
Sir, as a senior official who has first-hand experience in
dealing with international judicial cooperation to fight
terrorism. I would also like to thank today’s briefers.
Let us all think about the terrorist threat that we face
today. Terrorist organizations span borders. Terrorists
hide in one country before attacking in another.
Terrorists may obtain funds from criminal enterprises
that traffic people, illicit goods, narcotics or cultural
property across different continents. When terrorists
talk to each other, their emails may be transmitted from
one city to another but the records of such emails sit on
servers scattered around the world.
So, how do we prosecute a terrorist who is captured
in one State but who is a resident of a second State — a
terrorist who may be a citizen of yet a third State whose
emails are scattered on servers in a fourth, fifth or even
sixth State? The obvious answer is that prosecutors and
judges need to cooperate with each other and cooperate
16-43144

12/12/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

closely. The challenge that we must discuss today is
how to make that cooperation effective. Let me address
three ways in which we can do that.
First, each Member State needs to have the right
laws and agreements on the books — right on both
substance and procedure. The Council has played an
important role in enshrining the legal framework for
countering terrorist activities through resolutions 1373
(2001) and 2178 (2014). Those resolutions focused on
ensuring that all Member States make terrorism a
criminal offence, take action to cut off the financing of
terrorism and prosecute and penalize foreign terrorist
fighters. Resolution 2322 (2016), which we have just
adopted this afternoon, builds on that progress. It
reaffirms that all States should establish as a serious
criminal offence under each State’s domestic law
willfully financing terrorist organizations or individual
terrorists for any purpose.
However, it is not enough that States have laws that
permit them to prosecute terrorists. States may need
to gather evidence that is held in other jurisdictions
or even request the extradition of a terrorist. That
is why the resolution’s focus on mutual legal
assistance — obtaining evidence from another country
and extradition, a form of transferring a defendant
from one country to another — is so critical. One might
assume that those are more or less straightforward
processes. However, the United States has invested
considerable effort to streamline and update both tools
to help fight terrorism.
In the past, mutual legal assistance was a slow and
often cumbersome process. It was hard for States to talk
to each other and judges often had to authorize requests
for evidence. In our modern mutual legal assistance
treaties, prosecutors, through coordinating central
authorities, can work with each other to make requests
for evidence. Modern extradition treaties pave the way
for the extradition of terrorists. The United States is
working to make it easier for countries to share evidence
and extradite terrorists with robust legal safeguards.
That brings me to my second point — implementation.
We can strengthen our laws and agreements, but
actually disrupting terrorist networks requires that
our law enforcement agencies talk to one another.
Proximity helps here. The United States sends 60
resident legal advisers from its Department of Justice
to our embassies around the world to offer training
and technical assistance to prosecutors, along with

S/PV.7831

nine justice attachés who focus on extradition and
coordinating international legal cooperation on legal
cases. The United States also supports assembling joint
investigative teams in which investigators from different
States come together to look at a specific incident.
We can talk a lot here in the Security Council
about building cooperation on counter-terrorism, and
of course we, as diplomats, are used to speaking with
representatives of other countries. But all of us should
do more to make sure that our prosecutors and lawenforcement officials also have the chance to work
directly with one another. That would go a long way to
speeding up the sharing of information and resolving
the highly technical issues that come with international
requests for legal assistance. It also goes without saying
that our national law enforcement agencies should
improve their cooperation with existing multilateral
entities and help share information, such as through
INTERPOL. That is especially true when we talk about
how to counter foreign terrorist fighters, regularly
uploading information on them to INTERPOL’s
I-24/7 secure global police communications system.
Systematically checking against I-24/7 at ports of entry
can make a substantial difference in preventing travel
by foreign terrorist fighters.
The third thing we have to do is to help one another
build the requisite capacities. Judicial cooperation is no
easy task. Our laws differ from country to country, as do
our courts, prosecutors and law enforcement agencies.
The paperwork related to judicial cooperation can be
complicated and time-consuming, and rightly so, since
we are talking about arresting people and putting them
on trial, and therefore do not want to make mistakes.
But we do have a lot to learn from one another. We can
help each other understand our requirements for sharing
information. We can talk to each other about the ways
we have disrupted terrorist organizations. We can share
strategies for how to gather evidence and build a case
against terrorist networks, which do their best to keep
their activities hidden. That is why the United States
strongly supports the calls in today’s resolution to make
sure that United Nations entities are helping to provide
that expertise.
There are many opportunities for Member States to
work closely in fighting terrorism, but that cooperation
should not come at the expense of human rights or
civil liberties. We can find ways to share digital data,
and we should. But we should minimize the sharing
of extraneous, private information, and ensure that

16-4314411/25

S/PV.7831

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

these protocols do not suppress freedom of expression.
Similarly, timely extraditions are important, but we
must ensure that Member States follow all the applicable
legal requirements. A desire to expedite matters cannot
be an excuse for denying rights to the accused.
There is no question that this issue is a technical
one, but let us zoom out and look at the big picture.
Terrorism is a threat to our collective security. If
a terrorist struck any of us, we would want the tools
that today’s resolution outlines in order to make sure
that all of our investigators and prosecutors can work
together. Today’s debate should encourage each of us
to re-examine what we are doing to bolster those ties.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We commend the Spanish
presidency for convening today’s important meeting on
international judicial cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. We would like to welcome Mr. Rafael Саtalá,
Minister of Justice of Spain, to the Security Council
and thank him for presiding over our debate. We also
thank the briefers, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Ms. Dorcas
Oduor and Mr. Robert Strang, for their insightful
remarks. We commend Spain for its efforts leading to
today’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2322 (2016),
which is yet another landmark in the fight against this
scourge, through its establishment and reaffirmation of
important political, legal and operational provisions.
Today’s meeting is taking place at a crucial time,
when terrorism has become an unprecedented threat
to international peace and security, owing mainly to
terrorists’ capacity to adapt and persuade, including by
using information technologies, inciting people around
the world, especially the young, to join their ranks.
Terrorist groups take advantage of social and political
instability in many States, while economic, cultural,
ethnic and religious asymmetries make societies
vulnerable to the incitement and recruitment of young
people for subversive acts that can result in the loss
of lives, the destruction of social infrastructure, the
creation of refugees and the impoverishment of nations.
Unfortunately, this is a widespread phenomenon.
Terrorist movements, with different labels and
characteristics, are active in every region of the world,
a reality that calls for coordinated action and the
adoption of appropriate mechanisms for preventing and
fighting them.
Yesterday was particularly tragic, with terrorist
attacks committed in Istanbul, Cairo, Mogadishu and
Aden, along with the tragic return of the Islamic State
12/25

12/12/2016

in Iraq and the Levant to Palmyra. We firmly condemn
those attacks and offer our condolences to the victims’
families. Today’s meeting is timely, since it gives us an
added opportunity to continue our active attempts to
intensify our shared struggle against the deadly threat
to people’s well-being and to international peace and
security that terrorism represents.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is the main cooperative framework for
Member States working to search out, locate and bring
to justice those who support, facilitate and participate
in terrorist acts, as well as to deny them safe haven,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of national
and international law. The Security Council has taken
a decisive leadership role in that fight, and resolution
1373 (2001) is central to the endeavour. Its scope and
adoption under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations label terrorism as a true threat to international
peace and security. Under resolution 1373 (2001), States
have to work together to prevent and suppress terrorist
acts, increase their cooperation with one another,
become parties to the relevant international conventions
and protocols relating to terrorism and implement them
fully, take effective measures to prevent and suppress
the financing and planning of terrorist acts in their
territories, as well as strengthening ways to punish
offences on an international scale.
In order to achieve that, international cooperation
is a crucial tool, given that it is essential for
criminal justice practitioners who face new forms of
transnational criminality and terrorism to broaden their
criminal investigations and prosecutions so as to give
them international and even global scope. We have
put in place mechanisms for international cooperation
in the areas of extradition, mutual legal assistance,
the transfer of criminal proceedings and convicted
persons, the recognition of decisions by foreign
criminal jurisdictions, the freezing or seizure of assets
and cooperation between law enforcement agencies
relating to all types of criminality, including terrorism
and its financing.
Angola, which has much experience in fighting and
defeating terrorism, is fully committed to contributing
to implementing mechanisms designed to prevent and
combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
To that end, we have adopted a set of legal, political and
administrative decisions for reinforcing international
judicial cooperation in preventing and combating
terrorism, particularly in relation to the financing,
16-43144

12/12/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

incitement, recruitment and transit of terrorist fighters
through its territories. Among the legislative and
executive measures we have taken, we would highlight
the laws against money-laundering and the financing
of terrorism, and on international cooperation in
criminal justice; the tracking of money movements of
persons suspected of having connections with terrorist
activities; the control of foreign exchange flows and of
illegal migration; the strengthening of surveillance, with
the installation of high-technology equipment at entry
and exit points; the exchange of information between
national and foreign entities, including INTERPOL and
the Committee of Intelligence and Security Services
of Africa; and the strengthening of cooperation with
specialized United Nations organs and agencies.
To conclude, the dynamics and the actions of
terrorist groups highlights the need for greater
cooperation and exchange of information between all
nations and world entities. Terrorism can be defeated
only through a holistic and sustained approach by
all States, international and regional organizations
and civil society, in a common effort to isolate and
combat terrorist threat. In this endeavour, international
cooperation among law-enforcement agencies in
preventing terrorist acts and judicial practitioners in
holding its perpetrators accountable is key. The fight
against terrorism must involve all societies aiming to
build a more peaceful and just world, based on security,
peace and respect for human rights.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to thank you, Mr. Minister, in your capacity as President
of the Security Council, first of all for your initiative in
bringing this issue before the Council, and I wish to
thank the briefers for their valuable presentations.

S/PV.7831

are tailored to countering the increasingly sophisticated
methods now used by terrorist groups.
Uruguay has always made the rule of law,
especially international law, its modus operandi and
has always been a firm champion of cooperation as
a way of facilitating proceedings, in the recognition
that cooperation is one of the fundamental principles
of the international community. Judicial cooperation
is vital to combating crime in general and terrorism
in particular.
Uruguay co-sponsored and voted in favour of
resolution 2322 (2016) on the basis of its conviction
that it represents a robust instrument for promoting
cooperation and coordinated action among States in
their struggle against terrorism. In the framework of
such cooperation, we must take into account the varying
capacities of Member States and respect national
legislations, without prejudice to obligations deriving
from international law.
Another key aspect is coordination with
prosecutors’ offices and judicial authorities. These
bodies must perforce be actively involved in promoting
knowledge-sharing on good practices and in facilitating
capacity-building. In accordance with international
law, Uruguay rejects the wrongful granting of refugee
status to those who commit, organize or facilitate acts
of terrorism. We therefore agree that it is not acceptable
to claim political motivations in the commission of
terrorist acts in order to try to avoid extradition. At
the same time, we must be careful not to resort to
unrestricted use of the right to extradition.

Uruguay reiterates once again its firm
condemnation of terrorism. Today it wishes also to
express its indignation at the barbaric attacks that took
place this weekend in Cairo and Istanbul. It expresses its
solidarity with the families of the victims and conveys
its condolences to the peoples and the Governments of
Egypt and Turkey.

Uruguay is in favour of coordination in the area of
requests for cooperation in the digital sphere and for
the preservation of evidence and the transmission of
information. However, this must always take place with
due respect for human rights, privacy and the freedom of
thought and expression. In that respect, we must guard
against undermining the right to due process and respect
for human rights during investigations and proceedings
carried out as part of the fight against terrorism.

All terrorist acts are reprehensible. There can never
be any political, ideological, philosophical, religious
or other kind of justification for such acts. Uruguay
believes that international cooperation is vital in this
respect and therefore urges coordinated action on the
part of all States to combat terrorism, using tools that

In conclusion, Uruguay, a country that respects the
rule of law as well as the internal judicial procedures of
nations, supports judicial cooperation as an instrument
of great relevance and utility in adopting joint
approaches that help combat terrorism and promote
international peace and security.

16-4314413/25

S/PV.7831

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank the Spanish presidency of the
Security Council for having convened this important
meeting and for the initiative to discuss the topic under
consideration. I should like also to thank all briefers for
their valuable interventions. In addition, I wish also to
offer thanks and appreciation to all those who expressed
their solidarity with Egypt in connection with the
terrorist acts that struck us yesterday morning, which
led to the deaths of 25 persons, most of them women
and children, as they prayed in one of Cairo’s historical
churches. I should like to underline that such incidents
will only make us more adamant and determined to
combat terrorism and eradicate it completely.
International judicial cooperation in countering
terrorism is one of the most important pillars in the
effort to fight terrorism. It is vital in the context of
a comprehensive approach to combat this appalling
scourge. Without effective cooperation in this domain,
our efforts will always be incomplete and fall short of
reaching their objectives. It is as if we were working in
silos when it is in fact imperative for our efforts to be
complementary. We must fully cooperate and uphold
the common good and common interests, because
no country alone can defeat terrorism. So just as we
have forged alliances to defeat terrorism militarily
and operationally, we should also forge alliances and
cooperate judicially to defeat terrorism.
Resolution 2322 (2016), which the Council adopted
today, sends an important message to terrorists that
the international community is unified and adamant
in eradicating terrorism, and to the international
community on the need to go beyond narrow interests in
order to attempt, within a legal framework, to promote
international judicial cooperation in all its forms and
aspects, while stressing the need to end any form of
support for terrorism.
The resolution includes a number of important
aspects, including, for example, the need for the
exchange of information among States so as to stop the
financing of terrorism and the supply of weapons to
terrorists, as well as the need to enact the legislation
necessary to criminalize the financing of terrorism,
promote police cooperation and benefit from the
capabilities of INTERPOL, and build the capacity of
States, with reference to the vital role played by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. There is
also need to promote and develop cooperation among
14/25

12/12/2016

States, in line with criminal investigations relevant to
terrorist offenses.
The resolution also refers to the imperative of
holding officials accountable for terrorist acts, as well
as extraditing and prosecuting any person accused of
supporting, facilitating or participating in terrorist
acts. In that vein, the resolution reafirms the need to
not provide a safe haven to those who are financing,
planning or supporting terrorism. The resolution equally
reaffirms that it is necessary that terrorists not abuse
the asylum right. Political motives cannot be taken as a
pretext by States to reject requests for the extradition of
those accused of committing terrorist acts.
The Security Council’s adoption of the resolution
on international judicial cooperation in countering
terrorism is important; however, what is more
significant when it comes to Security Council
resolutions on combating terrorism in general is the
political will of States to implement such resolutions.
And that requires concerted follow-up on the part of
the Security Council, as well as holding accountable
States that do not fully abide by their implementation
and those States that continue to support terrorists or
provide shelter to them.
In conclusion, I would once more like to thank the
Spanish presidency of the Security Council. I would
like to reaffirm that Egypt will constantly maintain its
commitment to be at the forefront of international efforts
to defeat terrorism, while respecting international law,
the rule of law and human rights.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to express
Ukraine’s sincere appreciation to the Spanish President
personally for convening such an important meeting,
as well as for initiating resolution 2322 (2016), which
Ukraine sponsored.
I would also like to join other delegations in
expressing our solidarity and condolences to Egypt,
Turkey and other countries that recently suffered
violent terrorist attacks.
Of course, I also thank the briefers for their
important contributions to today’s meeting.
There is no doubt that today, when the growing
terrorist
threat
transcends
national
borders,
international legal cooperation in matters pertaining
to counter-terrorism is of paramount importance. No
single State, no matter how technologically advanced
or militarily powerful, can effectively combat this
16-43144

12/12/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

problem on its own. Numerous international treaties
and United Nations decisions in the counter-terrorism
field have already established mechanisms to facilitate
mutual legal assistance, apprehend fugitives and, when
appropriate, extradite wrongdoers. Yet they often lack
cohesion and efficiency because of complicated and
time-consuming procedures for processing foreign
requests in investigations and prosecutions against
those suspected of involvement in terrorist activities.
In that connection, I would like to highlight several
points on improving practical cooperation and reducing
delays in rendering mutual legal assistance and
information-sharing.
To ensure a faster response, especially in
circumstances demanding the prioritization of handling
terrorist-related cases, there is a persistent need to
create effective central authorities for mutual legal
assistance and extradition, with adequate resources
and experienced staff. Such authorities can also serve
as the main points of contact within the framework of
international and regional cooperation platforms.
To rapidly seek and provide assistance, States may
consider using simplified electronic request forms for
mutual legal assistance. To facilitate those endeavours,
international institutions, primarily the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL, could
conduct training for competent national authorities.
Furthermore, developing and introducing a universal
electronic system for submitting, managing and
responding to mutual legal assistance requests
in terrorism-related cases can be another major
undertaking. Competent authorities can also benefit
from using different ways of direct communication,
such as email or video teleconferencing, in order
to overcome challenges that may arise in satisfying
such requests.
To avoid conflicts over jurisdiction in cases that are
subject to prosecution in more than one country, States
can devise and apply universal jurisdiction mechanisms
for the prosecution of terrorists in the interest of
justice — for instance, tribunals, special courts or
even inter-State hybrid courts. In such instances, the
transfer of criminal proceedings can be one possible
solution. Implementing such possible steps may require
a revision of the relevant bilateral and multilateral
treaties on international cooperation in criminal matters
related to terrorism, or the conclusion of supplemental
agreements to incorporate those additional provisions.

S/PV.7831

While processing mutual legal assistance requests
may take some time, there is a growing need to provide
the basis for timely sharing of imperative intelligence
information when investigating terrorist activities and
securing criminal evidence, apprehending suspects and
preventing terrorists acts from being carried out. That
is where the Latin saying periculum in mora takes on a
special significance.
Therefore, establishing a mechanism for cross-border
collaboration between judicial and law enforcement
agencies, including by appointing liaison officers and
conducting joint investigations in terrorism cases,
facilitating the wider use of investigative international
databases and providing access to them for competent
national authorities, and facilitating inter-agency
collaboration are all of paramount importance. In
that vein, we also support the establishment of direct
global communication platforms for competent
authorities, such as the recently introduced point-ofcontact network set out in the Additional Protocol to
the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism, or the INTERPOL I-24/7 police information
exchange system.
In the world’s history, humankind has suffered
from various disasters, wars, epidemics and other
challenges. Still, we have always managed to overcome
them. By being united, therefore, we will eliminate the
terrorism threat once and for all. Frankly speaking,
mutual legal assistance reform in counter-terrorismrelated cases will not be easy, but there is an urgent
need to make inter-State cooperation more agile and
efficient. That is why we considered your initiative,
Mr. President, and this discussion particularly topical
and timely. We are confident that today’s resolution
will help us to achieve that goal.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank the
Spanish presidency for convening this briefing. I also
wish to thank our briefers today.
Promoting cooperation has long been an objective
of the Security Council’s counter-terrorism efforts.
Today’s resolution 2322 (2016), on international
judicial cooperation on counter-terrorism, advances
those efforts, and we commend Spain for its leadership.
I, too, wish to place on record my delegation’s
condolences to Egypt and Turkey for yesterday’s
terrorist attacks.

16-4314415/25

S/PV.7831

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

While terrorism is not a new phenomenon, the rise
of extensive global networks and their sophisticated
use of modern communications technologies have
considerably extended its reach. No country can
consider itself safe from the threat. Groups such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh
and Al-Qaida propagate and carry out indiscriminate
attacks across borders and use the Internet to recruit
for, finance and incite acts of terror. They find refuge in
fragile States and vulnerable communities and among
the disenfranchised.

12/12/2016

Internet by terrorist groups, mutual legal assistance
in relation to digital data will become increasingly
significant. Just as our approaches to counter-terrorism
must respond and evolve to meet the threat, so must
the ways in which States cooperate on prosecution and
enforcement issues. We must be as efficient and effective
as possible to combat impunity, while ensuring respect
for human rights, and in particular ensuring respect for
due process in criminal and associated proceedings.

As the Council has recognized, the emergence
of foreign terrorist fighters and the susceptibility to
recruitment of young people from all parts of the world
are particularly concerning developments. Foreign
terrorist fighters prolong the conflicts in which they
participate and carry extremism from one conflict
zone to another. Without effective strategies for
deradicalization and reintegration, the knowledge and
skills they have gained also have the potential to pose
a threat to their countries of origin, should they return.

In that regard, we must recognize and deal with the
fact that many States do not have the systems or the
resources to make or respond adequately to requests
for evidence or extradition in a terrorism case. We
are therefore going to have to do more to strengthen
their capacities in those areas. Otherwise, some States
may become unwitting havens for terrorists seeing to
evade justice or hide assets. To that end, New Zealand
recently hosted a joint United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and Pacific Islands Forum workshop in
Auckland, focused on ensuring legislative compliance
with international counter-terrorism instruments.

We all know there are no quick or simple solutions
Effective solutions will require time, resources and
commitment across a broad spectrum of activities to
combat terrorism, prevent and limit its spread, bring
terrorists to justice and rebuild the communities that
have suffered the effects of terrorist violence and
oppression. Effective prosecution and enforcement are
key parts of that effort. International cooperation is
also essential to make those parts work, just as it is to
all of our efforts to keep our communities as safe as
they can be.

New Zealand strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
We will never achieve our common goal of dealing
effectively with terrorism if we do not put a sharp focus
on addressing the conditions that drive individuals
to commit acts of terrorism in the first place. While
security responses are essential, they will only ever be
a partial fix to the much broader problem. New Zealand
also values the work of the Global Counter Terrorism
Forum in developing guidelines of best practices,
including on judicial cooperation in counter-terrorism.

The transnational nature of many terrorist
operations makes it much harder both to prevent terrorist
attacks and apprehend terrorists. As our briefers have
emphasized today, the transnational dimension also
poses major challenges to the successful prosecution
of terrorists, once apprehended. In many cases, the
information, evidence and witnesses necessary to
conduct a prosecution successfully are located in
a number of different countries, which raises both
practical and legal challenges.

The special meeting on terrorist financing to be
convened by the Chairs of ISIL/Al-Qaida and CounterTerrorism Committees today and tomorrow will
provide a useful opportunity to discuss one of the key
challenges that we face, that is, how to deprive terrorist
groups from accessing, raising and moving the funds
they need to finance their activities. I encourage my
successor as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) to
continue that useful practice of joint meetings between
that Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
on the many issues of common interest.

As today’s resolution stresses, international
cooperation among law enforcement agencies and
judicial authorities is essential. Mechanisms such
as mutual legal assistance and extradition have long
existed, but their role in responding to terrorism
remains underutilized. Given the extensive use of the
16/25

In conclusion, I must stress the key role that the
Council plays in encouraging States to work together
at the bilateral, regional and international levels to
identify and address the drivers of violent extremism.
16-43144

12/12/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Today’s meeting helpfully builds on high-level Council
meetings on counter-terrorism involving Ministers
of the Interior and Finance last year, and reinforces
the message that all the relevant agencies within
Governments need to be involved in implementing
Council counter-terrorism resolutions.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In conveying a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Rafael Catalá,
Minister of Justice of Spain, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela thanks the President for convening this
important briefing to address an issue of major interest
to our country, namely, strengthening international
judicial cooperation in the fight against terrorism. We
would also like to thank today’s briefers.
Given the significance and scope of this debate
in the efforts to boost international cooperation in the
area of combating terrorism, our delegation joined the
consensus in voting in favour of resolution 2322 (2016),
which we are sure will have a positive impact on our
common goal of eliminating that scourge and ensuring
accountability in cases linked to terrorism.
We would like to take this opportunity to express
our heartfelt condolences to, and solidarity with, the
families of the victims and the Governments of Yemen,
Turkey, Egypt and Nigeria, which this very weekend
were struck by the barbarity of terrorism, which has
once again left behind death and destruction in its wake.
Terrorism is a transnational phenomenon that
threatens international peace and security. Moreover,
given our interconnected world today, the linkages
between the financing, training and safe haven provided
to those responsible for this despicable scourge also
make terrorism transnational in character. If we are to
eliminate terrorism, the international community must
be resolute in its commitment.
Experience shows us that terrorist groups feed on
despair, injustice, frustration, a lack of opportunities
and the denial of human rights and fundamental
freedoms to promote their criminal and political
agendas, which are based on intolerance, sectarianism
and violent extremism. Poverty, social and economic
inequalities, political, ethnic and religious intolerance,
as well as the imposition of unilateral coercive
measures, foreign occupation and interference and
violations of the sovereignty of peoples and nations, to
name but a few, are also part and parcel of the so-called
drivers of terrorism.

S/PV.7831

We must recognize that, following the criminal
terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, a military
doctrine of a global war on terrorism was put in place.
Unfortunately, from that moment on, a set of military
interventions with different motives ensued in Iraq,
Libya and Syria, which have hugely destabilized the
region, leading to the collapse of the institutions of the
subject countries, along with their political and social
frameworks. That allowed for the extraordinary spread
of extremist and radical ideologies, with military
support and financing from other countries to use the
children of war and violence in terrorist groups affiliated
with Al-Qaida, Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other
associated groups. Those groups have exponentially
expanded and are fuelled by war, sectarianism and the
proliferation of all sorts of weapons in the region. They
also affect other regions in Africa and Europe, which is
a tremendous humanitarian toll.
It is for that reason that, as we have said on previous
occasions, effectively combating terrorism requires a
joint and resolute effort by the international community,
as well as the full and non-selective implementation of
the relevant resolutions of both the General Assembly
and the Security Council that, among other things,
prohibit the transfer of weapons and the financing,
training and provision of shelter to terrorist groups,
including the integrated and balanced implementation
of the four pillars of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Therefore, our country is
strongly committed to the fight against terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, as we have shown at the
international and regional levels through our accession
to a large number of treaties and conventions, as well
as in the national sphere through the enactment and
review of a series of legal instruments.
In that connection, the Security Council must
at all times show clear and unanimous evidence
of its resolute commitment to prevent, combat and
eliminate this despicable scourge, while avoiding the
use of double standards in the fight against terrorism.
The ruthless violence unleashed in recent years both
by terrorist groups and non-State actors through the
recruitment of children, abductions, the destruction
of World Heritage Sites, as in the case of the ancient
city of Palmyra in Syria, slavery, sexual and genderbased violence as weapons of war, as well as the use of
chemical weapons, have seriously impacted the civilian
population, particularly ethnic and religious minorities
and the most vulnerable groups, whose human rights

16-4314417/25

S/PV.7831

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

have been systematically and deliberately violated, in
contravention of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
In addition to triggering an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis, such actions constitute a clear
pattern of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, as clearly defined in the Rome Statute, and
the perpetrators of such acts must be brought to justice.
Accountability in terrorism-related cases is particularly
important for our country, which is why we would like
to see international legal cooperation strengthened in
the gathering and safeguarding of evidence in order to
ensure due process.
Effectively combating terrorism leaves no place
for dichotomies, and therefore there cannot be good
terrorists and bad terrorists. Terrorism is terrorism,
and it must be unequivocally prevented, combated and
eliminated. Given the transnational nature of terrorism
and the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters,
international legal cooperation is key to ensuring that
investigations and prosecutions of those responsible for
terrorist acts lead to positive results. Of course, such
action must respect due process and avoid summary
executions or the use of technological devices that
violate human rights.
That is why we consider the recently just adopted
to be of great importance. In that regard, we take this
opportunity to recognize the efforts of the Spanish
delegation during the lengthy and complex rounds
of negotiation on the resolution, which resulted in
the consensus adoption of the resolution, despite at
least one permanent Council member’s inflexibility
throughout the process.
Venezuela is of the view that international legal
cooperation in the fight against terrorism can be
strengthened, inter alia, through mutual legal assistance
and the principle of extradition or prosecution, in
particular to ensure that justice is served and to enforce
the sentences of those persons legally convicted of
terrorist acts in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 9 (d) of resolution 2322 (2016).
Our country has also been a victim of terrorism, as
seen in the cases concerning the 1976 bombing of the
Cubana de Aviación flight perpetrated by the notorious
self-avowed terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, in which
73 innocent people died, mostly Cuban athletes. I also
wish to cite the terrorist attacks on the Colombian
and Spanish diplomatic headquarters in Caracas in
18/25

12/12/2016

February 2003. Despite the efforts made to prosecute
or extradite those responsible for committing those
criminal acts, they remain fugitives from justice under
the protection of the State of one of the members of the
Security Council.
We therefore call on the members of the international
community, in particular Council members, to ensure
coherence in their speeches and actions. We also call
for the effective implementation of the extradition
agreements regarding persons identified as perpetrators
of terrorist acts, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and of the General
Assembly. As in cases of atrocity crimes, there can be
no impunity in situations involving terrorism, much less
safe haven, protection or shelter for those responsible
for such reprehensible crimes. That means that, beyond
just technically cooperating on law enforcement, what
is needed is the political will to ensure that we bring to
justice and convict those responsible for terrorist acts.
Venezuela reaffirms again today that the fight
against terrorism must take place within the framework
of international cooperation, in accordance with
existing regional and international instruments,
including the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the rules of international law,
fully respecting human rights, fundamental freedoms
and the rule of law and with strict respect for the
sovereignty of States.
However, we believe that prevention will always
be the best way forward in tackling the scourge of
terrorism. In that regard, we consider it crucial to move
forward in strengthening international cooperation,
including the building of technical capacities to
develop and strengthen infrastructure, mechanisms and
processes, including the exchange of information and
good practices, to identify areas of vulnerability that
need improvement and review mutual legal assistance
mechanisms if we are to be truly effective in this fight.
In that regard, we recognize the important role of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, and
in particular of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.
Lastly, it is our view that the international
community, now more than ever, must continue to work
in a resolute, united and coordinated way to prevent
and combat terrorism. In that context, we believe
that the adoption of a future international convention
against terrorism would complement the existing
16-43144

12/12/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

set of international legal instruments by providing a
definition that would strengthen consensus in this area.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
commend Spain’s initiative in convening this debate
on enhancing international judicial cooperation in
countering terrorism. We welcome Justice Minister
Rafael Саtalá to New York to preside over the meeting.
We thank Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate; Ms. Dorcas Oduor, Deputy Director of
Public Prosecutions in Kenya; and Mr. Robert Strang,
Executive Secretary of the International Institute for
Justice and the Rule of Law, for their briefings.
We strongly condemn the terrorist attacks that took
place recently in Egypt and Turkey, and we express
our condolences to the victims. We support affected
countries in taking action to combat terrorism and
safeguard national peace and security.
Terrorism is a common challenge faced by all
humankind. We must resolve to fight terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, wherever and whenever
it occurs. In the fight against terrorism, we must
avail ourselves of uniform standards. We cannot link
terrorism to any specific religion or ethnicity. We must
abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and allow the Organization and the
Security Council the central coordination role in taking
concerted action.
We must use multiple means, including political,
economic and cultural, in pushing for political solutions
to regional conflicts and address both the symptoms
and the root causes in order to eliminate the breeding
grounds of terrorism. Terrorist organizations are
currently running rampant. With tighter organizations
they are carrying out more frequent cross-border
activities. They are using new technologies, such as
the Internet, to disseminate extreme narratives. Their
threat is on the rise. Countries should strengthen legal
cooperation in the fight against terrorism in order to
weave a legal and judicial dragnet across all regions of
the world to ensure that terrorists have no place to hide.
First, strengthening counter-terrorism legislation
provides a domestic legal foundation for countering
terrorism and implementing cooperation among
international partners in this field. The international
community, in accordance with the Council’s
resolutions, should support countries in developing
domestic counter-terrorism legislation and updating

S/PV.7831

it as required by current terrorist threats. At the
same time, we must bear in mind the various national
conditions and situations. The international community
should respect the legislative and judicial sovereignty
of all States.
Secondly,
strengthening
counter-terrorism
cooperation is an important channel for combating crossborder terrorist activities. Countries must implement
fully the relevant Security Council resolutions and
multilateral and bilateral legal treatises on the mutual
use of legal assistance and extradition in order to
generate synergy in bringing terrorists to justice.
There should be no double standards or politicization
in carrying out judicial cooperation. China calls on all
countries, on the basis of equality and mutual benefit,
to step up cooperation in counter-terrorism activities
and intensify the negotiation and conclusion ofmutual
legal assistance and extradition treaties.
Thirdly,
strengthening
counter-terrorism
cooperation is an important way of joining hands in
counter-terrorism efforts. On the basis of equality and
mutual benefit, countries should carry out cross-border
enforcement cooperation in order to cut off supply
lines to terrorist organizations in terms of recruitment,
financing and weapons. In accordance with Security
Council resolutions, countries should step up
cooperation in areas such as intelligence sharing, border
control and enforcement support so that they can join
hands in fighting foreign terrorist fighters, especially
repatriated foreign terrorist fighters, in order to deal
with the threats they pose.
Fourthly, we must focus our efforts on suppressing
the use of the Internet for terrorist activities. At present,
terrorists are using the Internet as well as social media
and other platforms to spread both audio and visual
messages to disseminate extreme narratives and
ideologies, recruit people and raise funds. Those are
serious threats. The international community should
bear in mind the special features of cyberspace and
act in accordance with Security Council resolutions
to take effective collective measures to respond to
such threats. Countries should step up legislation and
reinforcement work and undertake judicial cooperation
in order to strengthen Internet-based monitoring and
surveillance activities and hold perpetrators of terrorist
activities accountable.
China is an important member of the international
counter-terrorism community. At the end of last year,

16-4314419/25

S/PV.7831

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

China promulgated its own counter-terrorism law: a
commitment for China to upscale its efforts to counter
terrorism and push for international counter-terrorism
cooperation. Our law clearly provides that China will, in
accordance with the treaties to which we are party and
on the basis of equality and mutual benefit, undertake
counter-terrorism cooperation with the relevant
countries, regions and international organizations in
areas such as policy dialogue, intelligence sharing,
enforcement cooperation and the monitoring of fund
flows. In accordance with the provisions of its counterterrorism law, China will continue its efforts to work
with international partners in order to prevent and
combat terrorism so as to ensure national security
and protect its people’s lives and property and make a
positive contribution to the safeguarding of world and
regional peace and security.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
is pleased to see you, Mr. President, in your capacity
as Minister for Justice of the Kingdom of Spain,
presiding over this Security Council meeting devoted
to international judicial cooperation in the fight
against terrorism, which is an extremely pertinent and
relevant theme.
My country also takes this opportunity to resolutely
condemn the murderous wave of attacks over the
weekend in Cairo, Istanbul, Aden and Mogadishu. We
express our sympathies and solidarity to the affected
countries. Senegal solemnly and unequivocally
reiterates its condemnation of all terrorist acts in all
their forms and manifestations, regardless of where
they take place or who the perpetrators are.
I would also like to thank today’s briefers — Mr. JeanPaul Laborde, Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate; Ms. Dorcas Oduor,
Deputy Director of Public Prosecutions in Kenya;
and Mr. Robert Strang, Executive Secretary of the
International Institute for Justice — for the quality of
their presentations.
Since terrorism knows no borders, we must face it
in collective and determined solidarity by developing
optimal coordination at the international level. It is
in that spirit, but also in respect of the rule of law,
democracy and human rights, that we must combat this
scourge, particularly through effective and enhanced
international judicial cooperation. It is therefore
essential that States adopt adequate and comprehensive
legislation to prevent and combat acts of terrorism.
20/25

12/12/2016

In that regard, allow me to recall that, under
resolution 1373 (2001), adopted on 28 September 2001,
the Security Council established close links between
international terrorism and transnational organized
crime, drug trafficking, money-laundering, illicit arms
trafficking and the illegal transfer of nuclear, chemical
and biological materials. That is a clear reminder of the
need for States to develop cooperation mechanisms.
It is undoubtedly such willingness to cooperate that
is at the root of the existence of today’s strong legal
framework, which includes 19 instruments, without
mentioning the various initiatives and actions carried
out by the international community. Unfortunately,
such a legal arsenal has not yet made it possible to halt
the scourge of terrorism, which manifests itself in new
and increasingly complex and unpredictable forms that
are harder to prevent and counteract. That is due to the
gaps in international cooperation, particularly in the
judicial field, as terrorism thrives on the use of modern
communication and propaganda tools to broaden its
scope and targets.
Moreover, judicial cooperation remains the weakeast
link in the international fight against terrorism. That is
due, inter alia, to the absence of adequate means and
training of justice actors. Procedures that are often slow,
complicated and inadequate lack the speed required for
an effective fight against terrorism. In addition, we also
lack a specific international resolution on international
judicial cooperation — a gap that must be bridged
as soon as possible, as we did a short while ago this
morning by adoptinng resolution as 2322 (2016).
Judicial cooperation remains a prerequisite
if we are to overcome the difficulties inherent in
the investigation and prosecution of terrorist acts,
especially when certain elements of the case — such
as evidence, suspects and witnesses — are spread out
over several jurisdictions, or if we are dealing with
electronic evidence, which is particularly complex to
preserve. Mutual legal assistance and exchanges of
information on terrorist networks and their operations
should be intensified and facilitated.
Moreover, it is important, if not urgent, for States
to introduce deliberate violations of the ban on the
financing of terrorist organizations or individuals for
whatever purpose into their national legislation as a
serious criminal offence. In order to effectively address
the financing of terrorism, States must, within the
framework of international judicial cooperation, give
16-43144

12/12/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

themselves the means to freeze the assets of persons
and organizations engaged in acts of terrorism and to
counteract the maneuvers of those who collect funds
for such acts. Such funds come from transnational
organized crime, including trafficking in arms, people,
drugs and artefacts, illegal trade in natural resources
stones and precious metals, kidnapping, extortion
and theft.
Moreover, abandoning the traditional principle
of double jeopardy for terrorism in the execution of
arrest warrants and the incorporation of universal
jurisdiction into national law for a global and uniform
prosecution of criminals must also be fully integrated
into judicial cooperation.
On another aspect, we find that terrorist groups
benefit from international transport facilities, the
spread of combat zones, the porosity of borders,
and information and communication technologies.
They expand their sphere of influence and action by
recruiting combatants from various geographical
areas. The subject of resolution 2178 (2014), of which
Senegal was a co-sponsor, is also an aspect that must
be addressed within the framework of international
judicial cooperation.
Timely cooperation and action, in accordance with
international obligations, can assist States in preventing
foreign terrorist fighters from entering conflict zones
and in developing effective strategies to deal with
repatriated persons. That would therefore preserve,
through judicial and police authorities, essential
evidence for the judicial process.
The counter-terrorism fight should be a consolidated
struggle on a global scale. It is important that we all
show the same level of commitment, no matter where
the threat is detected. In that regard, Africa must receive
special attention in the implementation of resolution
2322 (2016), both because of its various vulnerabilities
and because of the numerous terrorist groups that
thrive there. As an illustration, the nature and number
of criminal activities perpetrated in recent years in the
strip of the Sahel have not ceased to evolve, with regular
changes in location and targets, which demonstrates the
level of flexibility and the capacity for adaptation by
terrorist groups that are operating in the region.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
vigorously reaffirm the need to constantly adapt the legal
arsenal and judicial systems to the evolving terrorist
threat. Judging terrorist offences is today reserved just

S/PV.7831

for the competence of national courts. International
jurisdictions cannot hear, for instance, certain terrorist
acts when they present constitutive elements of crimes
falling within their purview. That limited effectiveness
in treatment merits being underlined and taken into
account in our quest for a global response to the threat
of both global terrorism and violent extremism.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): My delegation thanks you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely and important
meeting. I also wish to thank all the briefers for their
respective presentations, which provided important
views and perspectives on the issue at hand.
Before moving on to the subject of our discussion
today, I take this opportunity to express the deepest
condolences and sympathies of the people and the
Government of Malaysia to the victims and loved ones
affected by the terrorist attacks in Mogadishu, Cairo
and Istanbul yesterday. We wish the injured speedy
recovery. We are also deeply troubled by a report coming
out of Maiduguri, Nigeria, where yesterday two young
girls allegedly carried out suicide bomb attacks only
mere minutes apart. Malaysia reaffirms its solidarity
with Somalia, Egypt, Turkey and Nigeria, and we stand
together with all countries that are victims of such vile
and cowardly attacks.
Those attacks underscore the importance of
collective and coordinated action at all levels in
combating the scourge of terrorism. In my delegation’s
view, our meeting today represents another significant
step towards that end by seeking to strengthen
international cooperation in the administration of
justice and accountability for perpetrators of terrorism
and terrorist attacks. In that connection, my delegation
also welcomes the currently ongoing joint meeting
between the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities,
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counterterrorism, focusing on lessons learned and challenges
in preventing terrorist groups from accessing, raising
and moving funds. We believe that resolution 2322
(2016), just adopted by the Council, which Malaysia
was pleased to co-sponsor, will make a meaningful and
significant contribution to strengthening international
cooperation in combating terrorism in the particularly
crucial aspect of financing.

16-4314421/25

S/PV.7831

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

12/12/2016

As alluded to in the briefings, and as delegations
have attested, the task of ensuring accountability for
perpetrators of terrorist attacks can be complex and
challenging, particularly for law enforcement and
judicial authorities. We share the view that issues of
sovereignty, borders and differences in legal systems
are some of the major obstacles to better cooperation
among States. Such an apposition takes advantage of
the differences between legal systems, the clash of
bureaucracies, and often exploits the cumbersome
nature of inter-State trials and arrangements for
legal and judicial cooperation. That notwithstanding,
Malaysia firmly believes that traditional arrangements
for cooperation, such as mutual legal assistance
and extradition arrangements, could continue to be
enhanced. Where appropriate, areas such as evidentiary
standards, communication and records could be
streamlined with a view to minimize the transactional
processes involved when such arrangements are
activated between countries.

Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
Those arrangements reflect the common desire and
commitment of ASEAN member States to improve
the effectiveness of law enforcement authorities in the
prevention, investigation and prosecution of offences
through cooperation and mutual legal assistance at the
regional level.

At the domestic level, Malaysia enacted its mutual
legal assistance legislation in 2002. Act No. 621, also
knows and the Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters
Act, designates the Attorney-General as the central
authority empowered to make and receive requests for
mutual assistance in criminal matters to be rendered
and sought between Malaysia and other countries
and for matters connected therewith. With regard to
extradition, the designated central authority is the
Minister of Home Affairs, who will act upon advice
from the Attorney-General’s chamber. For Malaysia,
a reciprocal commitment is a mandatory requirement
that needs to be fulfilled when a requesting State makes
an extradition request. As such, we are pleased that this
important principle is duly recognized in resolution
2322 (2016).

As my delegation prepares to leave the Council,
I wish to underscore Malaysia’s commitment to
continuing its cooperation and engagement with key
partners, including the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL, in their tireless
efforts to ensure accountability for perpetrators of
terrorist acts and supporters of terrorism.

The Government of Malaysia is currently in
the process of reviewing the current mutual legal
assistance legislation, including the model treaty, with
a view to keeping abreast of common international
practices in dealing with the threat posed by terrorism
and terrorist actors, including the foreign terrorist
fighters phenomenon. Furthermore, at the regional
level, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) has in place mutual legal assistance treaty
arrangements intended to facilitate the implementation
of ASEAN member States’ obligations under
mutual legal assistance regimes established under
international instruments, such as the United Nations
22/25

In conclusion, the multidimensional nature of the
threat posed by terrorism and terrorists, including
foreign terrorist fighters and related activities,
especially on financing, constitute an ongoing
challenge to international peace and security, which
requires intensified cooperation at all levels in order to
fully counter that scourge. We believe that the adoption
of resolution 2322 (2016) strengthens the underlying
foundations for such cooperation and paves the way for
all States, as well as other partners and stakeholders,
in taking effective measures and cooperation in
that regard.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): As the
Security Council is aware, France has been struck
several times by murderous attacks, including on 14 July,
our national holiday. We will not forget the exceptional
groundswell of solidarity from the entire world, the
popular gatherings, the monuments illuminated in the
colours of the French flag and the numerous leaders
who expressed their solidarity.
But France is certainly not the only country to
have been attacked. Again just this weekend, Egypt,
Turkey, Nigeria and Somalia were once again affected
by terrorist attacks. On behalf of France, I wish to again
convey to them our most sincere condolences.
Faced with this global threat that knows no borders,
our response can be nothing less than collective. It must
cover all fronts: military action, where necessary, and
certainly political and diplomatic efforts to resolve the
crises that fuel terrorism. Apart from those obvious
initiatives, however, a whole series of areas, which
are sometimes perceived as more technical, remain
16-43144

12/12/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

absolutely essential to an effective and sustainable
fight against terrorism. International legal and police
cooperation is one of them.
I would therefore first like to extend my heartfelt
thanks to Spain for this initiative. Today’s debate
provides us with an opportunity to send a strong and
united message from the Security Council on the
importance of international cooperation in fight against
terrorism — much as we have done previously on the
financing of terrorism or combating propaganda. Step
by step and under the auspices of the Council, the
United Nations is increasingly at the vanguard in the
fight against terrorism. It is increasingly able to act
and ensure the convergence of States’ efforts to counter
that scourge. I also thank the speakers for their very
informative briefings.
France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2322 (2016), aimed at strengthening judicial
and police cooperation in the fight against terrorism, the
first such resolution to deal specifically with the issue.
I should like to focus on three especially important
messages sent by the resolution.
First of all, it asserts that strengthening international
judicial and police cooperation is not only essential
to preventing foreign terrorist fighters from entering
conflict zones but also to preparing for and managing
their return to their respective territories, which is a
crucial task.
Secondly, it stresses the importance of rapid
coordination between the States involved in a
terrorist investigation. Unfortunately, France has
had considerable experience in that field. Through
the attacks of 13 November 2015, we saw that the
networks in question crossed Europe. Rapid and
effective coordination can therefore be a major asset to
successful investigations.
Thirdly, it highlights the need to use all available
legal tools for cooperation in mutual legal assistance
and extradition. The development of a directory
of focal points and the use of electronic means of
communication as support for requests for mutual
assistance are especially desirable.
France also welcomes the fact that the resolution
echoes the major initiatives of the European Union with
regard to judicial and police cooperation in the areas of
counter-terrorism.

S/PV.7831

France does not underestimate the current challenges
of international judicial and police cooperation in the
fight against terrorism. There are technical challenges,
particularly those posed by the use of new information
and communication technologies by terrorist groups,
especially encrypted messaging systems. Differences
in legal systems as well as the complexity of judicial
organizations can also sometimes hinder cooperation.
But those challenges are not insurmountable, and the
United Nations has an essential role to play in that area.
First, the Organization must raise awareness and
build capacity in States that need it, as a particularly
important measure in helping States to better
understand and respond to these challenges. In that
regard, the technical assistance provided by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, particularly in
the development of databases and the establishment of
regional cooperation networks, is particularly valuable.
Moreover, given its universality and its legitimacy,
the United Nations is in a position to encourage
international cooperation among States, particularly
with regard to the exchange of information and the
gathering of evidence. Country visits by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate are
excellent opportunities for conveying those messages.
Finally, the United Nations has the unique capacity
to bring together Member States, international
organizations, the private sector and civil society in one
place to discuss common problems, which is a real asset
for strengthening public-private cooperation. In that
regard, the Organization has a particular responsibility
and it is an irreplaceable asset because of its legitimacy
in the fight against terrorism, which affects us all.
I once again thank the Spanish presidency for this
very thorough and important debate. Rest assured that
France will continue to play its full part in efforts to
strengthen international judicial and police cooperation
in the fight against terrorism.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the initiative to discuss in
the Security Council issues of legal cooperation in
the context of combating terrorism. We think it is a
timely debate. The tragedies in Egypt, Turkey and
other countries remind us once again of the need for
an energetic, consistent and joint struggle against the
scourge of terrorism. We join others in expressing
our condolences to the States that have been victims
of terrorist acts. It is now, in the light of the active

16-4314423/25

S/PV.7831

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

struggle against terrorists in Syria and Iraq, and with
the endless funnelling of human and material resources
to terrorist groups, that the sheer scope of the problem
that law enforcement bodies in various States face in
the area of law and order and cooperation with one
another becomes clear.
We also must note that State obligations already
enshrined in Security Council counter-terrorism
resolutions are not, by any means, always being fulfilled.
Today’s resolution 2322 (2016) highlights the gaps
in existing criminal legal mechanisms for combating
terrorism and possible options for their elimination. An
important expert role in this work should be played by
the United Nations specialized agencies, such as the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
One of the priorities in countering terrorism
for States and for specialized international regional
organizations is the need to harmonize and modernize
existing bilateral and multilateral treaties on issues of
extradition, legal assistance in criminal matters and the
transfer of criminal proceedings from one jurisdiction to
another. A helpful step would be a review of the various
reservations to those treaties concerning procedures
for cooperation in combating crime and terrorism.
Moreover, the absence of specialized international
treaties should not be an obstacle to legal aid and
extradition. In such far-from-ideal cases, States can and
must cooperate based on the principle of reciprocity.
During talks on today’s resolution, our delegation
insisted that the issues of the importance of updating
the international legal basis and invoking the principle
of reciprocity should be made very concrete to the
maximum extent possible. Sadly, those and some of our
other proposals were not reflected.
The resolution we adopted confirmed that it
is unacceptable to refuse to extradite terrorists for
political motives or provide them safe haven. The
document calls for further streamlining of procedures
for rendering legal assistance and for the extradition
of terrorists. We believe that an imperative of such
cooperation should continue to be to bring radicals
to justice. Achieving that is impossible without
building a sound knowledge-sharing system, primarily
through the specialized services, security bodies
and law enforcement agencies. In that regard, we
draw the attention of delegations to the actively
24/25

12/12/2016

developing — with the support of United Nations
specialized agencies — Global Terrorism Database.
We would also like to separately touch on issues
of legal cooperation in the area of combating the
financing of terrorism. The resolution calls on States
to exchange information on the criminalization of
financing terrorism, with an emphasis on the Financial
Action Task Force’s (FATF) fifth recommendation.
At Russia’s initiative, its scope has been expanded to
a complete ban on any trade with terrorists, including
trade in natural resources, as set forth in resolutions
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015). We believe that the FATF
now take very tough steps against States that fail to
meet the requirements of those resolutions, going so far
as to black- or grey-list them.
In our further joint work, we need to take into
account the specific terrorist challenges that have been
particularly prominent in recent years. One priority
is to address the increase in radicalism, which is
fuelled by unprecedented terrorist propaganda aimed
primarily at youth. That propaganda has adapted to
modern technological advances such as the Internet and
social networks. Sadly, there is a demand for it, which
is reflected in the scale of the recruitment of foreign
terrorist fighters to the ranks of the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria (ISIS), Jabhat Al-Nusra and other associated
terrorist groups.
Objectively, it is high time to pool our resources
and the experience of the international community to
prevent such manifestations. Once again, the resolution
highlights the presence of that problem. At the same
time, additional practical steps are needed to combat
the spread of the ideology of terrorism. We look
forward to continuing substantive work on that theme
in the Council, as well as in the counter-terrorism
bodies accountable to it. We should not forget about
the aspects of criminal activities that use information
communications technology. In that context, what
is still relevant is the Russian initiative to develop,
under the auspices of the United Nations, a treaty on
combating cybercrime.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the importance
of strengthening coordination and interaction among
States in order to destroy ISIS, Jabhat Al-Nusra and
other associated groups. That must be done by putting
an end to double standards and must include the central
coordinating role of the United Nations, based firmly
on international law.
16-43144

12/12/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude to Spain for convening today’s important and
timely briefing. I would also like to thank the briefers
for their informative presentations.
Looking back on 2016, we recognize that terrorist
attacks occurred all over the world, including in the
Middle East, Africa, Europe, North America and Asia.
I join others in offering condolences for the loss of life
in all those attacks, especially to Egypt, as one of the
most recent victims.
Resolution 2322 (2016), which was just adopted,
calls upon Member States to enhance judicial
cooperation to address global terrorism and reaffirms
that terrorists must be held accountable. Japan welcomes
and supports the resolution.
A number of key paragraphs in the resolution
would help enhance our judicial and police-to-police
cooperation. However, I would especially like to
highlight paragraph 17. That paragraph encourages
States to consider extending access to the INTERPOL
I-24/7 network beyond national central bureaus to
other national law enforcement entities at strategic
locations, such as remote border crossings. Terrorists
use lost or stolen passports to travel freely around the
world. To detect such false passports, INTERPOL
gives national central bureaus access to its stolen and
lost travel document database and helps them detect

S/PV.7831

false identifications. The database includes records of
the more that 68 million lost or stolen passports. From
January to September, the database was searched more
than 1.2 billion times, resulting in more than 115,000
hits — approximately 426 hits every day.
However, more than 100 out of 190 Member States
do not use that powerful database to screen travellers
at airports and border checkpoints. That means that,
even if national central bureaus detect the use of lost or
stolen passports, delayed notice to front-line screeners
may allow terrorists to sneak across borders unnoticed.
Timely access to the database is critically important for
front-line officers to prevent such breaches. I therefore
urge Member States to extend access to the INTERPOL
I-24/7 network, including the stolen and lost travel
document database, to front-line law enforcement
entities, in accordance with today’s resolution, with the
goal of restricting cross-border terrorist movements.
In conclusion, I stress that simply adopting today’s
resolution is not enough. We now must implement it.
Japan is always ready to closely cooperate with other
countries to enhance their capabilities and capacities.
Only the international community’s collective efforts
on judicial and police-to-police cooperation will bring
terrorists to justice.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

16-4314425/25
