S/PV.8160

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8160

th meeting
Thursday, 18 January 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

President Nazarbayev/Mr. Abdrakhmanov . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Al Sabah
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
President Duda
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Field
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Confidence-building measures
Letter dated 2 January 2018 from the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/4)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-01480 (E)
*1801480*

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Confidence-building measures
Letter dated 2 January 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/4)
The President (spoke in Russian): I wish to warmly
welcome His Excellency President Andrzej Duda of the
Republic of Poland, the Secretary-General, Ministers
and other distinguished representatives present in the
Security Council Chamber. Their presence here today
underscores the importance of the subject matter under
discussion. I should also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate President Duda on the start of Poland’s
non-permanent membership of the Security Council.
I look forward to fruitful cooperation with his
delegation. I also congratulate the delegations of Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, the Netherlands
and Peru on their accession to the Council this year as
non-permanent members. I very much hope that we will
work together productively in this critical organ of the
United Nations.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/4, which contains the text of a letter
dated 2 January 2018 from the Permanent Representative
of Kazakhstan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I am pleased to join the
members of the Security Council for this timely debate,
and I thank the Republic of Kazakhstan for convening it.
Kazakhstan has a proud tradition of support for a world
free of weapons of mass destruction and for the global
non-proliferation regime. I thank President Nursultan
Nazarbayev for his personal leadership on this vital
issue. Kazakhstan’s contributions include rejecting
2/28

18/01/2018

the possession of nuclear weapons and founding the
International Day against Nuclear Tests.
The Council, too, is instrumental in preventing the
spread and use of weapons of mass destruction. As the
Council declared in 1992 at its first Head of State-level
summit on the issue (see S/PV.3046), the proliferation of
all weapons of mass destruction constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. Confidence-building
measures such as resolutions 255 (1968) and 984 (1995),
on negative security assurances, helped pave the way,
respectively, to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and to its indefinite extension.
However, despite the Council’s efforts, the threat posed
by weapons of mass destruction remains — and, indeed,
seems to be gathering force.
Global anxieties about nuclear weapons are at the
highest level since the Cold War. The situation on the
Korean peninsula is the most tense and dangerous
peace-and-security challenge in the world today. I remain
deeply concerned about the growing risk of military
confrontation and the unimaginable consequences
that would result. I welcome the firm decisions that
the Security Council has taken in response to nuclear
tests and ballistic missile launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, in defiance of Security
Council resolutions. They must be fully implemented.
The Council’s unity also creates an opportunity
for diplomatic engagement. As I said to the General
Assembly this week, I welcome the reopening of
inter-Korean communication channels, especially
military-to-military. That is critical to lower the risk
of miscalculation or misunderstanding and to reduce
tensions. I am also encouraged by the decision of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to participate
in the upcoming Winter Olympics in the Republic of
Korea. We need to build upon those small signs of hope
and expand diplomatic efforts to achieve the peaceful
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula in the context
of regional security.
Elsewhere, trust on nuclear and other issues
between the United States and the Russian Federation
continues to ebb. Vital strategic arms-reduction
measures established during and after the Cold War are
under threat. There seems to be no appetite to negotiate
new nuclear arms arsenal-reduction treaties after the
expiration of the Treaty on Measures for the Further
Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms,
in 2021. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, on the
18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Iranian nuclear programme, is also being questioned.
That multilateral agreement, which is in the interests of
the Iranian people and of the international community
at large, should be preserved.
In the Syrian conflict, the use of chemical weapons
seriously challenges the global taboo against those
weapons of mass destruction. If the use of chemical
weapons in Syria is once again determined to have
taken place, the international community will need to
find an appropriate way to identify those responsible
and hold them to account. Without such an avenue, we
would be allowing the use of chemical weapons to take
place with impunity. I hope the Council can return to
unity on that issue.
The threats posed by weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery are taking place in an
environment of increasing military budgets and the
over-accumulation of weapons — and they are coupled
with a serious growth in regional tensions. In such a
geopolitical context, confidence-building measures
that support arms control, non-proliferation and
the elimination of weapons of mass destruction are
extremely important. By increasing understanding of
others’ positions and allowing information-sharing on,
for example, military budgets, strategic outlooks and
troop movements, they can help to decrease tension and
avert conflict
In the case of the Biological Weapons Convention,
which does not have a formal verification mechanism, a
system of confidence-building measures has contributed
to enhancing transparency. Those measures are intended
to “prevent or reduce the occurrence of ambiguities,
doubts and suspicions” through the provision of annual
information on national biodefence programmes, highcontainment laboratories, legislative frameworks, and
vaccine production. Unfortunately, participation has
been less than satisfactory, with fewer than half of all
States parties regularly providing information. For the
measures to be truly effective, States must take full
advantage of their benefits.
Trust is essential, but confidence can be undermined
by bellicose rhetoric, confrontational approaches, the
absence of communication channels, and inflexible
positions. Engaging in disarmament, non-proliferation
and arms-control measures are in and of themselves
confidence-building. By removing the threat posed
by weapons, arms-control and non-proliferation
mechanisms provide the breathing space for dialogue,

S/PV. 8160

boost confidence in parties’ intentions and lay the
groundwork for building the trust necessary to
end conflicts.
Nowhere was that more apparent than in the groundbreaking arms-control agreements of the late 1980s and
early 1990s that contributed to the peaceful end to the
Cold War. It is therefore alarming to see historic accords
such as the Treaty on Intermediate Range Nuclear
Forces and the Open Skies Treaty under question.
Effective verification mechanisms have proved to
be some of the most successful and enduring types
of confidence-building measures. From the groundbreaking verification protocols of the Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty to the invaluable work undertaken
by the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
verification builds confidence. In that context, I
welcome the establishment of a group of governmental
experts on nuclear disarmament verification.
Effective verification requires support for the
entities tasked with monitoring and verification, in
order to ensure that they can fulfil their duties in an
impartial and professional manner. It also requires
understanding that non-proliferation challenges are
not static. The measures we use to overcome them
need to evolve in tandem with the implementation of
disarmament commitments.
I believe that the United Nations can play a
central role in assisting Member States in developing,
augmenting and supporting confidence-building
measures. The United Nations position as an honest
broker allows us to act as a venue in which all parties
can engage in dialogue, whether for the development of
new norms and values or to resolve existing disputes
and promote understanding.
Going forward, the Security Council in particular
can provide leadership by demonstrating unity and
continuing to highlight the importance of dialogue
and diplomacy as an essential means for building
confidence. A measure that all Member States can
undertake is the universal and complete implementation
of all disarmament and non-proliferation obligations.
I appreciate the fact that, due to resource and other
constraints, the implementation of disarmament, arms
control and non-proliferation commitments can prove
difficult for some Member States. I therefore call on all
States able to do so to provide the necessary capacitybuilding assistance.

18-014803/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The development of practical confidence-building
measures is an important means of achieving the
United Nations mandate to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. However, they are not an end
in themselves. Preventing, mitigating and resolving
conflict requires comprehensive political solutions
that include dialogue and negotiation and, in cases
involving weapons of mass destruction, verifiable
disarmament and non-proliferation. I believe that the
current international situation underscores the need
to reframe and modernize long-standing disarmament
and non-proliferation priorities. Deepening divisions
and persistent stagnation in this field are exacerbating
international tensions and creating new dangers.
As a contribution to reversing these trends, I intend
to explore opportunities to generate new direction and
impetus for the global disarmament agenda. I look
forward to engaging with stakeholders on these issues
in the months ahead.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his robust
support for the agenda of today’s meeting.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of Kazakhstan.
(spoke in Kazakh; English interpretation provided by
the delegation)
I am glad to welcome everyone to this thematic
briefing. We consider Kazakhstan’s election as a
non-permanent member and accession to the presidency
of the Security Council to be signs of the international
community’s trust in our country and our peaceful
policy, in particular members that have supported our
position. As the first State of Central Asia to undertake
this noble mission, we have become the voice of the
countries of our region in this important organ of the
global Organization.
A year has passed since Kazakhstan started its
term in the Security Council. We have strived to be
proactive, constructive and objective in addressing
the pressing issues on the Council’s agenda. While
chairing the committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; and the committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009), concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, we have made our contribution
4/28

18/01/2018

to their productive proceedings. I am grateful to all
Council members for their continued cooperation.
(spoke in Russian)
Today’s meeting is the flagship event of
Kazakhstan’s presidency of the Security Council,
and is specifically dedicated to one of the most
pressing topics on the contemporary global agenda.
Confidence-building measures aimed at achieving the
goals of peace and security play a key role in conflict
prevention and the resolution of pressing global issues.
At the forty-seventh session of the General Assembly,
I proposed the establishment of a regional structure for
security and confidence-building measures in Asia.
That mechanism was created as a result of thorough
diplomatic action. The Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia is now
successfully functioning, bringing together 26 States
of the region.
A quarter of a century later, I again address
the United Nations on behalf of Kazakhstan, now
a non-permanent member of the Security Council.
However, I cannot help but say that question of
increasing mutual confidence among some countries
and at the global level remains urgent and is becoming
ever more relevant. Confidence-building measures
should remain on the agenda as the most important
element in the maintenance of the global security
architecture and the strengthening of peace at the
global level. Why is that so?
First, confidence-building measures justified
themselves in the process of preventing the threat of
total destruction in the second half of the twentieth
century, when humankind stood at the brink of a
large-scale war. The Charter of the United Nations
states that our main goal is to save the succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. Over a quarter of
a century in the United Nations system, my country has
made a sweeping transition from being an owner of the
world’s fourth-largest nuclear arsenal to being a leader
of global non-proliferation, having closed the largest
nuclear test site, Semipalatinsk. The renunciation of
nuclear weapons and the status of a nuclear Power
was our deliberate and sincere choice — a voluntary
initiative supported by all the people of Kazakhstan and
duly appreciated by the international community. Today
our country is a party to all fundamental international
treaties in the area of nuclear security and has legally
enshrined its nuclear-free status.
18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Secondly, the atmosphere of mutual trust may
facilitate the creation of a new model of international
cooperation. A shining example and a practical
embodiment of such cooperation was the opening last
year of the International Atomic Energy Agency LowEnriched Uranium Bank. With this, Kazakhstan has
made yet another contribution to strengthening the
non-proliferation regime and the safe use of uranium
for peace purposes.
Thirdly, Kazakhstan’s nuclear-free status may
serve as an example and practical guidance to other
countries. I say this on the basis of our own experience.
We have built and strengthened our independent country
and secured its high international standing specifically
by renouncing nuclear weapons and obtaining
non-aggression safeguards from nuclear Powers. We
call on all other States to follow our example. We have
called on Iran to do so, and now call on North Korea
to follow suit. The way to counter the threat of nuclear
weapons throughout the world is through trust.
Fourthly, the contemporary potential of progress in
science and technology and the realities of globalization
make the task of ensuring the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) a matter of
humankind’s survival. The increase in the number of
countries possessing WMDs poses the risk of nuclear,
chemical, biological and radiological weapons falling
into the hands of destructive forces. The current legal
framework for nuclear security failed to prevent the
expansion of the nuclear Powers club in the late twentieth
century. I believe that the much-needed strengthening
of the non-proliferation regime, based on the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), will
require deep shifts in thinking and new multilateral
political solutions. I suggest the following measures to
build confidence in the field of non-proliferation.
First. I believe that we should make withdrawal from
the NPT more difficult. The example of North Korea
may prompt similar action on the part of other countries
with ambitions to possess nuclear weapons. Without
casting doubt on the NPT, I propose that we consider
the possibility of crafting a special Security Council
draft resolution that clearly spells out the consequences
for those countries that violate the Treaty, including
sanctions measures and other coercive measures. We
have seen the necessity of that. The NPT did not stop
certain countries, such as India and Pakistan, in their
aspiration to possess nuclear weapons.

S/PV. 8160

Secondly, we must develop a truly effective
mechanism for implementing tough measures to prevent
the acquisition and proliferation of WMDs. Such
multilateral agreements should be adopted through
separate Security Council resolutions. As a primary
measure to eliminate incentives to possess WMDs, I
believe that it its necessary to develop a legally binding
system of safeguards by nuclear Powers for those States
that would voluntarily abandon possessing nuclear
weapons, as well as non-nuclear-weapon States. That is
fair and can be accomplished without great effort.
Thirdly, the success or failure of the process
of modernizing the global security system directly
depends on the international community’s ability to
overcome outdated militaristic mindsets. We should
relegate to the past dividing countries into military
blocs or alliances, a concept that has become both
provocative and meaningless in the twenty-first
century. In that specific regard, we require mutual
trust among States, which is waning with every passing
year. I have set out my vision for global anti-military
measures in my “Manifesto: the world, the twentyfirst century”, which proposes initiatives facilitating
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free world by
the United Nations centenary. If that goal enjoys the
support of the international community, I believe that it
will be attainable.
Fourthly, we must revive political trust and
systematic dialogue. A good illustration of that can
be seen in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) — the agreement concerning Iran’s nuclear
programme — which has demonstrated the success
attainable through multilateral diplomacy in the area
of non-proliferation. That has become a practical
example of resolving the most complicated issues
through negotiations. That agreement was made
possible thanks to an atmosphere of building trust to
which Kazakhstan contributed by example, and showed
what we have achieved, while earning the trust of the
international community. I hope for the continued and
successful implementation of the JCPOA despite recent
complications vis-à-vis some parties to the agreement’s
failure to fulfil their obligations.
As the Council is aware, two days ago I met with
the President of the United States, Mr. Trump. We
discussed that issue, and I have an impression that,
in principle, we can resolve it. In our view, a similar
constructive approach could be used to settle the nuclear
issue involving North Korea. As we all know, current

18-014805/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

developments on the Korean peninsula are illustrative
of profound contradictions. The world is deeply
concerned. That problem can be resolved by restoring
trust among the United States, the Russian Federation
and the People’s Republic of China, which we also
recently discussed at the White House. In that regard
our positions converged. Without the participation
of the United States, Russia and China, it would be
difficult for us to resolve that issue. Accordingly, we
call on stakeholders to reach a solution to the North
Korean issue as expeditiously and constructively as
possible. We advocate that the five nuclear-weapon
States grant security assurances to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea as a key prerequisite for
establishing an atmosphere of trust for Pyongyang
to return to the negotiating table. Kazakhstan stands
ready to engage in mediation and provide a platform for
negotiations should the need arise among stakeholders.
Confidence-building measures are more relevant
than ever for the Middle East, where tragic events are
currently unfolding. The conflict in Syria is having
negative repercussions extending far beyond the region.
In that regard, it is important to note that mutual trust
became the basis for the Astana talks, which, in so
much as is possible, is contributing to the Syrian peace
settlement process, while reinforcing the Geneva
talks. Seven such meetings were held in Astana, and,
as participants stated, those were all successful and
helped to address issues.
Fifthly, in our view, one of the most effective
measures in combating the proliferation of WMDs
involves the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones. That also constitutes the materialization of a form
of collective trust. That was accomplished in Central
Asia, and I hope that the nuclear Powers will recognize
that step and ensure our protection. It is important to
pursue efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the Middle East. I call on stakeholders to resume their
work, and hope that persistent disagreements remaining
among certain countries will soon be overcome
Sixthly, there is now the risk of a new arms race
involving scientific achievements. In that regard,
the international community should strengthen
control over the creation and proliferation of new
military and information technologies. I believe that
confidence-building measures are also necessary for
forging common approaches aimed at preventing the
militarization of outer space.
6/28

18/01/2018

I believe that all the issues that I have just
mentioned merit a stand-alone meeting of the United
Nations to discuss everything that they entail, achieve
a convergence of views among States and restore trust
among them.
Today’s realities are such that many conflicts can
be prevented and effectively settled provided that there
be mutual understanding and trust among the world’s
nuclear Powers. They bear the greatest responsibility
before humankind to prevent a nuclear catastrophe. The
largest nuclear Powers should constitute the vanguard
in the struggle for a nuclear-weapon-free world and
lead by an example in WMD reduction. That, however,
does not mean that other countries should stand aside as
if little depended upon them. On the other hand, if the
great nuclear Powers state that they intend to maintain
and strengthen their nuclear capacities and prevent
others from acquiring the same, I believe that that will
backfire. We must therefore work together.
The international community is strengthened by its
diversity and pluralism, and can survive and flourish
when there is balance and harmony among the nations
and peoples living on our planet. For that very reason,
we must strive together to achieve a safer world and
a more equitable world order based upon the rule of
international law. Undoubtedly, in that regard a special
role and historic mission falls to the Security Council.
I am convinced that in the twenty-first century
humankind will be able to forge a dignified way
towards a world free from the threat posed by WMDs.
I believe that the trust, will power and intelligence of
the international community amplified by the energy of
collective action will prevent our planet from plunging
into the abyss of a global catastrophe.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now call on the President of Poland.
President Duda: Let me start by thanking the
Kazakh presidency for organizing this high-level
debate on such an important and relevant topic. It
shows Kazakhstan’s long-lasting commitment to
non-proliferation efforts. Kazakhstan’s credibility
in that matter is reinforced by the fact that it is one
of a very few countries that has abandoned the
nuclear path. I remember reading remarks by President
Nazarbayev in which he stressed “that was the best
decision I have ever made for my young country”. And
Kazakhstan’s continued engagement in that regard
18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

has been demonstrated many times ever since. Let
me mention just the recent establishment of the Low
Enriched Uranium Bank, which not only constitutes a
major step towards promoting nuclear safety but also
promotes transparency and builds confidence among
peace-loving nations.
I also want to thank President Nazarbayev
personally for inviting me to this debate. This is my
first time, and most definitely not my last, visit to the
Security Council as President of the Republic of Poland.
I am here because the issue under consideration is very
much connected to Poland’s priorities in the Council,
that is, supporting the existing and building new
international law instruments to mitigate the unlawful
and aggressive behaviour of some members of the
international community. Let me stress that not only
aggression, but also any attempt to build aggressive
capabilities, should always be treated as a violation of
international norms because, in the end, it leads to the
erosion of the noble idea of the peaceful coexistence
among States.
Peaceful cooperation among all States is the very
essence of solidarity and lawfulness at the international
level. That is why it is so important to further develop
legal instruments in international relations, as well as
the ability to enforce them. It also applies to the issue of
nuclear non-proliferation. As members of the Security
Council, we are committed to treating it with all the
seriousness it deserves.
Despite having a developed and established legal and
treaty architecture, non-proliferation and disarmament
remain an unfinished project. At its core, the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) can
be seen as having a mixed record. I see three problems
in that regard. First, there is no requirement for a
country to join the Treaty, and those that do join have
a potentially easy way out — they can withdraw from
it with no more than three months’ notice. Secondly,
there is no framework under the Treaty for a sanctions
regime to guard against Treaty violations. And, thirdly,
although the Treaty allows for its signatories to pursue a
nuclear strategy for peaceful purposes, the inspections
procedure is based on voluntary cooperation and
mutual trust. But, as we have seen throughout history,
the world is not run by the gentlemen’s agreement rule.
In fact, world affairs are too often run by people who
are anything but gentlemen.

S/PV. 8160

Recent developments in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, broken assurances provided for
Ukraine by the Budapest Memorandum, controversies
over the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with Iran,
as well as threats posed by non-State actors, have all
shown that the non-proliferation agenda is even more
topical than ever today. And it does not apply only to
military nuclear capabilities; chemical and biological
weapons and ballistic missile proliferation2 are just
as important.
With regard to chemical weapons, Poland finds
it unacceptable that we are still confronted with the
continued use of that type of arms. It is the responsibility
of the Security Council to continue conveying a strong
message to the world on that matter. Chemical weapons
were used on a number of occasions since the 1960s by
Egypt in Yemen, in the 1980s by Iraq against Iran and
recently in Syria, but with no serious consequences for
the side that used them — which is the problem.
Currently, however, the most worrisome situation
seems to be the one on the Korean peninsula, where
provocative actions taken by the North Korean regime
not only destabilize the whole region but also undermine
the entire non-proliferation effort. The stockpiling of
chemical weapons, the development of military nuclear
capabilities and ballistic missile programmes and
provocative tests of those weapons are clear violations
of international law in general, and of the respective
Security Council resolutions in particular. Such actions
show that the policy of aggression and confrontation
overshadows the policy of open dialogue and trust.
What is worse, they also show — creating a dangerous
precedent — that running a policy based on the law of
force, and not the force of law, sadly can be effective
and can go unpunished.
The way in which we solve the crisis will have
a significant impact on the future of the entire
global non-proliferation architecture. I believe that
the intensified efforts undertaken together by the
international community will bring about a political
solution and will result in the stabilization of the
situation in the region. That is especially crucial
today, as the 2018 Winter Olympics will soon begin
in South Korea. That event should be celebrated in
safe surroundings and allow for spectacular sport
competition in an atmosphere of peace and friendship
among all nations.

18-014807/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Poland has been a longstanding and active supporter
of strengthening non-proliferation and disarmament
norms and principles. We currently chair two important
initiatives, namely, the second Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and The Hague
Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation,
the latter which we inherited from Kazakhstan in 2017.
Despite the concerns raised over the NPT, we believe
it is the only real instrument that brings us closer to a
world without nuclear weapons. The implementation of
the Treaty is subject to review every five years. As its
current guardian, Poland has the intention of focusing
on maintaining its credibility, as well as creating the
environment for a mutually respectful, transparent and
all-inclusive dialogue. Bearing in mind that the 2020
Review Conference will mark the fiftieth anniversary
of the entry into force of the NPT, we would very
much appreciate the support of the Security Council
and of the United Nations in efforts to make it our
common success.
Equally significant to global and regional security
and stability is the proliferation of ballistic missiles,
including those capable of delivering weapons of mass
destruction. Unfortunately, the record of efforts aimed
at curbing it is short. That is why the importance of
control mechanisms has become even greater.

18/01/2018

Mr. Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the Government and the people of the State
of Kuwait, I should like to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, and the friendly Republic of Kazakhstan
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. The choice of the topic for our
debate today at the first high-level briefing of 2018
under the agenda item “Non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction: confidence-building measures” is
extremely important to the international community
and to members of the Security Council, which seek to
safeguard the world from weapons of mass destruction
in the interest of maintaining stability, peace and
security in the region and the world. We affirm the
full support of the State of Kuwait in carrying out your
responsibilities and in fulfilling your mandate.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his valuable briefing, which
illustrates the need to promote confidence-building
measures in the context of preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, in order to put an
end to the threat that they represent. Disarmament
and non-proliferation efforts are key to maintaining
international peace and security.

In closing, I would like to again express my
gratitude to the Kazakh presidency for selecting such
an important issue as the focus of today’s debate.
Poland will continue its commitment to making our
world safe from nuclear threats. As we are all aware,
the devastating aftermath of the use of weapons of
mass destruction would transgress all borders. That is
why we should work closely within the United Nations
community to make sure that it never happens.

The State of Kuwait attaches particular importance
to all issues relating to disarmament, non-proliferation
and the peaceful use of nuclear energy, which constitute
the three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). I would like to reiterate the
steadfast position of the State of Kuwait with regard to
the maintenance of international peace and security and
to disarmament issues, in particular its commitment
to the NPT and the outcomes of the 1995, 2000 and
2010 Review Conferences of the Parties to the NPT,
in line with its absolute commitment to respecting
international treaties and our belief in their usefulness.
We also confirm that the best way to eliminate the
danger and threat of nuclear weapons and to ensure
their non-proliferation is the complete and holistic
elimination of nuclear weapons as soon as possible. We
call on nuclear-weapon States to eliminate such weapons,
to meet their commitments under article VI of the NPT
and to lead the efforts for the universal commitment
to the Treaty, which remains the very cornerstone of
the international security, and the basis of the current
disarmament and non-proliferation structure.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait.

In considering international initiatives and the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, we must
remember the challenges facing the Middle East region

For 15 years since its establishment, The Hague Code
of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation has
been promoting transparency and confidence-building
measures. As its Chair, Poland wishes to follow up by
supporting the full implementation of the Code and
strengthening its relationship with the United Nations,
as reflected in General Assembly resolution 59/91, of
3 December 2004.

8/28

18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

with regard to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone. Unfortunately, the Middle East remains a
flagrant example of the threat to the non-proliferation
regime and to the selectivity of the Security Council
in dealing with such threats. It is therefore no surprise
that the region, and the Arab countries in particular,
are experiencing an unprecedented level of frustration
because of the ongoing failure to implement the agreed
commitment to establishing a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.
That is highlighted in the resolution on the Middle
East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the NPT and in the action
plan adopted by the 2010 Review Conference of the
Parties to the NPT. Those documents remain relevant
until the objectives are achieved. It is the responsibility
of all parties to the Treaty to implement the resolution,
in particular the nuclear-weapon States and the three
States that deposited the Treaty and submitted the
resolution on the Middle East in the context of the
indefinite extension of the Treaty.
Our debate today reaffirms the seriousness with
which the Security Council deals with the threat of
weapons of mass destruction, which is not limited to
the declaration of preventive measures under resolution
1540 (2004) but also addresses future threats if such
measures fail. Any use or threat of use of those deadly
weapons will have consequences and will cause
untold destruction. The Security Council therefore
unanimously adopted resolution 2325 (2016), which
reaffirms that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons constitutes a threat to international
peace and security, and sets out a road map for the
future work of States and the Committee pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) until 2021. We hope that that
committee of the Security Council will become a
standing committee, and not a temporary one, given
its importance in preventing terrorists from acquiring
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
Moreover, we once again condemn the use of
chemical weapons in Syria, as affirmed by international
reports. We are following with concern the ongoing
allegations of the use of those internationally prohibited
weapons by the warring parties. The inability of the
Security Council to uphold the international mechanism
to determine which party has used such weapons means
that the perpetrators of such crimes will enjoy impunity.
We must find alternative solutions and a new mechanism
that enjoys the consensus of all Security Council

S/PV. 8160

members to ensure that such criminals are brought to
justice and held responsible. We also support the work
done by the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, through its factfinding mission, to investigate the allegations of the use
of chemical weapons in Syria.
Finally, I reiterate the steadfast, principled position
of the State of Kuwait with regard to non-proliferation
issues and its ongoing commitment to cooperating in
order to achieve our people’s aspiration to a world free
of weapons of mass destruction. We look forward to
the day when, together, we will once and for all get rid
of these weapons. Nuclear accidents do not recognize
national borders. They affect all parts of the world.
Our world no longer needs any proof of that. We call
on all States that bear special responsibility to maintain
international peace and security and all nations that
constantly state their commitment to respecting the
Charter of the United Nations to take clear and honest
measures in order to achieve the goal of establishing
a world free of nuclear weapons and weapons of
mass destruction.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The Russian Federation welcomes the initiative of the
President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, Nursultan
Nazarbayev, to hold a special meeting of the Security
Council on “Non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction: confidence-building measures”. This is
especially relevant given that on 1 July this year we will
mark the fiftieth anniversary of the opening for signature
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), which undergirds the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime. We believe firmly
that the risks and threats we are encountering in this
area today should be dealt with specifically on the
basis of the Treaty, with a balanced approach to its
three pillars — non-proliferation, disarmament and the
peaceful use of nuclear power.
Unfortunately, we are approaching that halfcentury milestone weighed down by contradictions
that could complicate the current NPT review cycle,
which will conclude with the Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons in 2020. Its main goals include confirmation
of our commitment to the goals of the Treaty and our
obligations under it, as well as its strengthening on the

18-014809/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

basis of the Action Plan adopted at the 2010 Review
Conference. To that end, all countries must renounce
the unwillingness to listen to one another that was so
evident at the 2015 Review Conference — in particular
in the misguided and dangerous trend prevailing at the
time involving attempts to compel nuclear Powers to
abandon their nuclear arsenals without accounting for
their security interests or strategic realities.
That approach resulted in forced efforts to draft
the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons that
is now open for signature. Russia does not intend to
join the Treaty. We believe that the total eradication
of nuclear weapons is possible only in a context of
comprehensive, full disarmament, with equitable,
equal and indivisible security for all, including those
possessing nuclear weapons, as is provided for in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
The provisions of the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons, as presented for signature, are
far from being based on those principles. It ignores
the importance of taking into account every factor
affecting our strategic stability today. It has given
rise to profound disagreement among members of the
international community and could have a destabilizing
effect on the non-proliferation regime. I would like to
stress that we embrace the goal of building a nuclearweapon-free world. However, we cannot achieve that
with the unilateral measures on which the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons is based.
The prospects for the current review cycle also
cast doubt on the lack of clarity regarding the creation
of a zone in the Middle East free of nuclear and other
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. We believe that the conference convened to
create such a zone remains relevant. For our part, we
will continue to work to make progress in this process.
We see a promise of success through consideration of
the issue within the broader context of regional security.
Russia’s specific views in that regard are well known to
all stakeholders and remain in force.
The status of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty is another important issue. As a principal
supporter of the Treaty, we call on all the countries on
which its entry into force depends to sign and ratify it,
as some of them have frequently promised to do. At the
same time, it is still important to ensure the continuation
of a moratorium on any nuclear explosions.
10/28

18/01/2018

One of the crucial concrete steps aimed at
maintaining the nuclear non-proliferation regime in
its current phase is that of combining our efforts to
sustainably implement the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) so as to resolve the issue of the Iranian
nuclear programme. The Security Council supported the
JCPOA through its unanimous adoption of resolution
2231 (2015) and therefore bears some responsibility for
its implementation. Iran has complied strictly with its
obligations, as the International Atomic Energy Agency
has regularly confirmed. An overwhelming majority of
the international community recognizes that the JCPOA
is making a tangible contribution to strengthening the
non-proliferation regime and maintaining international
peace and security. We cannot repudiate this genuine
achievement of multilateral diplomacy — the result of
the efforts not only of the participants in the agreement
itself but also of other stakeholders that supported the
initiative, including Kazakhstan — for the benefit of
certain countries’ political agendas.
It is obvious that if the JCPOA were to fail, and
especially if one of the members of the P5+1 was
responsible, it would send an alarming message about
our entire international security architecture, including
the prospects for resolving the nuclear problem on
the Korean peninsula. We would like to reaffirm
the relevance of Russia and China’s proposals for a
road map aimed at reaching an exclusively peaceful
settlement of this issue.
We are gravely concerned about the growing threat
of chemical terrorism in the Middle East, in particular
in Iraq and Syria. Militants are not only using toxic
chemicals but also have their own technological and
manufacturing capacities for synthesizing full-fledged
military toxic substances and have established farreaching channels for access to their precursors. We
should never ignore the very real threat of chemical
terrorism spreading beyond the Middle East,
particularly when we consider the significant numbers
of foreigners who are fighting alongside the extremists.
Terrorists who have come to Syria and Iraq from
abroad have already had the opportunity to acquire
practical experience and skills in manufacturing and
using chemical weapons. For many years — the past
three at least — we have repeatedly proposed adopting
a Security Council resolution, or at least a presidential
statement, condemning specific instances of chemical
terrorism in Syria and Iraq. Unfortunately, all of
our proposals have consistently met with obstinate
18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

resistance from some of our Western colleagues, who
prefer to turn a blind eye to the facts of the use, and
even manufacture, of chemical weapons by terrorists,
and to level unsubstantiated accusations at Damascus.
We consider it unacceptable to exploit efforts to combat
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in
order to achieve narrow geopolitical aims, as occurred
15 years ago with the intervention in Iraq on an utterly
trumped-up pretext.
We have recently witnessed persistent attempts
to manipulate the activity of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism,
which has concluded its work. This is deplorable, and
we reiterate our proposal for creating a new mechanism
for investigating incidents involving the use of
chemical weapons in Syria on the basis of principles
that fully reflect the standards of the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
We also call on all States to comply with their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004), adopted
in 2004, which directs all countries to take effective
measures to prevent weapons of mass destruction and
all other related materials from falling into the hands
of non-State actors, including terrorists, of course. The
resolution’s relevance was reaffirmed by the Security
Council following the 2016 comprehensive review of
its implementation. The Council is required to respond
severely to any breach of the resolution, whether in
Syria, Iraq or elsewhere, especially in cases where
non-State actors receive assistance in getting access to
weapons of mass destruction. Russia supports efforts
to establish and strengthen the national, regional and
subregional capacities needed for dealing with these
challenges. Under the auspices of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
United Nations Office of Disarmament Affairs, we
recently held a special seminar in Kaliningrad on the
practical aspects of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Last year, during our chairmanship of the
OSCE Forum for Security Cooperation, we organized
a special meeting on the issue. We also welcomed the
consensus three months ago approving a decision by the
OPCW Executive Council aimed at preventing threats
of non-State actors using chemical weapons, which in
our view is a step in the right direction.
In the interests of improving the effectiveness of
multilateral cooperation in preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and the threat of such

S/PV. 8160

weapons falling into the hands of terrorist groups and
other non-State actors, Russia has proposed formulating
a new, legally binding instrument, in the form of an
international convention to combat acts of chemical and
biological terrorism. We presented the draft convention
at the Conference on Disarmament, in Geneva, and we
call for negotiations for its approval to begin as soon
as possible.
The current state of affairs in non-proliferation and
disarmament urgently requires us to work together to
find ways of surmounting these growing contradictions,
while taking a careful approach to the cooperative
measures that have been proven to be effective and
strengthening their international legal foundations by
taking the interests of all States into account. We hope
that today’s Security Council meeting and the initiative
put forward by the President of Kazakhstan will help us
to resolve these issues.
The President (spoke in Russian): In connection
with the planned bilaterals, I am now obliged to
leave this meeting. I will be replaced by Mr. Kairat
Abdrakhmanov, Minister for Foreign of Kazakhstan.
I genuinely thank the Secretary-General and all
those who spoke today, including senior Government
officials, Foreign Ministers of neighbouring countries,
President Duda and Minister Lavrov. I thank them all
for their interest and for the valuable proposals that
have been put forward. I wish the Security Council the
very best in its quest for peace on Earth.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
his leadership in working to find enduring solutions to
increasingly complex problems.
It is fitting that Kazakhstan has called this important
meeting. One of Kazakhstan earliest decisions as an
independent nation remains one of the most important
moments in the history of non-proliferation. After the
fall of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan voluntarily removed
Soviet nuclear weapons from its territory and joined the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
By rejecting nuclear weapons, President Nazarbayev
set an example for the rest of the world. That action
built confidence. It showed Kazakhstan’s neighbours
and the world that it was not a threat. It was a vote of
confidence in the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty,
which remains the cornerstone of the global nuclear
non-proliferation effort. Critically, Kazakhstan’s action

18-0148011/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

demonstrated that it valued peace and stability in its
relations with other countries. It was an unmistakable
concrete expression of Kazakhstan’s willingness and
readiness to be a responsible member of the community
of nations.
The United States continues to lead in efforts to
stop the spread of nuclear weapons. We play a leading
role in ensuring the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) — a landmark agreement that the Security
Council unanimously adopted in 2004. Together with
our partners, we work to assist States and international
organizations in their efforts to prevent non-State
actors from developing and acquiring nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their delivery systems. But
the reality is that today’s security environment is more
challenging than in the past. An essential element of
further nuclear disarmament is successfully addressing
fundamental security challenges.
The regimes that most threaten the world today
with weapons of mass destruction are also the source of
different kinds of security challenges. They deny human
rights and fundamental freedoms to their people. They
promote regional instability. They aid terrorists and
militant groups. They promote conflict that eventually
spills over their borders. There is no greater threat to
the international nuclear non-proliferation regime than
that posed by North Korea. North Korea continues its
reckless pursuit of nuclear weapons, in defiance of
repeated resolutions by the Council. It continues to
pursue nuclear weapons while its people starve, and
to threaten other nations, while intimidating its own
citizens. The example that Kazakhstan set and the
efforts of so many others to curb the spread of nuclear
weapons will begin to unravel if the Council cannot
rise to the challenge. We call on all Member States to
fulfil their obligations and fully implement all Council
resolutions on North Korea. We will continue to work
with our partners in the Security Council in pursuit of a
peaceful, diplomatic solution to the crisis. However, let
me say it one more time: the United States remains fully
committed to defending itself and its allies if necessary.
The actions of the Iranian regime are another
example. The regime in Tehran is the leading cause of
instability in an unstable part of the world. It supports
terrorists, proxy militants and murderers like Bashar
Al-Assad. It provides ballistic missiles in violation of
United Nations arms embargoes. Its proxies launch
them at civilian targets, as we saw when Houthi militias
in Yemen fired an Iranian-supplied missile at an airport
12/28

18/01/2018

in Riyadh. When the Iranian people protest their
money being diverted to terrorists, the regime arrests
and kills them. It silences their voices and lies about
their motivations. When the Council adopted resolution
2231(2015), it endorsed the nuclear agreement and
retained its series of prohibitions on Iran’s behaviour.
The Iranian regime has repeatedly violated those
prohibitions and, in doing so, it has repeatedly shown
itself to be unworthy of our trust and our confidence.
When the Council considers the question of how we
can promote trust that States will not engage in the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the place
we must start and the very least we can do is to insist
that States comply with their existing international
obligations. In the case of Iran, while the United
States continues to uphold its commitments under the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, the international
community must also demand that Iran fulfil its
obligations under resolution 2231 (2015). We impose
those obligations as the Security Council. Together we
must respond to Iran’s dangerous violations, not because
we want the nuclear agreement to fail but because we
want the cause of non-proliferation to succeed.
We must not forget that weapons of mass destruction
are not just an abstract threat, but weapons that evil
regimes will put to use. The Syrian regime has repeatedly
used chemical weapons against its own people. They
are the actions of a Government so corrupt that it stands
with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) as the
only entities to use chemical weapons as tools of warfare
in the twenty-first century. The Security Council must
respond to the outrageous violation of international
law and basic human decency. The Council created the
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) for the express
purpose of exposing the perpetrators of those crimes.
The JIM determined that the Al-Assad regime and
ISIS used chemical weapons in Syria. Both must be
held accountable for their actions. However, one nation
stands in the way of the Security Council fulfilling its
duty. That nation is Russia.
It was Russia that vetoed three Council draft
resolutions that would have renewed the Joint
Investigative Mechanism. It is Russia that has gone to
great lengths at the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in The Hague to prevent
the Al-Assad regime from being held accountable for
its actions. If the Russian Government is serious about
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
it will convince its client, Mr. Al-Assad, that he must
18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

eliminate his chemical weapons and cooperate fully
with OPCW and the United Nations.
The Security Council tackles some of the greatest
challenges to international peace and security daily.
None is greater than the proliferation of nuclear,
biological and chemical weapons. The United States
works hard to ensure the non-proliferation of such
deadly weapons. We encourage the creation of a
security environment that benefits non-proliferation.
We believe all nations have a moral responsibility to
join in the creation of that environment.
Mr. Field (United Kingdom): On behalf of the
Government of the United Kingdom, may I warmly
congratulate Kazakhstan on becoming the first Central
Asian nation to steer and preside over the Security
Council. As has been pointed out, its historic commitment
to nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament is
well known. We welcome this important debate because
our collective security and prosperity depend upon an
effective global non-proliferation regime.
It is sometimes easy to forget just how recently the
global community first coalesced around a common
strategy in this sphere. There were very dark predictions
made during the 1960s and the 1970s of a bleak world
in which there would be dozens of nuclear armed States
vying with each other. Yet today, thanks to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, that
number of nuclear States remains in single figures.
Together we have painstakingly constructed a
comprehensive set of rules, norms and standards that
counter the proliferation of all types of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery. If the rule book
that we have written together is to remain effective in
this century, we must all meet our responsibilities to
protect and implement our common rules, norms and
standards, and we must hold those who breach them
properly to account. The success or failure depends
upon our ability to work together, and this is illustrated
most recently by the examples of Iran, North Korea and
Syria, which I shall now briefly discuss.
The threat of a nuclear Iran brought the international
community — the Security Council — together to
defend our commonly held rules and to protect our
shared security interests. Through our painstaking joint
diplomacy and accorded pressure, Iran finally came to
the negotiating table. Collectively we agreed the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, which we in the United
Kingdom continue steadfastly to support. We should

S/PV. 8160

always remember that before the deal, Iran could have
produced enough fissile material for a weapon in a few
months. Now all experts would suggest that this would
take at least a year. All of us in the Security Council
should be proud of this success that we achieved by
working together. Let us continue this work.
On North Korea, rightly, we have had successes,
not least because we have worked together. North
Korea has repeatedly and continuously flouted our
non-proliferation rules with deepening consequences
for international security. We agreed that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s development of a nuclear
programme is illegal and cannot be accepted. In
response, the Council collectively has imposed the
strictest sanctions in a generation with a number of
Security Council resolutions. We may rest assured
that these measures are already having an impact. The
Security Council must, in my view, continue to stand
united on both North Korea and Iran.
By contrast, the Security Council has not been
as united in response to the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. Regrettably, it has been Russia that has
repeatedly wielded its veto in the Council, despite
clear conclusions from an impartial independent expert
investigation set up by the Council itself that the Syrian
regime and Da’esh have repeatedly used chemical
weapons. I fear that the Council’s lack of unity and
resolve on Syria sends the most dangerous possible
signal of a confused message to would-be proliferators
of the future. The Security Council must be prepared
to hold all transgressors to account and the United
Kingdom implores those in the Council who have stood
in the way of action to join the consensus for the future.
The lesson for the Council could not be clearer.
When we work together, we can persuade and cajole
States to abandon their ambitions to obtain weapons
of mass destruction. If we do not, it is the most
vulnerable — civilians, often — who suffer and the
security of the world is put at risk.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons remains a cornerstone of international
security. Although the pace of non-proliferation and
disarmament is often frustratingly slow, it is vital not
to lose sight of the ambitious vision that the Treaty
embodies. Its achievements stem from its development
over time by consensus and because it has offered
tangible benefits to each and everyone of its signatories.
By contrast, the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear

18-0148013/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Weapons would offer no solutions to the very complex
security challenges that we face, nor in my view
to the significant technical challenges of nuclear
disarmament. That is why the United Kingdom will
not become a party to the nuclear weapon-ban treaty.
We do not consider that its prohibitions represent an
emerging rule of customary international law.
The United Kingdom remains committed to a world
without nuclear weapons. We believe that the best way
to achieve this goal is through gradual multilateral
disarmament, negotiated step by step, within existing
frameworks. There is much more that we can do if
we continue to work together. We can continue the
voluntary moratoriums on nuclear weapon testing and
also work for the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. We can prevent nuclear,
chemical and biological material from falling into the
hands of terrorists by working for full and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and we can
tackle the threat of ballistic missiles by encouraging
Member States to consider acceding or adhering to the
missile technology control regime and the Hague Code
of Conduct.
The Security Council has, as we know, a very
special role to play in safeguarding international
peace and security. As ever, it is the unity of the
Security Council and the United Nations beyond that
is vital. Together, we must continue working to prevent
proliferation; together, we must hold to account those
States that breach our rules; and together, we must
persuade and cajole would-be proliferators to abandon
their ambitions to develop weapons of mass destruction.
The United Kingdom remains ready to work closely
with all members of the Security Council towards these
important goals, which I believe are essential for the
future security of humankind.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): It is a privilege to see
you, Mr. President, presiding over this meeting of
the Security Council. We are also honoured to have
enjoyed the presence of His Excellency Mr. Nursultan
Nazarbayev, President of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
We take the opportunity to congratulate his country’s
delegation on the excellent work that it has done to date
as President of the Security Council. We also thank
Secretary-General António Guterres for his briefing
and his leadership on the subject that Kazakhstan chose
for today’s discussion.
14/28

18/01/2018

Bolivia, in the context of its dedication to respecting
international law and as a pacifist State that promotes
a culture of peace and the right to peace, advocates the
peaceful settlement of disputes, good offices, preventive
diplomacy, multilateralism, non-interference and
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of States as universal principles recognized by
the international community, which are effective tools
to avoid the scourge of war and its consequences.
We are meeting at a time when we are experiencing
a reality of great tensions at the global level. Bolivia
is concerned about the considerable number of armed
conflicts, which carry heavy humanitarian cost. We
have chosen the path of the culture of dialogue among
nations through the peoples’ diplomacy. In that regard,
we stress the need to adopt a wide-ranging approach
if we are to achieve peace and prevent conflicts by
analysing their structural causes, strengthening the
rule of law and promoting economic growth and
social development.
Bolivia, which belongs to the first densely populated
area in the world that declared itself free of nuclear
weapons, through the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean,
better known as the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and to the first
region to have declared itself a zone of peace — and
thanks to the peace process, the last armed conflict in
our region is being resolved in Colombia — has the
authority to call for this example to be replicated in
other parts of the world.
In that connection, we believe that the Members of
our Organization have the great challenge to implement
the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which
was adopted by the General Assembly on 7 July 2017.
It is time for countries to commit to prohibiting the
development, testing, production, procurement and
possession of nuclear arsenals and explosives. We
note the decision of countries such as Kazakhstan to
abandon the possession of nuclear weapons from its
defence doctrines and national security policies. In
line with our support for non-proliferation, we reiterate
our opposition to the carrying out of any type of
nuclear test or launching of ballistic missiles capable
of carrying weapons of mass destruction. We call for
the complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantling of
all nuclear programmes without peaceful ends and all
ballistic missiles.
18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

In that regard, we believe that the best preventive
measure is the elimination of all nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction. As such, in the
specific context of the conflict on the Korean peninsula,
we believe political dialogue is the only way to achieve
the denuclearization of the region. In that connection,
the development of mutual confidence-building
measures is essential. We highlight the willingness
shown by the Governments of the Republic of Korea
and of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
begin negotiations in order to facilitate the attendance
of a North Korean delegation in the upcoming Winter
Olympics and the participation of both countries in the
inaugural ceremony under the same flag.
Another success in the implementation of
mutual confidence-building measures is the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran’s nuclear
programme, which was negotiated among the five
permanent members of the Council, the European
Union and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
That development showed the readiness of the parties
to reach a peaceful and consensus-based agreement.
As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Bolivia
is firmly convinced that cooperation among States is
critical to its implementation so as to avert non-State
actors from acquiring or utilizing chemical, biological
or nuclear weapons. We also note that the Committee is
a platform for assistance among States, not a mechanism
for coercion or to channel sanctions against States.
Finally, we look on with concern at multimillion
dollar investments in the military-industrial complex.
Those exorbitant sums could be used instead to face
the grave humanitarian crisis, to fulfil the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, to eradicate poverty
and inequality and to thereby build a more just and
humane world.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
also are gratified to see you preside over the Security
Council, Mr. President, and we commend Kazakhstan
for its exceptional work during its presidency. My
delegation welcomes the timely convening of this
high-level debate on confidence-building measures
needed to ensure the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, and we thank President Nursultan
Nazarbayev for his participation. We likewise note
Kazakhstan’s leadership in setting a bold example for the

S/PV. 8160

international community on nuclear disarmament. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his salient briefing.
As expressed in the document entitled “Manifesto:
the world, the twenty-first century”, endorsed by
President of Kazakhstan, nothing can be further from
the objectives of peace, security and development than
the grave threat of the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery. We
agree with that vision and would like to share three
comments accordingly.
First, Peru is committed to disarmament and
the non-proliferation regimes on weapons of mass
destruction. We believe that ensuring international
peace and security means eliminating the risk posed
by such weapons. There is no better means to do that
than to guarantee their non-existence. As such, we must
promote disarmament. Thanks to the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, agreed at Tlatelolco, we are part of the
first nuclear-weapon-free zone in a densely populated
region of the world. In line with such commitments,
we call for the universalization of international
instruments, such as the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty and the recent Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons, which establishes the illegality of
the use and possession of such weapons.
Secondly, Peru believes that the challenges
faced by the nuclear non-proliferation regime are
the gravest threats to peace and security worldwide
today. Consequently, ensuring a united Council so
as to enable an effective and consistent response to
such challenges is, in our view, a priority. From our
perspective, that requires first addressing the challenge
posed by the nuclear and ballistic programme of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The nuclear
non-proliferation regime must also be enforced through
the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action on the Iranian nuclear programme — a prime
example of the implementation of confidence-building
measures as monitored by the International Atomic
Energy Agency. We also want to highlight the
importance of preserving the commitment of the
Council with regard to the unacceptable use of chemical
weapons in Syria, with a view to fully investigating the
facts and punishing the parties responsible.
Thirdly, in this complex context, Peru agrees that
we must go beyond the imposition of sanctions. We must
promote preventive diplomacy and build the necessary

18-0148015/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

trust to safeguard the non-proliferation regimes through
a more comprehensive approach. Indeed, in many
cases, distrust generates a perception of insecurity
that, in turn, leads to increasing stockpiling of arms.
We must address that perception in order to counter
proliferation and arms stockpiling, particularly in the
nuclear arena. In order to do so, creating open channels
of communication and mutual understanding, devising
open and transparent processes, setting up monitoring
and verification mechanisms and crisis control
protocols are, inter alia, confidence-building measures
that make up a basic foundation for cooperation that
will help mitigate the risk of escalation or accidents that
could have grave consequences.
Today, as Peru has the privilege of receiving a
visit by Pope Francis, we would like to conclude by
recalling the message that His Holiness delivered on
25 September 2015 before the General Assembly with
regard to the topic that bring us here today:
“A system of ethics and laws based on the threat of
mutual destruction, and possibly the destruction of
all humankind, is a contradiction in terms and an
affront to the entire edifice of the United Nations,
which would become a group of nations united by
fear and distrust.” (A/70/PV.3, p. 5)
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): It is good to see you back
at the United Nations, Mr. President. I want to begin
by thanking Kazakhstan for convening today’s
timely meeting on a very important issue. Your
country’s historic contribution to disarmament and
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is commendable. Indeed, by your decision, more than
25 years ago, to give up nuclear weapons, showed that
nuclear disarmament is indeed possible. Your personal
commitment to end nuclear testing and promote the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty deserves our
thanks. It is a priority shared by my country and by all
members of the European Union.
Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
thoughtful intervention this morning. We fully agree
with the Secretary-General’s new year’s message that
global anxieties about nuclear weapons are their highest
level since the Cold War. Speculations in recent months
about the possibility of the use of nuclear weapons are
an unwelcome echo from the past.
Meanwhile, both State and non-State actors push
the boundaries of our common values through the
use of chemical weapons. There is no doubt that the
16/28

18/01/2018

proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is a serious
threat to international peace and security.
Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are
two sides of the same coin and mutually reinforcing.
Making progress on both fronts must be a priority for the
international community and for the Security Council.
It is not only a moral and humanitarian responsibility,
but also essential for our common security interests.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) remains the indispensable framework
and the cornerstone of global disarmament and
non-proliferation. We are committed to the success of
the current NPT review cycle. That will require making
progress on all three pillars of the Treaty, including
disarmament, concerning which the nuclear-weapon
States have a special responsibility. The widespread
frustration within the international community
regarding the lack of progress within the NPT context
is real and well-founded. It needs to be addressed by
concrete progress in the implementation of existing
disarmament commitments.
Effective disarmament will require sincere
negotiations in good faith within the framework of
all existing conventions. We must all act according
to our commitments and live up to our promises. On
the path ahead, it is essential that we build mutual
trust, as was stressed by the Secretary-General and
President Nazarbayev earlier this morning, including
by increasing understanding for each another’s
perspectives — something clearly lacking today.
We must also mobilize the necessary political will
to negotiate and compromise in order to reach a
positive outcome.
The paralysis in the Conference on Disarmament
(CD), which is now in its twenty-second year, should
be a matter of concern for us all. Sweden will assume
the rotating presidency of the CD next month. We
will make every effort to define a combination of
substantive issues based upon which a programme of
work can finally be agreed and that we hope may help
to break the deadlock.
We are also faced with the increasing threat of
weapons of mass destruction being acquired by non-State
actors. Collective efforts are needed to meet the evolving
threats and uphold the global non-proliferation regime.
All States must work to implement their obligations
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Confidence-building measures can help reduce
tensions, prevent conflicts and build the trust necessary
for effective disarmament and non-proliferation. Such
efforts are strengthened if they are based on the clear
principles of accountability, transparency, irreversibility
and verifiability. The nuclear-weapon-free zone in
Central Asia provides a good example of where those
principles have been applied. It was the first zone of
its kind to be based on verification according to the
model additional protocol of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). That provided the IAEA
with the ability to verify not only the non-diversion
of declared nuclear material, but also the absence of
undeclared nuclear material as well as activities in
participating States.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is
another important example of the potential of diplomacy.
The JCPOA is designed to ensure the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme
That crucial agreement contributes to stability within
and beyond the region, and contributes significantly to
strengthening the global non-proliferation architecture.
As reiterated by High Representative of the European
Union Federica Mogherini, and by many others around
the table today, the European Union remains committed
to supporting the full implementation of the JCPOA,
and it is vital that all parties continue to implement
their commitments. IAEA verification and the Joint
Commission for addressing implementation matters
are both indispensable components of the agreement.
In addition, we look forward to Iran’s early ratification
of the additional protocol, which is essential to building
confidence and ensuring sustainability.
The Council has repeatedly addressed the testing
of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in breach of
international obligations and contrary to the existing
global norm against nuclear testing embodied in the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. We continue
to condemn those actions in the strongest terms.
The full and comprehensive implementation of the
Council’s relevant resolutions by all United Nations
States Members is needed. At the same time, sanctions
alone will not solve the current crisis on the Korean
peninsula. Efforts are needed to pave the way for
a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution to the
conflict. In parallel to effectively implementing the
sanctions regime, we must undertake further work to
reduce tensions and build trust. We welcome the latest

S/PV. 8160

developments on the peninsula, including the steps
taken to reopen channels of communication, such as
military-to-military dialogue. That is an important
means to avoid misunderstandings and reduce tensions.
We also welcome the decision of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to participate in the
Olympic Games. Those are positive developments. It
is important to seize that window of opportunity and
support all efforts that can lead to denuclearization and
peaceful relations on the Korean peninsula.
Stepped-up efforts are also needed to address the
issue of chemical weapons. The use of such weapons in
Syria and Iraq is illegal and unacceptable. There can be
no impunity for such grave violations of international
law. Those responsible must be identified and brought
to justice. We deeply regret the multiple instances of
the use of the veto in the Council, thereby hindering
accountability. Recent allegations of the use of
chlorine gas in Syria and ongoing investigations by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
serve only to further illustrate the need to continue our
efforts to develop a new mechanism for attribution so
as to ensure accountability and uphold the international
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. The Council
has a responsibility in that regard, and we will continue
our efforts to find a way forward.
In his New Year’s message, the SecretaryGeneral urged leaders to bring people together around
common goals. Surely, one of those goals must be
furthering non-proliferation and disarmament. The
Council must work together and enhance its efforts
to promote and uphold progress, including by helping
building confidence and trust among countries. We
will continue to work actively will all partners to
further disarmament, non-proliferation, respect for
international law and accountability for those who
violate international norms and obligations.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Kazakh presidency for organizing this important and
equally timely meeting on confidence and transparency
measures on weapons of mass destruction. It was a
particular honour to have President Nazarbayev and
President Duda present among us this morning, and I
am very happy to see you, Mr. Minister here today once
again. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his very enlightening briefing.

18-0148017/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Almost a century ago, the atrocities resulting from
the use of chemical weapons during the First World War
led us to jointly initiate and develop, piece by piece, the
current non-proliferation regime on weapons of mass
destruction. That regime is today the backbone of the
international security architecture. As the past year has
tragically reminded us, it is nevertheless under attack
and has been possibly put in jeopardy. The proliferation
of biological, chemical and nuclear weapons and
their means of delivery remains a dangerous reality.
In Asia and the Middle East, the most robust and
fundamental non-proliferation and disarmament norms
are systematically, and even flagrantly, violated. Let
us make no mistake: the stakes are extremely high.
Beyond the immediate implications concerning peace
and security, what is at stake is long-term strategic
stability, which implicates the security of all our States.
That is why combating weapons of mass destruction is,
and must remain, at the heart of the Security Council’s
priorities, and why France intends to remain committed
to such a critical issue.
With the barbaric use of toxic chemical agents
in Syria, Iraq and Asia, we are witnessing the deadly
reappearance of weapons that sow fear and death among
civilians. The use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
regime against its own people is but one tragic example
of that. On behalf of France, I recall that trivializing that
situation, owing to our failure to build an international
consensus to find a solution for it, steadily increases
the risk of chemical terrorism, which is something we
all fear. It exacerbates regional instability and weakens
the international security architecture, for which the
Council is both the guardian and ultimate guarantor.
The same observation applies to North Korea’s
actions. The North Korean regime is determined to
acquire an operational nuclear arsenal, in systematic
and blatant violation of its obligations. The threat
has reached a critical level and concerns us all. It is
therefore necessary today, through the pressure being
applied, to find a political solution so as to achieve the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. The unity
and resolute commitment of the Security Council are a
prerequisite condition for success.
In such an uncertain and complex environment,
trust and transparency at the regional and multilateral
levels — among the priorities behind our meetings — are
more than ever core values that we must safeguard
and nurture. That is especially true with regard to the
non-proliferation regime. As the Secretary-General
18/28

18/01/2018

recalled, it is based on binding commitments, followed
by a rigorous verification of their implementation.
That is in particular the role of such international
bodies as the International Atomic Energy Agency and
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), whose work France actively supports.
I also reiterate our resolute commitment to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons — the fiftieth anniversary of which we will
celebrate this year — as well as our firm opposition to
any international initiative that might undermine it. I
would also like to especially express our full support
for the entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty as soon as possible. We call upon all
countries that have not yet acceded to the Treaty to do
so without delay — I refer in particular to countries
whose accession is required.
France also supports the implementation by all
of the commitments made under resolution 1540
(2004), adopted by the Council to prevent non-State
actors from obtaining weapons of mass destruction.
That is a topical issue because we are more than
ever concerned about possible transfers to non-State
entities, particularly in the area of missiles. In that
respect, it is crucial that States that have not yet done so
adopt export-control legislation and the corresponding
administrative arrangements.
Lastly, as members are aware, France is very
involved in the Proliferation Security Initiative. France
intends to continue actively supporting non-proliferation
efforts and, as I have said, remain proactive regarding
the Initiative. France is convinced that with the
determination of the international community, based
on pragmatic and realistic multilateralism, it is possible
to find solutions to the proliferation crises. Allow me,
in that regard, to mention the Iranian case.
My country actively contributed to the development
of the robust, solid and verifiable agreement that is
now the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. As we
have already said, we want rigorous implementation
of that agreement and of resolution 2231 (2015).
Taken together, those texts constitute the cornerstone
of stability and regional and international security.
Nevertheless, the agreement does not address all of our
concerns, in particular with respect to Iran’s ballistic
activities. That is why we hope that frank dialogue will
take place on the matter.
18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV. 8160

Similarly, the reinstatement of a total ban on the
use of chemical weapons is urgently needed. Impunity
cannot, and will not, be an option. That was the merit of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism — the dissolution of
which is particularly regrettable; however, we must not
stand by idly. Criminals identified as having resorted to
such weapons, whether State or non-State actors, should
be punished, and those who might consider it deterred.

on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological Weapons
Convention and various Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 1540 (2004) as well as subsequent
resolutions. Despite such existing mechanisms, the
relevance of which is well established, it is clear that
much remains to be done in the area of non-proliferation
and the elimination of all such weapons.

That is why France has decided to convene in Paris
on 23 January countries that share that same concern,
in order to effectively work together against the
unacceptable impunity for the use of chemical weapons.
A new intergovernmental partnership will be set up on
that occasion, the purpose of which will be to assist
and support existing mechanisms in their investigative
work as well as international organizations, primarily
the OPCW, which is in charge of that issue.

Various recent issues — namely, the Iran nuclear
deal, the North Korean nuclear and ballistic tests and
the alleged use of chemical weapons by Islamic State
terrorists — pose a challenge to the non-proliferation
regime and require special attention and vigilance on
the part of the Council. We must therefore go further
collectively in the adoption of binding regimes for
the prohibition of weapons of mass destruction and in
strengthening dialogue among States.

With the risk of erosion in the non-proliferation
regime, it is our security as a whole, as well as the
very existence of the rule of law as the foundation
of multilateralism, that are in peril. In the light
of the magnitude of the stakes, it is our collective
responsibility to safeguard and strengthen the gains
that together we have made, by building confidence
and transparency among all parties respecting their
non-proliferation commitments. France remains fully
committed to that end.

We must realize that, despite the signing of the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, that
category of weapons of mass destruction is increasingly
a growing threat. That is due to the fact that the major
nuclear Powers have shied away from the Treaty and,
in addition, have opposed the establishment of binding
legal instruments, as called for by all other countries.
The nuclear Powers must rally to the international
consensus on the eventual elimination of nuclear
weapons and strengthen dialogue with other countries
in the context of collective security guarantees. In that
regard, Côte d’Ivoire calls for a further reduction of all
nuclear arsenals in order to discourage countries that
are tempted to join the group of nuclear Powers.

Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the presence at
this Security Council meeting of His Excellency
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, as well as that of the
President of Poland, the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation and
the Minister of State for Asia and the Pacific of the
United Kingdom. The presence of such leaders confers
particular prominence to our work. I would like to
thank Kazakhstan for organizing this briefing on such a
crucial subject. My delegation also extends its gratitude
to the Secretary-General for his briefing and vision on
this question, which has preoccupied the Organization
and Council for many years.
Aware of the threat posed to humankind by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the
United Nations established a series of instruments and
multilateral mechanisms very early on, with the aim of
reducing or eliminating all or part of those weapons
in the long-term. Those instruments include the Treaty

In that context, nuclear-armed countries and other
concerned countries must create the conditions for the
entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty in order to prevent the development of new
nuclear weapons and the production of large quantities
of fissile material and other nuclear waste. Beyond
the agreements, the nuclear countries must provide
the necessary guarantees with respect to the handling
and storage of those materials, which constitute a real
danger for the countries of the South, and also provide
safety and nuclear security guarantees.
My country, which has made peace its guiding
principle, certainly is in favour of a firm position, but
we are not closed to ongoing dialogue on those issues.
We also attach the highest importance to Africa
remaining a nuclear-weapon-free zone. We also call on

18-0148019/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the nuclear Powers and the African countries to combat
the pollution of the continent by nuclear materials.
It is therefore important that the international
community mobilize in support of the Iranian nuclear
agreement, in accordance with resolution 2231 (2015),
as the safest guarantee for preventing an arms race in
the Middle East, with the clear threat of proliferation.
Similarly, the thaw in the relations between the
two Koreas, following the tensions arising from the
nuclear and ballistic tests by North Korea, is to be
welcomed and encouraged through the opening of a
comprehensive dialogue that includes all stakeholders
in the crisis on the Korean peninsula. That thaw augurs
well for the Olympic Winter Games in South Korea. It
should be welcomed and encouraged in order to achieve
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Finally, allegations of the use of chemical weapons
by terrorist groups in Iraq and Syria, if proved, would
constitute a serious violation of the non-proliferation
regime and a challenge to our collective security. The
Council must reach agreement on that issue in order to
allow for an investigation of the facts, in particular in
Syria, and to bring to justice those found responsible.
True to its tradition of peace, Côte d’Ivoire has
always advocated the settlement of all disputes through
dialogue. It therefore follows that we ratified the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons on
6 March 1973 and, on 20 July 2017, signed the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, adopted by the
General Assembly on 7 July 2017. The latter instrument
is crucial to building a safer world and to guaranteeing
the future of humankind, since the risk of a nuclear
confrontation is no longer an academic theory.
Côte d’Ivoire will therefore continue to support
global efforts to eradicate nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery from the face of the Earth by helping
to strengthen the non-proliferation regime and to expand
its scope, on the one hand, and by ensuring the strict
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in particular
with regard to non-State actors, on the other hand.
Our efforts to implement a global non-proliferation
architecture would be in vain if they were not part
of a comprehensive approach to strengthening
cooperation and assistance among States, on the one
hand, and between States and subregional, regional and
international organizations, on the other.
20/28

18/01/2018

That reasoning leads my country to recall the two
pillars on which the Council’s activities in that area are
based, namely, the responsibility to establish a system
for the regulation of armaments, as provided for in
Article 26 of the Charter of the United Nations, and the
pursuit of a number of objectives, ranging from respect
for the prohibition of the use of biological and chemical
weapons to the prevention of the acquisition of such
weapons by non-State actors, in accordance with the
primary responsibility of the United Nations to ensure
the maintenance of international peace and security.
In that perspective, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) could support States
that so wish in strengthening their national capacities for
sharing experiences and good practices. Strengthening
national and regional capacities is all the more necessary
given recent technological developments, including
the miniaturization of weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery systems, which increase the risk of
proliferation and the acquisition of such weapons by
terrorist groups.
Like Kazakhstan, your country, Mr. President,
whose commitment to building a world free of weapons
of mass destruction is to be welcomed, the Ivorian
delegation would like to reiterate the willingness of
Côte d’Ivoire to fully implement the disarmament
and non-proliferation regimes for weapons of mass
destruction with a view to achieving a safer world free
of nuclear weapons. We express our full support for
your country’s appeal to the permanent members of
the Security Council to work to build of a nuclear-free
world by 2045, which coincides with the centenary of
the Organization.
Côte d’Ivoire also supports the call for nuclear
States to refrain from the first use nuclear weapons in
the case of conflict.
Finally, my country welcomes the holding in May
of the United Nations high-level conference on nuclear
disarmament, which is clearly a key step in the process
of establishing a global non-proliferation regime and
completely eliminating nuclear weapons.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We express our appreciation
to the Kazakh presidency for organzing this high-level
briefing on a very important issue, which has been
at the top of the Security Council agenda for the past
year. We were very pleased to see the President of
Kazakhstan presiding over this meeting as the leader of
a country that decided not to have nuclear weapons on
18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

its territory. He made a wise decision in that regard, and
we appreciate his vision and wisdom on that important
issue. We are always appreciative of the SecretaryGeneral for his briefings. We are also very pleased
to see the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan
presiding over the meeting at this point.
Since the end of the Cold War, the threat posed by
the proliferation of nuclear weapons has never been
as deeply worrying as it is today. We all know the
unimaginable potential danger that humankind would
face should the non-proliferation regime be further
weakened. That is why a world free of nuclear weapons
is an important objective, which we in Ethiopia fully
support and subscribe to, as do many States Members
of the United Nations. We are also party to the African
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty, the Pelindaba Treaty.
Moreover, we recognize the challenge that the
world faces today with regard to the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and the fact that the international norm
set by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is being seriously tested. The question before
us today, therefore, is what can be done to respond to
the current challenges and to preserve that important
international norm. We believe that the issues raised
in the concept note (S/2018/4, annex) in terms of
prevention and confidence-building measures are very
timely and relevant.
Let me stress that we deeply appreciate the proposals
made by the President of Kazkahstan in that regard. In
our view, it is important to comprehensively address
risks of proliferation through political and diplomatic
means aimed at finding a negotiated solution. For
example, we believe that the manner in which the States
participating in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) managed to address the Iranian nuclear issue
is a significant achievement for multilateralism. Of
course, we recognize that much more needs to be done to
resolve misunderstandings and to prevent any possible
obstacles to the full implementation of the JCPOA.
We believe, as the Secretary-General stated, that
issues not directly related to the JCPOA should be
addressed without prejudice to the provisions of the
Agreement and its accomplishments. We therefore
hope that the participating countries will continue to
uphold their commitment to that important deal, which
has enormous significance to international peace and
security within the international non-proliferation
regime. We believe that it is essential to adopt

S/PV. 8160

confidence-building measures in order to build trust
among the participating States, and we hope that the
President will take steps in that direction.
Based on the lessons learned from the Iranian
nuclear deal, it is important to explore ways and means
of addressing the serious threat posed by the nuclear
and ballistic missile programme of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. It is increasingly apparent
that there is no other option but a peaceful and
diplomatic path to resolving the crisis in the Korean
peninsula. It is for that reason that priority should be
given to easing heightened tensions and avoiding the
risk of miscalculation. In that regard, we welcome the
recent high-level intra-Korean talks and the agreement
reached to ease military tensions, hold military-tomilitary talks and reopen the inter-Korean military
hotline, which we hope will help to reduce tensions on
the Korean peninsula. We also welcome the agreement
reached between the United States and the Republic of
Korea to postpone their joint military exercises.
Undeniably, such developments are encouraging
and should facilitate the resumption of serious
dialogue. At this stage, it is important to create an
atmosphere conducive to the holding of such dialogue.
We hope that the Winter Olympic Games will be
instrumental in promoting that kind of atmosphere and
in building confidence. We welcome the decision of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to send its
delegation to the Winter Olympic Games, and we also
appreciate the Secretary-General’s decision to attend
the opening ceremony of the Games. On the other
hand, we are under no illusion that resolving the issue
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will be
easy. It is absolutely important that all sides start to
take small but meaningful steps to build the necessary
trust and confidence that could help pave the way for
the resumption of dialogue and negotiation towards
finding a comprehensive and lasting solution to the
issue surrounding the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and denuclearizing the Korean peninsula. We
must take serious note of the proposal by the President
on this matter.
That brings me to my third point on the broader
threat to international peace and security and to
humankind posed by the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, including by non-State actors.
Multilateral agreements, such as the Biological Weapons
Convention, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

18-0148021/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

18/01/2018

continue to contribute immensely to the prevention
and elimination of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, including into the hands of non-State actors
and terrorist groups. Nonetheless, much remains to be
done to ensure the universal accession to and the full
implementation of such agreements. Regional nuclearweapon-free zones, such as the African NuclearWeapon-Free Zone, also remain central to the global
and regional non-proliferation regimes in the creation
of a world free of nuclear weapons.

of States and greater in-depth cooperation. We must
acknowledge that proliferation risks and challenges
remain severe. Some non-proliferation hotspot issues
are protracted and intractable. Technological advances
have lowered the threshold for proliferation. The risk of
non-State actors, and terrorists in particular, acquiring
and using weapons of mass destruction is increasing.
The authority, universality and effectiveness of
the international non-proliferation regime must be
enhanced urgently.

The Security Council plays a critical role in
addressing the serious threat posed by the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by using all the
available tools at its disposal, including sanctions. As
we have seen over the past year, the unity of the Council
is absolutely critical to addressing non-proliferation
issues, and everything must be done to preserve it. It is
also important to ensure that the various decisions and
measures taken by the Council are adhered to by all
Member States. With regard to advocacy and follow-up,
the role of the relevant subsidiary bodies of the Council
remains vital.

President Xi Jinping of China has stressed that
no country can respond on its own to the fiercest
challenges facing humankind and or return to selfimposed isolation. We urge the people of the world to
work together to build a shared destiny for humankind
and a world that is open, inclusive, clean and beautiful,
with lasting peace, universal security and shared
prosperity. China is of the view that strengthening
global governance in the area of non-proliferation is
an important component for building a shared destiny
for humankind. The international community must
therefore enhance cooperation and coordination in
many dimensions.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming
Ethiopia’s commitment to upholding the international
non-proliferation regime and fulfilling its obligations in
implementing the relevant Security Council resolutions
without fail.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Kazakhstan for its initiative to convene today’s
Security Council meeting on non-proliferation.
China thanks His Excellency President Nazarbayev
for presiding over today’s meeting. We also welcome
Kazakhstan’s Foreign Minister back to New York.
We thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
Peace and development remain two main
contemporary issues. However, our world has yet to
achieve peace. Regional hotspots continue to emerge
and traditional and non-traditional security threats
are on the rise. The proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems constitute
genuine threats to international peace, security and
stability and are common challenges faced by the
international community.
Owing to the international community’s efforts
in recent years, consensus has been reached on the
international non-proliferation regime. The regime
is increasingly enhanced by the improved capacity
22/28

First, a commitment to achieving common security
is vital. Non-proliferation is in essence a security issue.
Security concerns are the main drivers of proliferation
activities. All countries should reject the Cold War
mentality, remain resolute in adhering to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, foster
a concept of shared, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable security, build a new form of international
relations featuring mutual respect, fairness, justice and
win-win cooperation, and create a security trend that
features fairness and justice, joint contributions and
common benefits. The United Nations and the Security
Council should bring into full play their essential
role in ending war and maintaining peace, finding
a path to effectively prevent conflicts, and building
enduring peace in order to achieve common security
for all countries. That will fundamentally eliminate the
drivers of proliferation. It is also a fundamental way for
all countries to build confidence.
Secondly, it is important to commit to the peaceful
resolution of issues by political and diplomatic means.
Confrontation and unrelenting sanctions and pressure
will lead only to the escalation of conflict and the
increased risk of proliferation. All countries should
remain on the path to the peaceful resolution of conflict
18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and strive to resolve non-proliferation hotspot issues by
political and diplomatic means.
At present, some positive changes have emerged
on the Korean peninsula. All parties should make a
concerted effort to maintain the hard-won momentum of
reduced tensions, create the conditions for relaunching
dialogue and negotiations and return the nuclear issue
of the Korean peninsula to dialogue and negotiation.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
with Iran is a hard-won and important accomplishment
of multilateralism. It is also a model for resolving
international hotspot issues by political and diplomatic
means. The relevant parties should bear in mind their
overall situation and long-term interests, maintain
their political will, manage differences properly and
continue to comprehensively and effectively implement
the JCPOA.
Thirdly, there must be a commitment to consolidating
and developing the international non-proliferation
regime. With the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention,
Biological Weapons Convention and resolution 1540
(2004) as its legal bases, and with international
organizations such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons as its institutional mechanisms, the
international non-proliferation regime is an important
component of the global security order and has played
a vital role in preventing the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and in maintaining global strategic
balance and stability. The international community
should effectively maintain the universality, authority
and effectiveness of the regime, continue to improve
relevant international norms, adhere to equality before
norms, and discard double standards and elective
practices. The international non-proliferation regime
founded on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons must be maintained, and whoever
acquires nuclear weapons illegally must effectively
comply with the obligation to denuclearize.
Fourthly, with respect to the commitment to
enhancing States’ non-proliferation capacities, the
primary responsibility for non-proliferation should be
assumed by Governments. Non-proliferation policies
developed in accordance with country-specific
situations should be respected and supported in order to
push for continuous improvement of non-proliferation
laws and regulations and to strengthen capacity-

S/PV. 8160

building in enforcement. All countries should, in
the spirit of openness, inclusion, mutual benefit
and win-win cooperation, conduct exchanges and
practical cooperation in non-proliferation so as
to jointly enhance their capacity and the level of
non-proliferation. The needs of developing countries
for international non-proliferation assistance should be
effectively met. At the same time, a comprehensive and
balanced approach should be put in place to promote
non-proliferation and the use of science and technology
for peaceful purposes. Non-proliferation should not
be used as an excuse to limit or deprive countries of
their rights to use science and technology for peaceful
purposes and to promote international cooperation.
China has consistently advocated for peace,
development and cooperation in order to promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes and support the
prevention of conflicts. China is firmly opposed to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery. China has acceded to all international
conventions and joined relevant international
organizations in the field of non-proliferation. China has
built a complete system of non-proliferation and export
control and ensured the effective implementation of
relevant laws and regulations. China comprehensively
and fully implements relevant Council resolutions,
actively participates in international and regional
cooperation on non-proliferation, supports the United
Nations in playing its role in non-proliferation,
and commits to pushing for a political solution to
non-proliferation hotspot issues.
China constructively participated in the negotiation
and implementation process of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action with Iran and put forward its
own proposals.
China has work tirelessly to promote a negotiated
solution to the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula.
China’s suspension-for-suspension initiative and
two-track approach, as well as the road map jointly
proposed by China and Russia, are realistic and feasible
for appropriately resolving the nuclear issue of the
Korean peninsula. China hopes for a positive response
and support from all sides on this. A denuclearized,
peaceful and stable Korean peninsula is in the
interest of all parties. The unity of the international
community on this issue is critical. China would like
to work with the international community, engage in
close communication, display mutual confidence and
mutual respect, and strengthen cooperation in pursuing

18-0148023/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

continued progress towards a suitable solution to the
Korean peninsula issue.
Non-proliferation is a long-term task before the
international community. It requires the involvement
of all countries. China is a builder of world peace
and a guardian of the international non-proliferation
regime. China would like to continue to work with all
parties in making a greater contribution to enhancing
the international non-proliferation regime, advancing
global governance in non-proliferation and building a
common destiny of humankind.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and the Republic of Kazakhstan for convening this
meeting on this very important topic. We commend
Kazakhstan for its continued leadership role in this
area. On a personal note, allow me to add that it is a
pleasure to see you, Minister Abdrakhmanov, back in
New York and presiding over the Council. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his very
informative briefing.
As declared repeatedly by the Council, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is a
threat to international peace and security. Therefore,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands attaches the greatest
importance to making every effort to prevent the use,
stop the spread and ultimately achieve a world free
of weapons of mass destruction. In that light, I will
make three main points here today, concerning the
importance of the non-proliferation architecture, the
need for attention for implementation, and the need for
activities to strengthen the architecture.
On my first point, achieving a world without
weapons of mass destruction starts with the
current non-proliferation architecture — that is,
the international regimes and norms that underpin
our efforts against proliferation. The NPT is the
cornerstone of the international regime to prevent
nuclear proliferation and to work towards nuclear
disarmament. Chemical and biological weapons are
fully banned by the Chemical Weapons Convention and
the Biological Weapons Convention. The Hague is the
proud host of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons. As the Polish President mentioned
earlier, we attach great value to The Hague Code of
Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation.
However, proliferation concerns are not restricted
to States alone. Non-State actors represent a growing
24/28

18/01/2018

threat when it comes to weapons and materials of mass
destruction. We must make every effort to prevent such
weapons and materials from falling into the hands of
terrorists. This, of course, is the purview of resolution
1540 (2004). This comprehensive architecture
of non-proliferation norms and obligations is the
foundation of international peace and security.
This brings me to my second point. We must
pay constant attention to the implementation of our
obligations, because clearly the non-proliferation
architecture is not free from violations. It is imperative
that all countries fulfil their commitments in order to
bring us closer to the goal of a world free of weapons
of mass destruction. We have to work persistently
to universalize, implement, verify and enforce the
international non-proliferation norms. Non-compliance
must always be addressed and enforcement measures
have to be taken. Doing so, and doing so effectively,
will also strengthen international confidence in
the architecture.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is
a milestone accomplishment of international diplomacy
and has proven to be a success, as verified by the
International Atomic Energy Agency. It is essential
that all parties continue to fulfil their commitments
under the JCPOA. As facilitator for resolution 2231
(2015), I look forward to working with all parties to
ensure full and comprehensive implementation of the
resolution. I welcome the suggestion just made by our
French colleague for a frank dialogue with Iran on
related issues.
When States fail to live up to their obligations and
endanger international peace and security, we must act
with common purpose to find diplomatic solutions. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has repeatedly
defied its international obligations. Its nuclear weapons
and ballistic missile programmes threaten not just
regional, but also global stability and security. The
international community has been swift and strong in
its condemnation of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s actions and the Council has imposed the
heaviest sanctions ever. To make these sanctions work,
we need scrupulous and worldwide implementation.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), I am working with all parties
to this end, building on the work of Italy, our split-term
party in 2017-2018. Of course, as others have said, we
welcome recent developments of increased contacts
18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

between the Republic of Korea and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
The use of chemical weapons in Syria, especially
by the Government, as well as by terrorist groups, is
another grave violation of international norms and
is unacceptable. We regret the dismantling of the
Organiation for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism. We must
ensure accountability for such acts, lest we undermine
the rule of law and the humanity that underpin the
United Nations system. Let me recall in this context the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic and the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Turning to my third point, we must engage in new
activities to further strengthen the non-proliferation
architecture. The first example is the cycle of the 2020
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). While
obstacles remain, the first meeting of the Preparatory
Committee set us on the path towards a successful review
cycle. As Chair of the first Preparatory Committee, we
found that, even when different States and regions have
different priorities, support for the NPT remains strong.
We should build on this support to preserve our common
ground and reach our shared goals.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands also values
initiatives aimed at facilitating cooperation and
dialogue. We promote progress towards a fissile material
cut-off treaty and support the important work being
done on the topic of nuclear disarmament verification.
We call on all States to make every effort to realize
the entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty. We must continue to push for the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and we
should support the work of international organizations
and actively engage in multilateral initiatives, such as
the Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons
and Materials of Mass Destruction and the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.
In conclusion, only together can we maintain and
strengthen international norms against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. That will require
implementing our commitments and complying with
our obligations under the relevant treaty regimes. It
will require building upon our commitments to further
strengthening the non-proliferation architecture. And

S/PV. 8160

it will require addressing and enforcing issues of
non-compliance, collectively and effectively. These
steps will serve to build confidence. They will serve to
enhance international peace and security, and help to
prevent conflict, which is a fundamental responsibility
of the Council.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): The presence of persons of note at this
meeting of the Security Council is a testament to the
great importance of the topic under consideration — the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. As
such, we wish to congratulate and thank Kazakhstan
for including this issue in its programme of work. We
also thank Secretary-General Guterres for sharing his
prescient ideas.
This report is timely, as recent world events indicate
a difficult year for multilateral action on disarmament
and international peace and security. Last year, we saw
renewed efforts to address a broad spectrum of issues
related to non-proliferation, multilateral disarmament
and international security, including far-reaching
questions on cyberspace and outer space activities.
International security has continued to deteriorate as
the world faces immense peace and security challenges.
In that regard, I wish to underline the absolute validity
of multilateral diplomacy in the field of disarmament,
non-proliferation and international security, and
reiterate that there is no substitute for a multilateral
approach to addressing global issues of disarmament
in a sustainable manner, in accordance with the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
As the international community continues to await
the realization of the goal of the total elimination of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction,
we seek broader and more concrete measures in
the pursuit of the goal of nuclear disarmament and
nonproliferation. It is evident that the current approach
has not managed to offer tangible results that ensure the
realization of the goal and the general objectives of a
world without weapons of mass destruction.
On 20 September 2017, the historic Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW) was opened
for signature. Its adoption was a welcome development
in our search for a world free of weapons of mass
destruction. I want to emphasize that the TPNW
underlines our shared commitment to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Both

18-0148025/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

treaties complement each other and establish a clear path
towards a world free of weapons of mass destruction.
Equatorial Guinea is well aware that, in order
to achieve significant progress in the elimination of
weapons of mass destruction, there must be practical
and comprehensive confidence-building measures.
Indeed, all Member States, particularly nuclearweapon States, must commit to the existing regimes of
transparency, dialogue and verifiable notifications of
military reserves and activities.
More than 70 years have passed since the world
witnessed the terrifying power of the atomic bomb in
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The destruction and impact
of the twin bombs still resonate today. The unfortunate
incidents left a legacy of devastation and long-term
negative impact on the environment and, fundamentally,
on the lives of the people affected. Therefore, the
time has come for the world to unequivocally and
unanimously express the goal of ensuring a world free
of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. It is also time to raise our voices against
the slow pace of nuclear disarmament and to call on
all Member States to comply with the legal obligations
and the implementation of the commitments assumed
by the nuclear-weapon States.
For Equatorial Guinea, the highest priority
remains nuclear disarmament and the total elimination
of all weapons of mass destruction. To that end, the
contribution of nuclear-weapon-free zones to the
objectives of the NPT, including nuclear disarmament,
as well as other contributions to nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation in all regions of the world, should
be maintained and expanded.
The African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty, the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean, the South Pacific Nuclear
Free Zone Treaty, the Treaty on the Southeast Asia
Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone and the nuclear-weapon-free
zone of Central Asia, as well as the nuclear-weapon-free
State of Mongolia, contribute significantly to achieving
the general objective of a world free of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction. They improve
global and regional peace and security, strengthen the
nuclear non-proliferation regime and contribute to the
realization of the objectives of nuclear disarmament
and the elimination of weapons of mass destruction.
In that context, the Government of Equatorial
Guinea reiterates its ongoing commitment to the Treaty
26/28

18/01/2018

of Pelindaba, which entered into force on 15 July 2009.
The Treaty reaffirms, inter alia, the status of Africa
as a nuclear-weapon-free zone and shields Africa by
avoiding the parking of nuclear explosive devices on the
continent and prohibiting the testing of such weapons
throughout the African continent.
This year will mark the thirty-second anniversary
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, based in Lomé. Despite its
limited resources, the Centre has continued to offer
technical assistance to States throughout the African
region. In 2015, the Centre oversaw the participation
of more than 1,000 representatives of Governments
and regional organizations, as well as more than
2,000 members of civil society through a wide range
of activities. The Centre needs help in promoting its
mandate. We welcome the Centre’s efforts and its
management, and we take this opportunity to request
more alliances and more assistance to boost its efforts
and ensure that it fulfils its mandate.
My country emphasizes the importance of continued
respect for the inalienable right to the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and highlights the central role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in that
regard, through the ongoing commitments of States
to the implementation of the IAEA Comprehensive
Safeguards System and the provision of technical
assistance and cooperation.
We also stress humanitarian considerations in the
context of deliberations on weapons of mass destruction,
particularly in the light of the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of the use or detonation of nuclear
weapons, either by accident or as a deliberate measure.
We therefore stress the importance of General Assembly
resolution 70/47 and call on all States, in particular
the nuclear-weapon States, to take into account the
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of the use
of these weapons on human health, the environment
and vital economic resources, inter alia, and to take
the necessary measures to dismantle and give up
these weapons. It is in this context that I once again
welcome the adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons.
The continued existence and possession of nuclear
weapons does not guarantee security; rather, they
subtract from it. Our world, including outer space,
must be free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction. It is in this context that my country
18-01480

18/01/2018

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

insists on the need for nuclear-weapon States to stop
modernizing, renewing or extending the life of their
nuclear weapons and related facilities.
In Equatorial Guinea, we also underscore the
importance of achieving universal accession to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT),
taking into account the special responsibilities of
nuclear-weapon States in this regard. Our delegation
welcomes the convening of the eighth Ministerial
Conference on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, held in New York on 21 September 2016, and
supports the international community in remaining
committed to the promotion of the CTBT. We call on
all nuclear-weapon States, those States that have not yet
acceded to the NPT, those that are listed in annex 2 of
the CTBT, and those that have not yet signed or ratified
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty to do so
without delay.
Equatorial Guinea reaffirms the importance of the
work entrusted to the Conference on Disarmament and
expresses its concern at the many years of stalemate
that have prevented the Conference from fulfilling
its mandate as the single multilateral disarmament
negotiation forum. I call on the Conference on
Disarmament to resume its substantive work, bearing
in mind the security interests of all States and without
further delay.
Furthermore, we are concerned that the United
Nations Disarmament Commission has been unable
to reach consensus on recommendations since 1999.
Nevertheless, I welcome the adoption in April 2017
of recommendations on practical confidence-building
measures in the field of conventional weapons. Indeed,
it is important to stress the importance, not only of
preserving the Commission, but also of achieving its
negotiating goals.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Like other members of the Security Council,
I too am pleased to see the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Kazakhstan presiding over today’s meeting, which
is dedicated to strengthening confidence-building
measures. Unfortunately, around the world and in
the Security Council in particular, there is indeed
insufficient confidence and insufficient trust, and that is
evident. What kind of trust or confidence can there be if

S/PV. 8160

some countries — and given that Russia was mentioned
by name, I will take the liberty to mention them by name:
the United States and the United Kingdom — continue
to manipulate the Security Council and the social
sentiment of the international community?
Perhaps their statements were written in advance,
and they did not have sufficient time to revise their
drafts after they had heard our statement. But, no,
this is being done deliberately. We are deliberately not
being heard, and our positions are being distorted. They
erroneously claim that we are responsible for closing
the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) because we
vetoed the draft resolution on its extension. However,
they shamefully forget to mention that we proposed a
draft resolution that would have extended the JIM and
improve its effectiveness, efficiency, professionalism
and impartiality, which they did not allowed to be
adopted. We proposed that draft resolution because the
JIM completely discredited itself with a mendacious
report that withstood no criticism.
I would ask a couple of rhetorical questions. Who in
essence vetoed our draft resolution, and who was the last
to do it? It is those very countries — the United States
and the United Kingdom — that, without blinking an
eye, are today accusing us of doing this. Who closed the
JIM? I will say once again what was already repeatedly
said in consultations on the Syrian chemical-weapons
dossier: Stop your games at the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons — we know the aim
of those games — and demonstrate your readiness to
establish a genuinely independent and professional
mechanism, if you want honest cooperation, and not a
smokescreen for political manipulation”. The needed
trust would then emerge.
There should be no illusions about this. We need
a new mechanism that is approved by the Security
Council. In our view, any other alternatives or
agreements in a narrow format will be illegitimate.
The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Field (United Kingdom): I simply would like
to restate the facts of which everyone in the Security
Council is well aware: Russia was — and we accept this
fact — a key player in creating the Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM). We were very delighted to see
that it played its full role in that regard. The Security
Council will recall that Russia voted to establish the

18-0148027/28

S/PV.8160

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

JIM (resolution 2235 (2015)). It voted in favour of a
report and resolutions that set out the very detailed
methodology that the JIM was to follow.
This was an independent expert body. It then made
a key undisputed finding of fact: the fact that the Syrian
regime — the regime of Al-Assad — had gassed its
own people. These were the facts that Russia then did
not like and so it was on that basis that it chose to veto
the JIM, and in so doing, it set back the whole issue of
non-proliferation and all of our efforts and destroyed a
global consensus against the use of chemical weapons.
This is very dangerous precedent, as I said in my
original comments. It was also, I think, a sad day for us
all here in the Security Council, but most importantly it
was a calamity for the Syrian people.

28/28

18/01/2018

I would therefore simply urge Russia to use the
very considerable influence that it wields to stop
Al-Assad from using chemical weapons in future and
to comply with his country’s obligations. We recognize
that Russia is playing an important part in the Iranian
issue, so it is not that Russia is being obstructive across
the board, but in relation to the Syrian matter, as I said,
with an expert independent body that came up with
a report that Russia did not like, it sought to veto it,
which sends an extremely dangerous signal for future
nuclear proliferators and one that I think we should all
roundly condemn.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

18-01480
