United Nations

303rd

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Friday, 3 November 1950, at 3 p.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Official Records

Flushing Meadow, New Yo,.k

CONTENTS

Page

Observance in Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania of human rights and fundamental freedoms: report of the Ad Hoc Political Committee (A/1437)

(concluded)

353
President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Iran).

Observance in Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania
of human rights and fundamental fl'eedoms:
report of the Ad Hoc Political Committee
(AjI437) (concluded)
[Agenda item 25]
1. Mr. DROHOJOWSKI (Poland): The Ad Hoc
Political Committee had an opportunity to fulfil its duty
by recommending the discontinuance of the item which,
for the third time, faces a session of the General Assembly. The Committee would thus have bolstered the prestige of our Organization. But other considerations
prevailed against justice, logic and good sense. The
United States and the United Kingdom had their way
in the Committee. The vote on the draft resolution now
before the General Assembly was nevertheless significant. While five delegations opposed the draft resolution,
thirteen, by abstaining, made plain their serious misgivings in spite of ohvious pressure. In other words,
eighteen delegations did not approve of the substance
and wording of the resolution. 1
2. At this time I wish to state again that whoever
comes forward with a claim that human rights and
fundamental freedoms should be observed in other
countries must come with clean hands. He who preaches
must practise what he preaches. This is relevant, regardless of what the representative of the United States
may think. We fail to see it in this case. I also dare say
that some representatives came to the debate in the Committee with preconceived ideas. Their minds were made
up before the discussion had begun. Any open-minded
person could draw but one conclusion. That is, that each
and every argument, facts, logic, and every appeal to
reason and good sense were discarded a priori. The representative of the United States, fo~ instance, sought
refuge in railroading the issue in the direction of a totally
irrelevant issue, namely, that of the alleged expulsion
of Turkish nationalists from Bulgaria.
.
1 For the discussion 011 this subject in the Ad Hoc Political
Committee, see Official Records of the General Assembly,
Fifth Session, Ad Hoc Polit·ical Committee, 2nd to 6th meetings inclusive.

3. We are now considering this question in the Assembly, which is called upon to approve or disapprove the
draft resolution before us. This Assembly can and should
reject this draft, which is not inspired by the spirit or
letter of the Charter. If adopted, it would not be conducive to the development of friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights.
Our Organization was meant, so the Chartcr says, to
be a centre for harmonizing the action of nations. Can
you truthfully say that these base affirmations, these
slanderous statemcnts and harsh words are meant to
harmonize our actions? The answer must be in the
negative.
4. But allow me to briefly restate the case. In the first
place, after discussion at three sessions of the General
Assembly, no one has been able to substantiate the allegation that fundamental rights have been violated by
Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania. All statements to that
effect have been mere accusations, and empty accusations at that.
5~ Another avenue was explored, that of redirecting
the case into other channels by defining it as a dispute.
For this purpose, the authority of the International
Court of Justice was used. May I remind you, however,
that the Court's answer is that it is
cr. • • not called upon to deal with the charges
brought before the General Assembly since the questions put to the Court relate neither to the alleged
violations of the provisions of the Treaties concerning
human rights and fundamental freedoms nor to the
interpretation of the articles relating to these matters".2

6. However, this clear and unequivocal statement of
the Court did not prevent the representative of Australia
from calling it a judgment. That appears in the record
of the second meeting of the Ad H DC Political Committee on 2 October. Neither did it prevent the representative of the United Kingdom from stating in the Com2 See Interpretation of Peace Treaties, AdvisO'ry Opinion:
I.G.!. Reports 1950, page 70.

353

AjPY.303

,

.

General Assembly-Fifth Seuion-Plencry Nfeetlnp
11

.;

mittee, on 4- Octo~~·,/ that it would be misleading and
beside the point to maintain. that the Court declined
jurisdittion to interpret the art~cles of the treaties deal~
1ugwith hwnan rights. I should like to challenge the
reprcsentativeo£ the United Kingdom to show a single
word or sentence in the advisory opinion of the Court
according to which it pronounces itself on the subject
of human rights. .n11.d yet many speakers ill the Com",
mittee took the· vi~Jations of human rights for granted.

i. Conscious of die weakness of·their arguments, some

representatives shii~ed the problem to another field,
namely, to the allegeq, duty of the three governments to
. send their representatives to Lake Success and/or The
Hague. And they cotlcluded,as did the representative
of the. United States {Ihis morning [302nd m~cting 1,
:tbat,slnce the thre~~overnments have not done so, that
constimres a proofoltlteirguilt. The whole tasearises,
as is well known, from the. peace treaties signed by
those three governments. Yet not a single stipulation in
those peace treaties imposes upon the three governments
such a duty, a,nd none of the delegations which voted in
favour of the draft resolution in the Committee can
prove the existence of such an alleged duty.
8.0£ course, there was a. possibility of having the rep~
resen~tives of· those three countries in this Assembly,
the simplest way bei·ng the admission'of those States to
the Untted Nations. Yet that admission was refused. I
repeat-the simplest way of having them he,re· was to
admit those States to the United Nations. Thus we ar'"
r1ve ata very strange situation indeed. On the one hand,
some reptesentatives want them to be present; and, 011
the other hand, they refuse to admit them.
9:. It is obvious that the whole caserests on the peace
treaties. Therefore we maintained and continue to maintain that neither the ,. General Assembly nor the Inter..
national Court of Justice was competent to deal with the
matter. But even the Court,. in its advisory opinion of
18 July, denied the authors of the whole case the right
to initiate any procedure as provided by the peace treaties without the clear and explicit consent and. co~
operation of the three States directly concerned. Thus,
Imvingfailed wjth the. Court, the proponents of this
dlTnpaign returned to this forum in order to carry on.
]O~· in order. to show some of the true aims, it is to the
point to mention that the ~~romoters of this campaign not
only by-pass Articlt;; 4, paragraph 2 of the Charter, and
distort the spi~t and letter of Article 55c, but. that
tltey conveniently fail to l'rlention article 4 of' the peace
treaties with Bulgaria and Huugaryand article 5 of the
peace treaty with Romania. Those articles are pertinent
to the 'case. The;v itnoose upon the three govern111em$'
the obligation not to Permit the existence and aljtivities
of organizations which, among other things t conduct
propaganda hostile ta the United Nations, il1:duding re..
visiGnist propaganda, organi~ations of a fasdst ~e and
organizations engaged in anti~democraticactivities...
11. . It has been established beyond the 'shadow of a
douht that those accused,and sentenced during' the trials
in Bulgaria; Hungary and .Romania were leaders of or..
ganizations described in Articles 4 and 5 of the peace
treaties. Why, tben, such bashful silence about these
stipulations? It is clear that· the Bulgarian, Hungarian
ana Romanian criminals were to have been the spear..
head of. Anglo..American interventionism in the three
.

.

pe~ples' detnoc~acies. As the campaign in which o~~

Or~ni~tion istald to participate is but.Qne. facet of

Anglo~An1erican

interventionism, it .could not, ~~..
pected that the representatives of the United States, the.
United Kingdom and certain other countries would
mention these articles of the peace treaties.
12. The real motive behind the draft resolution now
before us is to obtain from this Assembly another go..
ahead s~gnal for theint~rventionist campaign of the
United States, so that that Pow~r can intervene when..
ever and wherever it suits its purposes.
13. In pursuing this aim, the United States and its
friends forget to remind the Assembly that each and
eveJ:'Y country has its security laws. In the case of the
United States and some other countries, the laws are
conducive to witch~bunting where labour leaders arid
leaders of the peace movement are concerned. This
witch..bunt is being encouraged by the highest authorities in the United States. It is therefore cynical to ques..
tion the right of the peoples of Bulgaria, Hungary and
Romania to enact suCh laws as they deem pr()per for
the p~eservation of governments of their own chpice.
It is even more cynical to criqcize the courts which the
people.:" of these three countries have established lnaccordance 'with their laws. The United States delegation
has chosen to do sQwhile the Scottsboro case, the
Ingram case, the Willie McGee case.and the case of. the
Martinsville seven stand 'out as examples of United
. States justice, and while those. in charge of the enforcement of the· law cannot boast of their integrity~ .
14. Racial discrimination against Negroes, .LatinAmericans and Orietitals is not only a custom in a large
portion, of the U nit~d ~tates;, it. is . sanct~oned by ~aw
and by the coudsof Just1ce.Wh~re,.lfnot In the U~lted
States, ,could a congressman, dUil'mga congressIOnal
hearing,. call a. distinguished citizen: "Yo~ black soand..so"? This happened~n4' August thIS year.. The '
United States representatlvecannot whitewash hl1l1Self
by .calling the circutnst~mce$ irrelevant to the case of
humallt'ights.
'
'15. The rp-cord of the. United Kingdom is far from
good, especially where colonial people are. concerned.
Australia's policy wwardaborigines and coloured people is a shameful one.. The campaign against rallOur,
the peace movement and all' fot'r11s of progress is rantpant. We slu.tllnot insist at this time on .similar facts
concerning Bolivia, Cuba and other accusing countries.
What they really do is to follow the lead ot the United
States..Of course, thev do it. in accordance with the
customs of their own ruling classes. When their moral
!ight tO~W;.iI~r ~s. accusers was' eloq?ently challeng~d
111 the CotnttUtte~ by the tepresentaave of the Soviet
Union and by others; the representative of the United
States remained silent. Thesilenca was shared by the
representatives of the United Kingdom and Australia.
Is it proper for them, may I ask, to appear as accusers?
While their own consciences are heavily burdened, they
appear empty-handed with unsubstantiated allegations
and slanderous acc'l1satipns.
16. ,. There' is also another aspet:t of ·this caU1paig~;
which ,was to.entioned this morning by the represen~"
tlve of the United State~. The United Nations' is supposed to take part in apropagandistic attempt to overthrow the democratic and progressive regimes in Europe.

at

ass
This wasimplicltly- stated in.the. Committee by the representative of .the Netherlands, on 5 October. He sald
in substance that the repeated discussion of the question
would alloy! p'ooplein all .countries .still under the spell
of communIstic propaganda toreabze the actual facts,
This admission needs no comment. But what has our
Organization to do with such wishful thi~king of the
representative of the Netherlands? Is it our function to
incite criminal organizamllnsagainst' the lawful govern..
ments of these cot.tiltries? Theretord of those gov,ernmentsspeaks for it~elf.
,
'
17. In the course of our discussions, 'I have stressed
the 1ecord of the'three pef)ples' democracies concerned
-social progress, as comprA!ed with pre..war backwat>dnessand oppression; th(~ right of all to work instead
of unemployment and mi~\ery ; equality before .the law in
lieu of privileges; the raising of the standard at living;
schools for all versus theiUiteracy of bygone days.
18. Does th~representativeof the Netherlands really
believe that the retention in one shape or another of the
item before us will induce the peoples of Bulgaria,
HtJn~ry, and Romania to desire the return of their
previous lords and masters and the intervention of their
foreign protectors? Of course, following this. trend of
thought" the representative of the Netherlands, as did
some others, lightly dismissed the agreement between
Church and State in Hungary, which was read in the
C..onunittee; and the quotations from the Bulgarian,
Hangarian and Romanian Constitutions regarding religious liberty and so forth. Nevertheless, facts remain·
facts, and no wi~hful thinking or one-track-mindedness
can dismiss substat\tiated arguments and replace them
by unsubstantiated ac~usa.tions.
'
19. What are we then to do at this juncture? The
draft resolution is unacceptable both in its substance
and in its wording. It is not a compromise as stated by
the representative of the United States. It is 'a diktat of
a \~oerced majority.
20. ParagraphS, for instance, admits implicitly that
no on~ else but those who sign the treaty or treaties
, have any rights in connex:ion with· the clauses contained
therein. At the same time, however, it aims at the con..
tinut~tion ofa 'campaign of slander through the intermediary of the Secretary..General.
.
21. As to paragraphs 2 and 4,which are couched in
harsh langUage, it is again necessary to reeall that the
Gover!ltqents of,Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania were
not found to be violating the obligations -of their respective peace treaties, and the General Assembly has,
therefore; no right to condemn them or to note its
anxiety.
22. As I pointed out·in a statement before the COlllIt.~ittee; ,paragraph 3 coittains a most deliberate1 . 'Unfdlunded and extraordinary assumption that the Governments of Bulgaria, Hungary Cl,nd Romania ate aware
that breaches of the treaties are being committed. \tVhere
is there the slightest evidence to this effect? Noallegatiolns have been substantiated. As I indicated in the
course of the Committee's discussions, such· an asswnpw
tio:l1 seems to be an excursion in the dom.ain of psycholPgjr-aridiculous excursion and, therefore, incompatible
wi~p the dignity ·of our Organization.
.
,
2~. .Paragraph 4 suggests that the General Assembly ,
S~Pltldsubscribe to «ndendorse slanderous and baseless

accusations. This is indeed vet'y dangerous. TheaUega..
tion' contained in paragraph 4 to the\eftect that the
three govetthnents have made no satisfactory refutation
of certain ac::.'usations is a typical example of distortion.
All accusations have met with clear statements containing the elementtr of every case. The circumstance that
these refutations have been thrown overboard by Ithe'
accusers is not a sufficient basis for, the statement contained in paragraph 4.
24. Each and every element of the draft resolutionand the draftasa w'hole--gives every gi"o:und for its
rejection. It is. paspa on facts which are n<'Jlt substantiated, alld the conclusions have nothing in common with
real and, .stw,st;tnti::Lt~d facts. I thereforecarge the General Ass~tr1~,ly to r~ject it and thereby to discontinue the
consider~Hon of ~ri item which has long enough been an
obstacle to {)ur efforts to develop frretidly relations
among nations, and which has contributed to preven~ing
our Organization from becoming a centre for hannotUz..
ing the actions of nations in the attainment of comm.on
ends.
~3. Sir Carl BERENDSEN, (New Zt-'aland): The
delegation of New Zealand feels that it would be failing
in its duty if it did not explail~ very briefly: the~policy
that it adopts in connexion w~tlh this fundamental question of human rig~ts.
26. This is nota, new question. The poil1t of view of
New Zealand has been etICplaill.ed very firmly indeed on '
previous occasions, :and ;that point of view remains unaltered. 'We deplore and condetl1tt these grave and continued denials of justice, these breaches of f)lose, dementa"ry canons common to all religions and to all moral
concepts of what is right and .Jecent.and proper i'!!-c't'he'
relations· of man with man. and in the relatioriscf a
government with its citizens. To us it is incredible that,
in this year of grace, any government cl~imiJ.1g tape a
civilized administration should refuse even 11'0 discuss,
in the terms in which it solemnly promised to discuss,
such shocking allegations. While this denial of the most
elementary rights e:xist~~ while there is this contumacious refusal to perform n. bounden duty, the countries
concerned will be held by, the whole£ree world-by
right-thinking men and women everywhere-to be in
contempt of civilization and, to be derelict in their duty
to the worl~ and in the observance of their pledged word.
27; I wish it were possible for the United Nations to
do something.t11ore directly ,to assist the innocents who
ha1re suffered and are suffering. Today, action seerns to
he beyond oUr power, but it is within oUr power-and
it is indeed our'bounden duty-to express in the finnest
possible words ?ur.<detestation of. what has taken 1?1ace
and our determmaition, as and when we can, to build a
world in which such crimes ,cannot be repeated,,·
28. Mr. PLAISANT (France) (translated. fr()m
French) : Each time that this question has been placed
on the agenda we have voiced our indignation that these
crimes should go unpunished and that the culprits· remain unconcerned.
29. The General Assembly has twice [r6$()1~tion$212
(Ill) and 294 (IV)] expressed its feelings; ithasap..
pealed to BUlgaria, Hungary and Romania. It has asked
those countries, which have applied to beadmttted
among us as equals; to clear themselves of the charges
which disqualify them for admission and to fulfil their
0

AeeeuW1y-Fiftt.
----,,---------...;..,,-:;..--......,..;.;--------,
::.......--.....;::.------_.---.....--

AS6--_

SesslQn-Ple171ury Meetitigs
....
35. Mr. ICHASO (Cuba) (triinslatedJrom Spanish) :
obligations,:, especially tho$e cOl1cerning the respect for
For more than two years our Organization has been
h~an rights. Far from h~swering that appeal,. the
C{fovernments of Bulgaria, Hung~ry and Romania have .concerned with the .a.bnormal situ~tion prevailing in
Bulgaria,E!ungary and Romania with regard to human
persisted'in the et-'t'ot of their ways.
rights and fUkldamental freedorns and, above all, with
30. In the meantime the International Court 1Jf Jus~
the
systematic refusal of the governments of those
tice has given its opinion a upon the q"testion},\ which
countries
to COl'reet such improper conduct.
the General Assembly put to 1t last year. The a(,'visory
opinion was precisely what the French. delegatio,v. had .36. SincE~ the third session of the General, Assembly,
predicted. The Court recognized that the dispute. which
ample pro1of has been submitted of. the fact that those
had arisen between some of the signatories to theJ.peace
peoples are being denied their elementary rights, and, as
treaties on the one hand, and Bulgaria, F.(ungn.ry and
though such evidence were not more. than enough,
Romania on the other, cOllcernAng the fulfiltnent of
theria is the testimony. of very respecta~le perl:ions and
their obligations for the saieguarding of h\lman rights,
instituti011$ and of all the free Press of tne world, which
was a dispute which could be $ubmitt~d to the organs
leaves no doubt as to the grave r~sponsibiHty of the
of arbi~r~tion.. provi.ded for in those treat!es. It thus
Hungarian, Bulgarian and Romaaian authorities have
assertea that 1t Was Incumbent upon Bulgarta, Hungary
incurred in such serious cases as that of C~rdinal Mindsand Romania to submit to arhltration and to designate
zenty, and others which need not be mentioned because
their arbiters.
'
they are well known in all countries where the expression
of thought atld reports on facts are not subject to official
31., The advisory opinion of the Court-as the French
censorship.
delegation said last year [234th meeting]-..obviously
could not, in the absence of specific stipulations in the
37. The great.majority of delegations in this Assembly
treaties, supply us with weapons against. the 1)ad faith
has never had any doubt that under those totalitarian
of the defendants and their systematic refusal to carry
regimes the people are ina· disadvantageous position.in
out the specific undertakings which they had accepted.
regard to. their essential rights~ notwithstanding the
Once again we are in the same impasse. While the
crude so.phistries. that the. defenders of those. St.ates
victim suffers, the accused escapes both the charge and
where official terror prevails have used in the attempt
the verdict. If our conception of our duties and our
to conceal certain crimes-although no smoke screen
responsibilities' were less lofty, we might succumb to
or iron curtain thick enough, to hide such crimes has yet
the temptation to let the m~tter go ~y defaul~ and judge
been invented.
..
t.hose who refuse to ~ppea.r In court ~.n absent~a. WIsdom
38. For that reason it is strange that in this fifth seshaspl'ompted us h1therto not to· take that course, alsion the Assembly has, in my opinion, still acted in such
though we might have been morally justified in taking
a very cauticus and circumspect manner on such a
more drastic s~ps.
serious and important question. Perhaps that .attitude
32. The case remains open; it cannot be closed SO long
may
be attributed to the evasive answer given by the
as evidence can be accumulated and sifted. It is now up
International
Court of Justice.. Although the Court's
to the defence to present its case, so that justice may
opinion
in
principle
condemns the attitude taken by the
be done.
Governments of Bulgaria, Hungary a;nd Romania, it is
33. But there is one thing in this whole vast affair
110t favourable t~) legal deter:.nination of the matter and
which we can-and must-condernn here and now. The
rules out the possibility of submitting it to the methods of
highest internati011a~ judicial authority has told us what, arbitration provided for in the peace treaties.
the law. is with rei~ar<'t to the procedure for the· enforce~'
39. Ever since 1948, we have been in favour ofa posiment of the peact~ treaties. We know that Hungary,
tive
condemnation of the violations and transgressions
Bulgaria and Rolt,tania are under the legal. obligation
repeatedly
committed by the governments of these three
to submit to arbitr'ation. and to appoint arbiters. They
Balkan nations without subterfuge or euphemism. We
have not done so; they have even explicitly refused to
believe
that in dealing yvith fundamental questions the
rlto· so. That is inex',cusable; it is a serious breach of a
United
Nations should reject any policy of pretence,
cOlltl"actual obligl!ti()n of which we are bound to take
appeasement or evasion. The armed inva~ion ofa. sov"
c()gnizance in this very Assembly, whose law is that
ereign State by the· armed forces of another is, in our
c(mtracts are sacred and which itself depends on an
opinion, no more fundamental than disr,~gard of human
international conl~ract.
.
.
rights and the violation of the' inherent rights of the
34. The draft resolution of the Ad Hoc Political individual
in any country which prides itseH on being
CClmmittee wisely refers to these considerations, the
Civilized.
Fa!',
although invasion causes material dam"
~alsic c~ndusions qf which I hav~ emphasized. In giving
~tge and 105:$ ot life, violation of the freedom and dignity
Its approval to the d1'aft resolubon, the French delegaof man caus~~s just as irreparable moral damage and protion intends not only to register a protest. against a
vokes
a profound disturbance in the mind of mankina.
bet.rayal of justice, but to record its insistence on the
strict observance of contractual obligations and its re~
40.. In my .6'Pini~n, the arg~ent thatthe safeguardipg
.spect for the safeguarding of human rights, which is an
of human rIghts IS a. domestic concern of States1S 1n"
integral part of. our national tradition and has now been
valid. No Sta;te based on a free and respected citizenry
proclaimed by the Uni\ted Nations as our international
can hide behind such an argument in order to avoid its
1dea1.
fundamental duties to its subjects. Attacks upon individual
freedoms, wherever they may occur, are of such a
8 See Interpretation of Peace Treaties, Advisory Opinion:
character
that they go beyond national frontiers and
I.e.l. Reports 1950, page 65~ and ibid., (second phase)~ page
221.
assume a world..wide character.
.
.

...__..._. ....

I'

General

.

851
--,-----_._--------41. It is to be noted that the Declaration o£Human
Rights ad(')pted by the United Nations in 1948 [resolution 217 A (Ill)] is described as universal., The preamble tCl ~~he D\lClaration states that a recognition o~ the
inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights
of-all members of the human family is the foulldationof
freedom, justice,and peace in the world, and that disregard for human rights has resulted in barbarous acts
which have outraged the conscience of mankind.
42. From this it follows th~t a just peace, that is, a
genuine, stable and .lasting peace, is incompatibl~ with
systems of government which attempt to enclose the
human spirit in iron moulds within which the will is
atrophied, thought is stunted and conscience ceases to
exist as the governing principle o~ conduct.
43. Peace, the supreme desire of man and his greatest
good on earth, requires conditions of life favourable to
the fuU deve'lopment of the individual in 'What is' highest
and noblest.........freedoman<1 dignity:""
44. , So long as there are regimes or governments which
enslaYe. the human spirit and ,prevent the individual
from thinking1 believing, feeling and acting in a~cord­
ance with his mind and conscience, war will continue to
be a constant threat to mankind.
45. On the. other hand, we; the Members ~f the
United Na.'tiot1s, arecommitterJ under Article 55 c of
the Ch~ ..ter to promote' universal respect' .for ' human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion. It is therefore
not optional but, mandatory for the ASf?embly to intervene firmly in all cases of flagrant and $ystematic violation of fundamental human freedoms.
46. As I stated in the Ad Hoc Political Committee
when this matter was dircussed, the Assembly, fu'-'ed
by the authoritative bu~ over-literal decision of the
International Court of Justice, must give up the idcaof
having the problem settled' through legal channels and
adopt a different course in order to arrive at a satisfactory ~91ution.
47.'\iVith this in view, the Australian representative
submitfed a draft which was admirable in principle but
drawn up in such prudent and cautious terms as to
give the impression that he wasairaid to roll up his
sleeves and get down to the question. My de:legation
considered that it was necessary to go further and take
.an attitude in keeping with the acts which had been denounced;; it felt that the fact that three States had not
only persisted in violating human rights and {unda,·
mental freedoms, hut had also turned treaties into dead
letters and scoffed at the Assembly's decisions-thus
clearly showing their inability to fulfil their commitments
and to conduct themselves fittingly as members of the
international community-should be "subject to moral
'
punishment.
48. The Cuban delegation, therefor~, which supported
the substance of the Australian draft resolution, submitted certain amendments with three ends in view. In
the first place, the .Assembly was openly to condemn the
three .accused governments, without circumlocution .01'
~onsideration of extenuating circumstances. Secondly,
It was to take note of the fact that the refusal of those
governments to appoint representatives to the treaty
cornmissions;'in'~raerto settle a dispute w~ose existence
d b~en recogmzed by the Court,. constituted yet an- ,

ha

other proof that those governments, did not observe
human rights am:). fundamental freedo1lls. Thirdly, it
was to decide that as long as the GOV'~Thxnents of Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania did not change th~ir attitude, th~ir applications for admission to membership of
the United Nations would not be considered.
.
49. We do not deny the radical character and the
strong tone of these Cuban amendments, but we believe
that mild language cannot be used ift the face of such
stern realities. We consider that everything proposed .py
my delegation was just and in keeping whh the seriousness of the facts, It was nevertheless easy for us to observe that the majority, "fer reasons which" we respectalthough we do not share them-was inclined to continue to deal more mildly with the matter. In t~~e drcumstanc.es, it w.oUld have been, fU,tile categor.ic~l1Y to
insist on our point of view. My delegation has th~refore
c~mfined ,itself to making its point. of view 011 this\1questIOn clear.
" I '
50. We were ve~'y grateful to ,the Australian tepr~fenta­
tive for, agreeing to rev.,ise the original text, of hi~! d,raft
in accordance with two of our amendments. We l~e1ieve
that his understandin,g and gep-~rous attitude basat
least made it possible for the Assembly to agree, as it
surely must; to a .specific "condemnation of the attitude
of the Governments of Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania.
in systematically and stJ..1bbornly attacking the freedom
and dig>:'ityor the human being.
51. ' Let. that suffic.e. The United Nations has certainly
made great strides in the defence of moral principles 'and
the application of such principles. The events in Korea
sho"w that all the democratic pelles of the world stand
rc~dy to combat armed aggression wherever it:IT1ay
occur, The Assembly's condemnation of the impropet
conduct of the three Balkan States concerned-and it
is certainly going to pronounce such condemnation-is,
a proof that our concern for h'aman rights continues to .'
grow and is about to take a concrete and fitting form.
'52; The United Nations does not exist merely to discuss and settle conflicts between States by peaceful
methods; it also exists to ensure 111an a secure, dignified
and free life throughout the world.
53. Mr. ANZE MATIENZO (Bolivia) (translated,
from Spanish) : Vve have reached the end of the third
stage of the efforts the United Nations began in 1949-,
on the initiative of Bolivia, supported by Australia-'.to
compel Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania to' observe
those human rights which they had violated so shockin fT_
ly that the feelings of all men in all parts of the world
were outraged.
,
.
54. The procedure followed in this matter, which the
civilized world wished to bring to a successful conclusion,
was inspired by the principles of the Charter. The
Charter is not only a multilateral treaty' binding-upon
States, but also, I think, a code of political morals and
a standard of conduct to which all peoples should aspire
if they wish to consider themselves worthy of civiliza"
tion and of the,modern world.
55. We were disconcerted at the outset regarding the
fulfilment of the Charter obligations to respect human
rights; later we wer,e led.to take action ill.111ore practical
and positive ways. My country raised, the question with..
in tlie framework of the Charter, but it then encountered
the insurmountable barrier '0£ Article 2, paragraph 7,

358
,;

which constitutes at~ obvious contradiction in that ad..
mirable document: for the· Charter attempts to promote
rights whose observance it \cannot require. In thIS case it
cannot require. observance, ,because respect for human
rights is incumbent upon. Sta.tes and snternatiotlal\ compulsion'cannot be brought in,to play in matters aftecting
internal sovereignty.
56, Fac-ed with that obstacle, we found an expeditious
solution ~n the p~ce treaties, .articles 4 and 5 of which
enjoin ac()nt~'actual obligation which establishes a rule
of posi~ive law. The General Assembly found that in
that matter it could act legally by hlvoking theobligadons ,laid down in the peace treaties.
57. We know what course that action has taken. We
know that the International .Court of Justice handed
down. an advisory opinion in response to the General
Assembly's request for such an opinion. It\ the Bolivian
delegation's view that opinion does not in at\y w~,y preclude positive ~ction in. order to ensure the oh~ervance
of human rig'hts.
58. As the representative of France has stated, the
arbitration pi~ovided for in the treaties is binding upon
the parties. '.It'he only negative element in the Court's
opinion is to be found in the statement that a third
party may n(lt' intervene in the organization of the
arbitration tribunal.
.
59. "'That new effort having been frustrated, we reached
the third stage in our struggle for observance. of human
rights in a coni'ident and calm frame of mind. That
struggle was not inspired by orders or proposals. of a
political character, but rather by the profound consciousness of mankind that the individual is the essential
nucleus of society and that nothmg is more tragically
defenceless., than t\rnan confronting a Srate which disregards the law an".: '=>ppresses him.
60. That consciousnes$, despite the legal provisions in
the Charter (J.'bstructing coercive action, is nevertheless
growing andll under the pr,otective shadow of the Universal Declaration of Hum~\n Rights, the conscience- of
mankind is identifying itself with the will and fate of
individuals of all countries and regions of the world.
61. In tbis third stage to which r have referred, my
delegation has tried to introduce two concepts. The first
is an. interpretation of{act~ for it is impossible to go
into the abstract field of principles unless we start from
facts, and the fact is the; fitl\grant violations of human
rights, reported to us p~.rsistently and eloquently, committed by the Governm~nts of Hungary, Bulgaria and
Romania. Those violations have provoked collective
. action of moral perswasion, which has convinced us that
there is a uniV(~l'"$al C(;nncern for the o1)servance of human
rights.
62.. Our amendment, which would have tlie United
Nations intervene wherever there was a violation of
human rights regardJ:ess of whether a State was concerned or not, was nbt adopted. Nevertheless, the fact
is even' stronger than the Assembly'sacticn, for. we find
in the very important proposal which we have just approved-I refer to paragraph 15 of the resolution on
unitedaction for peace [A/1456]---that Member States
are called upon. to respect human rights and fundamental
freedoms, doubtless because it is felt that united action
for peace cannot be achieved withoutrespect£or human
rights.
,

,

63. In accordance with. that conviction. my delegation
tried to broaden the provisions of'the A1 .1stralian draij:
1

resolution. It desired tbatall Member- St!Ltes should be
informed of the deliberations and studies of States and
of the Sectetary..General on these cases of violations, so
that they might have a detailed. account of activities
wnichoutraged their conscience as civilized nations. The
draft resolution which we are approving condemns, invites, deplores and thus brings .amoral and spiritual
pressure to bear on the transgressors. I believe it constitutes a step forward, a firm step towards what we
wish to achieve-the idea! proclaimed in Paris, which is
one of the triumphs of which the United Nations can
be proud.
64. 1 hope that we shall not waste time and that one
day that moral objective will be reached ; in other words,
I hope that one day we shall not need legal subterfuges,
but usher.in that principle through the front door, so
that the world may live without fear. relying on the respect whichgover11l11ents owe the individual, since governments are but the expression of the individ~al's will.
In that 'hope, I urge the Assembly to vote in favour of
the draft resolution submitt-ed by the Ad H DC Political
Committee.
65. Mr.. ZARUBIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Re..
publics) (translated from Russian): The question of
the observance of human rights 'and fundamental freedoms in Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania is being discussed .for the third time by the General Assembly.

66. At previous sessions, when the question was discussed, and in the Ad Hoc Political Committee at this
session, the USSRdclegation and the delegations of
certain other countries proved, on the basis of documentary evidence, the provisions of the United Nations
Charter and the principles of internatiQnallaw, how il..
legal it was for the United Nations to discuss that question; furthermore, they exposed the absurdity and inconsistency of the slanderous accusations' made by the
representatives of the Anglo-American bloc against the
three peoples' democracies-Bulgaria, Hungary and
Rornania.-·in conn~on with the alleged non7observance
by those countries of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and th~ir alleged violation of peace treaties.
67. In summarizifig the substance of the discussions
on this question and in analysing the motives of those
who were responsible £.01' its' submission to the Organization, it is essential to note certain facts. Neither the
United Nations Charter flor the fundamental principles
of inte~nationa1 1a\Whave ever provided-or now provide-any legal b?-~!~ for' the discussion of this question
in the United Nations~
68. In the course of the discussion of the question, the
USSR delegation has frequently called attention to the
fact thatthe Charter categorically forbids the Organiza"
tion to interfere in matters whic1l lie within the domestic
jurisdiction -of any State and does not require either
Member States or non-member States to SUbmit such
matters to the Organization for consideration. During
the discussion of the question in the United. Nations,
none of the initiators. of this slander against Bulgaria,
Hungary and Romama have been abl~, without contra"
dicting Common sense, tb~ fundamf! ilt~J orovisiotls of the
Charter and the generally accented pri~ciples of international law, to refute the indisputable fact that this

S03rd Meedng--S Novembel' 1950
_....- -----------------_
..:::-_-------------_.,.......,-------:---

359

question lies exclusively within the domestic: jurisdiction
of those three States and that the United Nations has
nothing to do with it or is entitled to deal with it.
69. The authors of this plot, who have brought the
totally<unfounded charges against Bulgaria, Hungary
and Romania, have also been unable to refute the uni..
versally recognized legal fact that the United Nations
Charter does not confer upon the Org~nizationand its
subsidiary oodies the right to deal with questions which
hav~\ arisen as the result of the Second World War and,
mor/tovert does not confer upon them the right to concern themselves with questions relating to the inteTretation Or observanee of peace treaties. Such questions
are beyond the scopeC)£ the United Nations and do not
lie within its. co~petence. The ·fac~ that the question of
the clleged VIOlation of peace treaties by Bulgaria, .Hungary nnd Romania was originally submitted to the Gen..
eral Assembly. under the. pressure of the Anglo-American bloc, and was. subsequently submitted, under the
same pressure, to the International Court of Justice for
an advisory opinion, in itself constitutes a flagrant viola..
tion of the Cliarter.
70. The attempt .by the parties to. this plot to base
their argument on Article 5.5 c of the Charter, which calls
for universal respect for, and observance of, human
rights and fundamental free.10ms for all without distinction as t~ race, se~, language or religion, is equally
vain. It. has already been proved frequently, by docu..
mentsas well as by reference to the Constitutions and
legislat!ve measures enacted by Bulgaria, Hungary and
RomanIa, that. these .three peOPles..' d~.m.o.~.r~cies, a..fter
the overthrow of their monarcho..fa~clst regImes, have
resolutely c:.rlbarked. upon a c<,)urse of comprehensive
democratic reform, which. has fundam{>,ntaIly altered
social, political and economic conditions in those countries and established them on the basis of real popular
democracy.
,<
71. The Constitutions. of these States guarantee to an
citizens, without distinction as to sex,nationality, race
~eligion, educational or property status, absolute equal~
Ity before the law and the right to work, to leisure
to social security and to education. The Constitutions of
these countries .guarantee the inviolability of the citizen's person and his home and the privacy of correspondence; they gua:antee .freedom ~f speech· and assembly,
as well as the nght to hold meetmgs and demonstrations
and to take part in societies and organizations.. Any
p~op~g~nda; for, or expression of, hostility, hatred or
~lscrlmmahon on grounds of race or nationality is punIs.hable by law. T~e. Constit~t~ons of these States proVIde for the equahty of all cItizens before the law and
for .the application of that law to all citizens on an equal
baSIS. All laws and regulations of the former fascist
governments;-:the . Horthy <.regime in Hungary, the
.t\n~one~cu reg1tn~ In ROl?lanta and the monarcho-fascist
regime In Bulgaria-whIch limited the people's rights,
!Jave been revoked. The popular democratic authorities
.1n .t~ese countries guarantee their citizens freedom of
religIOn and of conscience.
,
72. As a result of these comprehensive democratic refo~ms, millions of people have, for the first time, re~
celVed not only full freedom and wide democratic rights
but also the material conditions for leading an independ~
ent existence, free from want and fear of the morrow.
As a result of agrarian reforms, millions of peasants

who owned no land or but little hlwe been given land
for the :first time in the history of thes,~ countries. Unemployment has been abolished forever. It,{undreds of thou...
sands of unemployed persons have been given work.
The right to work has not only been formally included
and proclaimed in the Constitutions of these·countries,
but the peoples' democratic regimes .now in powerthe:'iehave ensured the realization and implemedation o.f t~~(t
right.
'
l!.

f

73. The existence and development of. peoples' d~~J1oo"
cratic regimes in Bulgaria, Hungary and Romani:a~lf~ave
proved clearly to the whole world that the peoples' 'democratic order is based primarily on the desire to ensure
real" equality for all citizens, irrespective of their race,
sex, language or religion. Concern for freedom,. equality
and the gr~~ter welfare of the people is the very basis of
the people$' democratic regimes. That is the unalterable
law of the development of the peoples' democratic order.
74. In the· light of these welbknownand irrefutable
facts, the attempts of the enemies of the peoples' democracies to accuse these countries of non-observance of
human rights and fundamental freedoms are pitiable and
ridiculous.
75. The discussion of this trumped-up and sl'1nderous
Anglo-American charge.at three sessions of the General
Assembly has shown the whole world that the enemies
of the peoples' democracies are trying. to use.the Charter
and this Organization itself to foster enmity and hatred
among peoples, to justify their attempts to interfere'in
the domestic affairs of sovereign States and to make
those States subservient to a foreign and hostile will.
rr:hese intentions. are cOl1trary to the purposes and prinCIples of the Umted NatlOns. They are'contrary to Article 2, paragraph 7 and to Article 55 of the Charter, to
which I have already referred.
.
76. It is said that the United States delegation laid
particular stress on the inclusion of Article 2 in the
Chatter in order to avoid United Nations interference in
the internal affairs of the United States, where, as wea1l
know, millions of Negroes are.subJected to a repugnant
~nd humiliating racial discrimination and to lynchings,
Just as they wer~ a hundred years ago, and: where racial
dis~rimination is exercised. in respect of certain other
nabonal groups which do not belong to the so-called
Anglo-Saxon master race.
77. These facts are known throughout the world, and
constitute a flagrant violation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Yet the United Nations does
~ot take up or consider this question, it does not include it in the agenda of the General Assembly and the
question is not discussed in the subsidiary bodies. of the
United Nations, because it is obvious that, under the
aforementioned San Francisco fonnula and in .acca;dance with Article 2, paragraph 7 of the Charter" such
questions do not fall within the. competence~f the
United Nations. The Charter does not allow tbe Organization to interfere in the domestic affairs of Sj~tes. This
principle of the Charter applies alike to Memf)erso£ the
Organi~ationand to ~on-m~mher States. Thus any interference In the domesbc affaIrs of these States constitutes
a flagrant violation not only of the Charter, but of the
generally accepted tenets of international law.
78. The representatives of the Anglo-American coun..
tries, who are £ullyaware of the injustice and illegality

360
citizens are equal before the ·law and have an. equal
of submitting this question to the United Nations~ at..
responsibility for crimes they have committed, what...
tempt to base their argttments on the peace treaties with
ever
their social or professional status.
'.
Bulgaria, ;Hungary and Romania. It lS well known that
the political provisions of these treaties laid down the
8S. This irre£ut~ble·and universally known fact serves
following fundamental clauses:
to 'foil~l1 the attempts. of the representatives of the
(1) Bulg~lr1a, H1.1ngary and Romania !Must eU.sure
United States, the United Kingdom, Austra1i~, New
Zealand,Cuba· and other countries· to bring absurd
t~at ,all pers '.l1ls within their jurisdiction, .yv~thott'c ~is"
charges against Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania, nametmctIon c1$ tl~. race, sex., langttag~... or rehglon, enJoy
hUm31l l'ights and fundamental freedoms;
ly, that these countries have allegedly violated human
rights and fundamental. freedo1ns.
(2) The. laws of these countries must not establish
a:.l1Y discrimination on the ground of race, sex, language
84. It is also well known that when the activities of a
or religion, and all manner of discriminatory legislation
number of illegal· and dan<iestine organizations were ex..
enacted by the former fascist regimes in those coun~ries
posed in Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania, documentary
and the restrictions arising out of such legislation must
evidence sbowed,in the first· place, that neat1ya.U of
be repealed.
them planned to deprive the people of their demoCl'atic
rights and were plotting the overthrow of the; popular
(S') These countries must take measures to disband
democratic
regimes in those countries and," in the
all political, military and para-military organizations of
$ccond
place,
that they had gambled on the restoration
a fascist character in their territories. and in future must
of reactionary or avowed fascist
in
those
countries.
not countenince the existence or activities of such organregilneS of the type of the Horthy regime in Hungary,
izations, the sole purpose of which is to depdve the
the
Antonescu regime in Romania and the'czarist regime'
peoples of their democratic rights.
.
in Bulgaria.
.
.
79. .In accordance with these fundamental political pro85.. It was also conclusively proved fr(i>m the' docuvisions of the peace trf;aties, the Governments of Bulgaria, HUngary and Romania have guaranteed in their
ments that all these enemies. of the Bl..'tgarian, HunConstitutions and legislative enactments the: ~njoyment
garian and Romanian peoples 'Were connected with the
of .human rights and fl.l1ldamental freedoms to all citi- .official representatives of the United .Kingdom and the
zens without distinction as to race, sex, language or re..
United States; they acted strictly in accordance with
ligion, repealed the discriminatory legislation of the
the orders of their foreign masters and worked for them
former fascist regimes and taken measures to disband
as spies and saboteurs. The public trials showed that
fascist organizations. They are also taking appropriate
the defendants were not only theimp}acable enemies of
. . teps to prevent the existence and activities of organizathe Bulgarian, Hungarian and Romanian peoples- and
.ons whose purpose is to' deprive the peoples of their
of the popular democratic regimes in those countries,
lemocratic rights,
but that they were agents of the Anglo-American intelliserVices· and were consequently traitors to their
gence
BO. The trials held in these countries, which were used
coun~ries
and their peoples.
by the Governments of the United States and the
United Kingdom as a pretext for attempted interfer86. It, is worth noting in this connexion that none of
ence in 'the domestic affairs of these States, have shown
those who brought the question u~der di.scussiop. to the
clearly that the accused persons were leaders or memnotice of the General Assembly has been able to deny,
bers of anti-democratic and anti-popular organizations
without flouting common sense and .the generally ac..
whose. purpose was to deprive the peoples of those
cepted principles' of international law, the universally
~"
countries of their democratic rights.
recognized fact that. the trial and condemnation of conspirators and persons guilty of crimes against the' State,
81. The Catholic Cardinal Mindszenty and' the H comot
spies and saboteurs; of those who have betrayed the
munist'" Minister Rajk in Hung~ry were both ar..
national
interest, is. a question which is within the
l.'aigned and prosecuted for the same crime, that of
domestic
jurisdiction of. every sovereign State. No one
leadership of organizations whose purpose 'was to over..
has .been able or will be able to dispute the right of
rnrow the democratic regime in Hungary and to deprive
sovereign
States to take any measures against such perthe Hungarian people of their· democratic rights. The
sons
which
they may consider necessary in.accordance
same sentence was passed on them both, in strict accordance with the law. They, were both accused and' with the law. No one-·.and that includes the United
Nations-is entitled to interfere in such matters.
sentenced on the basis of the same law (Law VII, 1946,
article 1, paragraph 1).
87. Not only those trials but also more recent trials,
such as those of the Ahglo-American spies Vogeler and
82. Mr. Cohen, the United States representative, by
Sanders in Budapest, have shown that there was a great
using the names of these criminals, these enemies of the
and
widespread· network of spies· and agitators in HunHungarian pebple, invoking their official positions and
gary
which· was directed by the competent· representajuggling with words, has en.deavoured to show that the
tives of the· U.l1ited ·States and the United Kingdom.
conviction of Mindszenty ancl Rajk was evidence of the
At
the trial of Vogeler and Sanders. the defendants
existence' in I-Iullgary of terrorism and a violation of
witnesses named and exposed approximately forty
and
human rights. But in the eyes of all objective and unO'
United State~ citizens and more than ten British subbiased persons, any such assertion is merely absurd.
jects who were engaged in spying and subversive activiThe fact that both these criminals, one in a cardinal's
ties
against Hungary. More than::fifteen United States
robe and the other garbed as a minister, were convicted
citizens
and ten British subjects who had also worked
by the Hungarian people's court for the same crime and
as spies and saboteurs against Hungary were unmasked
on the basis of the same law, merely serves to show that
at the trial of Rajk in Budapest.
in Hungary, as in the other peoples' democracies, all
l

88. The trials have shown that th~ ruling circles in the
United States and the United Kingdom are still contip\ting to nurture plans involving direct inte.rvention in
the internal affairs of Bulgaria, Romania and, HungarY'.
In their stubborn attempts to give effect to these plans,
they rely on elements hostile to, the popular democratic
re~me$ of those countries, making spies of them and
usmg them to carry out subversion.

,8~. As soon as one group of people carrying out
espionage and sttbversion in, these counthes collapsed,
new groups were planted. The'defend?41ts in the trials
to which I have referred fully confesSled that they bad
engaged in espionage and subversion, The confessions
took place at public trials, in the pr(~sence not only of
large numbers of the public but also of. all the foreign
journalists in the, countries concerned; those journalists
categorically denied in theirartic!cs and special dispatches •the slanderous allegations concerning those
trials which were made in official United States and
British propaganda. The trialH mage it abundantly, apparent that all the threads of, conspiracy and espiona.ge
in Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania were manipubted
by the official representatives of the United States and
the United Kingdom.
'
90. The de~teat three sessions .of the General Assembly on the Anglo··American slanders about Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania has left no room for
doubt that it was in ordt.:r to distract attention from
their' $ubyersiveactiv,ties in those countries and to use
the United Nations as an instrument for exerting political pressure on them that the Governments of the
United States and the United Kingdom brought the
question of the observance of human rights and fundamental freedomsin Bulgaria, Hungary a.nd Romania before the United Nations.
"

91. At this session of the General Assembly, considerable attention was paid in the Ad, Hoc P9Htical Committee to the so-called opinion of the International
Court of Justice which was rendered at the request of
the fourth ses~ion of the General Assembly. As we
know, the Anglo-American bloc, which is at the bottom
of the slanders about Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania,
forced on the fourth session of the Assembly a resolution
containing a request .that the International Court of
Justice should be asked to give an advisory opinion on
the following> fouL" questions:
.

(1) Do there exist" between, Bulgaria, Hungary and
Romania on the one hand, and certain Powers signatories to the treaties of peace on the other, any disputes
healing on the implementation of the articles of the
treaties concerning the observance of human rights and
f~~damental ,freedoms. which are subject, to the provls~ons for the settlemellt of disputes contained in those
artIcles of the peace treaties wnich deal with the interpretation or implementation of the treaties ?

. (2~ In the event of an affirmative reply to the first
quesbon, are the Governments of Bulgaria, Hungary
and Romania bound to appoint their representatives to
the treaty commissions? '
,
(3) If they have not appointed' their representatives
!o these commissions within theprescribea time limit,
!s toe Secretary-General of the United Natiol1S authorIzed to aPJJoint the third member at the request of the

other party to the dispute, that is to say,~~ ~~~!t
of the United States and the United Kingdom?' -- _"C."

. (4) In the, event of an affirtriatrtve reply to the third
question, woul9 a treaty commlss1on composed of representatives ~f O1'1e side alone, Ahat is to say, of the
representativ~$ of the United ~inr~dom and the Unite.g
States~ and of ~ third memb~r ap~~inted by the Secre..,
tary-General of t.b~ United Nations, constitute a COUlr
mission, within the meaning of the irrelevant treat~~,
articles, competent to make a definitive and bind~ng decision in settlement of a dispute?
92. Any objective observer with the rudiments of :an
education who reads carefully the four questions which
I have just mentioned cannot fail to conclude that such
questions have been raised only in order to further the
wishes of the United States and the United Kingdom.
They want to establish, hy' iair means or foul~ .a so-called
treatycommisslQn composed solely of an Anglo-American, representative and a "third" tttember appointed on
their orders by tht'· United Nations Secre~ry-Genera1.
They want this "tripartite" commission, composed of
two members-a commission without precedent in international practice--to adopt definit!ve decisions plnding
on Bulgana, Hungary and Romama.
'
93. The tendentiousness, illegality'and absurdity of the
whole of this undertaking were fully exposed by the
USSR delegation at the,fourth 'session of the General
Assembly. The delegation of the Soviet Union pointed
out that th~ General Assembly was not competent to ask
for the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on that matter because it w~\sa matter exclusively within, the domestic jurisdictioilof Bulgaria, Hu,n..
garyand Romania. For the same reasons, ~' the USSR
delegation further indicated, the Court was not competent to discuss that matter without the consefit of the
governments of the States directly concerned; namely,
Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania. The head of the
Soviet Union delegatian, Mr. Vyshinsky, told the Assemblyat that session [234th -meeting] that the reference
of that question to theCou1"t in itself constitute&, contempt of the peace treaties, and a flouting of legaJ/ logic
and, at the same time, an ov~rt violation of the Charter
and an act of disrespect towards the€ol1q.The nega~
tive replies of the Court to the third and {ourtllquest10ns.
in the General Assembly resolution fully confirm the,~> ,soundness of the position which the USSR delegation '
adopted on this matter at the fourth session.
94. The International Court of Justice, which'is an <
org,an of. the United Nations, is not competent
,~';;~'
am111e thiS matter for the further reason that the tight
to interpret the peace treaties with Bulgaria, Hungary
and Romania is not vested in the United Nations· a.nd
its organs; under the provisions of those treaties, that
right is vested solely ill the contracting parties.

to

95. The United Nations and its orgalls have no right
whatever to interpret these peace treaties. We know
thatundet Article 96 of the Charter, the General Assembly may request the International Court of Justice
to give an advisory opinion on legal qu~stiQns. In this
case, however~ the matter referred, to the, Court was not
a legal question, but an issue raised 101' the definite
political purpose of using ·the authority of the Court
and of the General Assembly in order to exert shameless

,

political pressure on the Governm~t~ o! Bulgaria,

Hungary aftd Romania to change theIr poltcy on matters exclusively within their dom,stic j\trisdiction.
96. The Govenunents of Bulgaria, Hungar)t and Ro..
mania, as the parties directly concerned in this question,
objected to any discussion of the unwarranmd and illegal complaints made against them by the United
States and United Kingdom Governments. The Court
t-ad no legal right to ~a.mine that matter. By taking
cognizance of it and giving an opinion on it, the Court
violated the Charter and its own Statute, as well as the
geij.erallyaccepted principles of internationa1law.
97~ That the Court was not competent to exanline
that matter was admitted later even by one of the judges
. who had .previously voted in favour of the illegal
op!nion of the Court. In his separate opinion, Judge
Az~\Vedcy stated that, before the Court could examine that
matter, the consent of the States whose interests would
be affected by the findings of the Court must be pro..
cured. His conc1us7on was that the Court should have
refrained from giving any opinion on the questions referred to it by the Assembly.
98. Under the provisions of the peace treaties with
Bulga.ria (articles 35 and 36) , l:tungary (articles 39
and 40) and -Romania (artides 37 and 38)f the right
to consider a question concerning the interpretation.or
, non-execution of the treaties is v~sted in the contracting
parties only awl in nO one else. 'This Tight has been
granted nei:dte-j to the United Nations nor to its organs.
Furthe'.rn~<te, it can be e..--cercised on behalf of the Allied
Powers only by the heads of the diplomatic missions of
the USSR, the United States andthe United Kingdom
to Bulga.ria, Hungary and Romania respectively, acting
jointly and in agreement. Despite these legal provisions,
and acting in violation thereof, the Court not only took
cogv-izance of the questions which the Assembly had
iUet;'"ally referred to it under pressure from the AngloAtnedcan bloc, but also gave affirmative replies to the
first and second questicms. For the reasons I have j1.tst
given$ these tepl~es were quite obviously worthless. Tb€;
Court pennitted an overt andg:ross. violation 'hi both
the.·letter and 'the spirit of. the p(~ce treaties with Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania by lagreeing that· two only
of the other countries.. -the UniteOl States and the United
Kingdom.-might be, a party. to It dispute with any of
those countries. This premise utlderIying the Court's
approach, to the case "'''as fundamieDtally unsound and
entirely distorted the provisions of the peace treaties.
99. In the sttkt meaning of the articles of the peace
treaties I have mentioned, the p3,rties to any dispute
concerning the i~tetJ?retation or execution.. of these
treaties cap be only Hungary, Bulgaria or Romania acting separlltety, and the USSR. the United States and
me United Kingdom acting jo~ntly and in agreement.
If there is no s:tIch agreement oetween them, there is no
second party to the dispute and consequently it is im..
llOssib1.e to take any aftion under the ptocedure laid
down In the peace treaties for the settlement of dIsputes
concerning their interpreta.tion or execution.
l00~ .. In the .pa~ticular. case befo~e us, tla1ti~ly, the
.slanderous Anglo-AMertcan alIegatton coneerntng the
non..observance of hU1~an tights and fundamental free~
dams in Bulgaria, Hungary "and Romania, there is no
such agreement between the Soviet Union, the United

""

States and the United Kingdom, because the USSll

does, not recognize the existence of any grounds for'

making complaints against Bulgaria! Hungary and ~o"
mania, which ate honestly and sc~~upulou$ly fulfilbng
all thefr; obliga.tions ttnder the peace treaties. Consequently, since ther; is no. concerted ~ctionon this mattertt.mong the SOvletUntOn, the Untted States and the
United Kingdom, the necessary conditions which would
enable those three Powers jointly to become a J?arty to a
dispute with Bulgaria or Hun~ary or Romanta do not
exist. Without the participation of the USSR, the
United States and the United Kingdom by themselves
eannot constitute; nor have they any legal right to constitute, a party to su,ch a dispute. Thus, since the Govern..
mentof the SovietUnio!l does not support the illegal
and slanderous accusations made by the United States
.and the United Kingdom against Bulgaria, Hungary
and Romania, there tannot possibly be a party to a dis..
pute with any of these three countries. And if t~ere is
no party ton dispute, then there can be no dispute, since
there can be no question in this case of making any com..
plaints ~nst the other party, namely, Bulgaria or Hun..
gary or Romania, under the peace treaties conchuled
with those countries.
101. If we are to speak of disputes, then the dispute
is between the United State,i and the United Kingdom
on the one hand, and the ~>l:)viet Union on the other;
because the Soviet Union drO.~s not support their illegal
and unwarranted complaints against Bulgaria, Hungary
and Romania, which. conflict with the prQvisions of the
peace treaties. and the Charter of the United Nations.
The three countries in qu~stion have and can have
nothing to do with sltch a dispute between theSovie'L
Union on the one hand and the United States and the
United Kingdom on the other hand.
102. In these circumstances, the Governments of Bm..
garia, Hungary and Romania are under no compulsion
to appoint representatives to the treaty .commissions,
because .no such commissions can be created without
the, participation of the Soviet Union. Any attempt to
interpret this question. otherwise would be a grDss
violation of the relev~nt provisions of thepea(;e treaties.
Obviously there can be no dispute if there il; no party
to a dispute. And if there is no dispute, there is no
need for the Governments of Bulgaria, Ht1n~ry ~md
Romania to appoint representatives to a commission 'cllJ
.examine non.. ex:istent disputes.
103. It follows that the replies of the International
Court of Justice to the first and second questions are
unfounded from both the legal and the political points
of view. Consequently there are no grounds for accuS"
ing those three countries of non-execution of the peace
treaties.
104. In view of these considerations, the Court's assertion that there ex:ists a dispute with Bulgaria, Hungary
and Romania subject to the provisions of the peace
treaties for the settlement of disputes is both worthless
and unfoun<red in law. The Court failed in this matter
to 'give et just and objective legal analysis of articles
35 and 36 of the peace treaty with Bulgaria or of the
corresponding . articles of the peace treaties with
Romartia and Hungary. The Court yielded to political
pressure by the reoresentatives of the United States
and the United Kingdom who took part in its work
and, instead of giving a legal definition of· the dispute

S03rd Meetlng-3 November 1950
in accordance with the provisions contained in the
aforesaid artieleo of the peace treaties, took a one..sided,
biased .and political approach to the question.
105~ The incorrect premise adopted by the Court in
defining-the term, "~arty to the dispute·' ~ and hence in
deciding whether a disDute existed~ led it to give i!1egal .
and juril~icatly inconslstent ansWers to the first two
questions. These answers are unfounded in law, since
they are' based on the premise, which is erl'oneous and
contrary to the peace treaties, that any of three Statesthe USSR, the United States or the United Kingdom
-could be regarded as parties to the dispute, either
severally or two of them together. Such an inte~reta...
tion of those articles of the peace treaties by the Court
constitutes a flagrant distortion of the letter and spirit
of the treaties, which provide clearly and unequivocally
that, fora dispute between two parties. to exist, it is
absolutetyessential that all three States-the USSR,
the United States and the United Kingdom--and not
one or two of them separately, s110uld form one party,
and that thosl~ three Powers should act in concert. The
other party t() any such dispute concerning the interpretation or ey,;eeuti\on of the treaties must be Bulgaria·
or Hungary or Romania. separately, since an inde..
pendent ~ce tfieaty was signed· with each of those
.
countries by the· three Powers.
106. As I have already pointed out, the root of the
matter is that the United States and the United Kingdom wished at all costs to obtain from the International
Court Ot Justice an advisQry opinion which would conceal and justify their illegal attempts, contrat'jr to and
in violation of the provisions of the peace treaties, to
vest in the representative of the United States and the
L!nite~ Kingd9m, and in another representative ar'"
bltranly appomted by the Secretary-Generall at the
insta~e.of those Powers, .the functions of a treaty
commISSIOn.

107.1'he representatives of. the. United States and
the U~dted Kingd01n sought to ensure that SlilCh comtnissil)ns, arbitrarily·and illegally set up, without the
participation of the Soviet 'Union or of the representatives of Bulgaria, Hungary or Romania, sho1.1l1d be regarded as commissions satirfying the provisions of the
peace treaties and competent to take finalllnd binding
deci$ions~ The representatives of the United States and
the United Kingdom demanded at meetings of the
Court, against all logic and.common sense, i~ violation
of the elementary rules of law and without th~~ slightest
justification, that the two persons arbitrarily and.illegally
appointed by them and, at their request, by the~;ecretary­
General of the United Nations, to serve on sUlch a commission should be regarded as constituting.a tripartite
commission established in accordance with the relevant
~rticles of the ~ace trClaties. According tott1Us absurd
Idea, these two perSOn$l' who would act without any
l~~a.1 authority, were towctate their final and binding
'decisions to the Governmentq of Bulgaria, Hu.ngary
an,i Romania.
109. The member:s of the Internation~l Court of Justice, who hadi1l~~lly taken cognizance of the question
impt,sed by the Anglo-American bloc on thte General
Assetnbly, eould not make up their minds to concur
in the demands of the Anglo-American politidans, who
had r~lached absurdity in their attempts to find some

861·

I

legal "basis" for their inventions about the peoples'
democracies.
.
.
'
109. This legal analYj~is of the reasons for the Court's
decision proves the iuconsistency of the Court's ass~r'"
tion that in this case a dispute exists with Bul~na,
Hu~ary or RomQ,!t1ia subject to the relevant arttcles
of the peace treaties.
110.. In the light of the foregoing, the inconsistency
of the draft res~)lution ,flubmitted to the Assembly is
perfectly clear. 1~'he draltt p~solution refers to the un...
founded and illegal opb ~(IU of the Court on the first
and second qu:estions; i I; .Uso c;ontains th~ totally unfounded and iUegal clul.tges tnat Bulgana, Hungary
and Romania have failed to appoint their rep,resentatives to the tlteaty commissions. Yet, as has! been in...
dicated, and :~sis clear. from the replies of the Court
to the third and., fourth questions, those governments
cannot and shOUld not appoint representatives to. the
illegal and fictitious commissions which the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom
are trying to set up by unilateral ,action.
111. The attempts of the Anglo..American bloc to use
the United Nations and the General Assembly in'order
to bring illegal charges against Bulgaria, HungarY and
Romania are inadmissible, since they are contrary: both
to the Charter and. to genetaUy accepted rules of 1nter'" .
national law. The General Assembly has .no right· to
censure governments of Member States of theOrganization for matters which fall within their internal com...
petence ;it has even less right so. to censure governments of States not·Members of the United Nanons.
112. The efforts made by the Anglo..Americanbloc
to force through this draft resolution, originally sulP
mitted by the Australian delegation, which is directed
against BulgarIa, .Hungary and Romania; serve to
undermine the prestige and authority of the United
Nations and the General Assembly. The turmoil created.
over that draft resolution shows the whole world how
the Anglo..Americanmajority in the Organhationis
using the General Assembly for its selfish and tendentious political purposes, which bear no relation to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
113. . In their attempt to divert the attention of world
public opinion from the exposure of Anglo"{\tnerican
espionage and. subversion in Bulgaria, Hungary and .
Romania, the Governments· of. the United States and·
the United Kingdom have ·illegally seized the General
Assembly of what they call the question of the "observance .of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
Bulgaria, Hungary· and Romania" . The discussion of
this question at three sessions of the General Assembly
has fully proved that the real. reason why the question
. was raised was the desire of the United States and the
United Kingdom to diverfattention from the reyelatiol1s
concerning Anglo..American espionage and subversion
in Bulgaria, }!ungary and Romania and to use the
United Nations 111 order to exert political pressure on
.
these countries.
114. During the debates on this question in the Ad
Hoc Political Committee at this session of the Assembly, the delegations of the United Stab=s, the United
Kingdom and Australia interminably re~terat~d their
allegations, which have 'been exploded long ugo, to the
effect that Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania had vio...

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings
--,

lated human rights by exposing and condemning the
Anglo-American spies and traitors to the Bul~rian,
Hungarian and Romanian peoples-people like.Mindszenty, Rajk, Shipkov, Kostovand Petkov. The charges
contained in the draft resolution are mendacious and
unfounded.
.
115. A review of the debates on this Anglo-American
slander about Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania which
have taken place at three sessions of the General Assembly can only lead to the conclusion that this attempt
has failed completely and that its purposes have been
fully revealed. Any a.ttempt to hold further debat~s
on this question ih organs of the United NaHons would
be senseless and dangerous. Such a course would undermine the prestige and authority of the United Nations t
which the Angolo-American politicians wish to use for
ilieir own ends. Such a course would lead to a flagrant
violation of the Charter, since the purpose of the AngloA.nerlcan bloc in raising the discussion of such a .
question in the Organization is to interfere in the
internal affairs" of sovere!gn States an(t to use the
Organization in order to exercise pressure on these
States. Any further discussi~n of this question in the
United Nations would .constitute a violation not only
of Article 2 of the Charterf which forbids the 01'ganization to interfere in the internal affairs of any State,
but also a violation of Article 55, which provides for
the promotiQnQf "peaceful and friendly relationsamQng
nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples".
·116. .The clause in the draft resolution which invites
Members of the Organization to submit to the SecretaryGeneral evidence relating to the slanderous AngloAmerican accusations against Bulgaria, Hungary and
Romania is merely a further attempt to use the United
NatiQns for '.he continuance of slanderous charges
against the lkoples' democracies. That provision can
Qnly be interpreted as an attempt to involve as many
States as possible in this Anglo-American plot, in order
to ~ontinue the ...ca~paign of slander and insinuation
against three sovereign States. All this can only le.ad
to an aggravation of the international situation -and to
increased international friction, and serve to divert
the attention of the United Nations and its Memhers
from the funrlamental and primary task of mainta' ',.ting
and strengthening international peace and S~Ct.1rit1 and
creating friendly relations among nations based Oil respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples.
117. Sir Frank SOSKICE (United Kingdom) : The
United Kingdom delegation has already made it clear
th~t the draft resolutiQn whi(:h is at pr.sent before the
General Assembly has the wholehearted support of
my government.
118. As many representatives have pointed out, here
we have the case of three governments which have flagrantly violated obliga,tions into which ~hey solemt;ly
entered under the terms of the peace treaties made WIth
them. They have been accused of brutal'maltreatment
Qf their peoples and, althoul~h the International Court
of Justice has clearly estahllished that they are int'ernationally bound under the terms of these treaties to
take pct:ti: in the arbitratiorl procedure for which the
treaties 1\rovide, each of them refuses, without the slight..
est shadow of justification~ to take any step toward this

end. They are given the opportunity tQ have the charges
made. against them investigated and shown to be either
well-founded or ill-fou11-ded.
119 As has been repeatedly said, the inference to be
drawn from their obstructive conduct is only tQO Qbvi....
ous. They could not have given any more patent indicatiQn of their consCiousness of guilt tha.n they have
given in persistently and cynically blocking and frustrating the procedure for which· the treaties provide.
There can be no excuse for this, and no reason except
that these governments have too much to hide.
120. The draft resolution· which is before the General
Assembly condemns them for this behaviour, and it
is difficult to 'conceive any condemnation that is more
richly merited. It may perhaps be disappointing to
the victims of their oppression that no more. direc~
help can be brought to them to relieve them in the
sufferings which they ha.ve to undergo. It may, 'however, be some solace to them to know that their oppressorsare recognized and castigated before world opinion
and that the conscience of civilized mankind is deeply
perturbed over their fate and the inhuman treatment
to which, day in and day out, they and their families
are subjected under the administration of the three
governments' which stand arraigned before the bar of
the world.
121. There are many people all Qver the world who,
misled by the propaganda persistently disseminated by
the apologists for regimes of this type, are temp"ed to
believe th~t those who live under them enjoy the blessings proclaimed by those who support dictatorial government$.
122. I hope th~" these misguided people, when they
hear how the three governments whose conduct the
draft resplution condemns have obstructed any attempt
at inquiry into their proceedings, may pause and. consider what is the lesson to be drawn from such conduct.
They may well ask themselves why it is that the Governments of Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania should
isolate themselves by such impenetrable barriers from
the free world. They may ask themselves what it is
that those three governments are so anxious to conceal. In any free country every one may inquire tor
himself, and it is only under these dictatorial regimes
that mystery shrouds the lives. of their citizens from
the outside .world.
123. Whatever else may be the effect of the resolUtion which I. hope the General Assembly will adopt
today, one effect I profoundly hope will be to give
pause to those many· people throughout the world who
are beguiled anc misled by the promises made by com'
munist propagandists.
124. Mr. GOLDSTUCKER (Czechoslovakia): The
Czechoslvvak delegation wish~s me tQ express·its oppositionto the draft. resolution submitted for the consideration of the Assembly by the AdHoc Political Committee,
and to explain my delegation's reason for this opposition.
125. In the (lpinion of my delegation, the Unittd
Nations has no right whatsoever to deal with matters
falling essentially within .. the .domestic jurisdiction of
Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania, and if it does so it
will act in flagrant violationQf Article 2, paragraph

pt,

"_,_~_",_.~~.~,c~_.__ ~""_,_~ ..._,,",.,,_,,,.."

c_,,. ,,·-"-~303~d~~Mee·-""ti~"n~";~'"'-. ~3~N~<~"""";"""""e~"""'<'be-"-;_·.."""'lg-"s.·;_·....
..... M._.......
, *,_40_

7 of the Charter. No arguments can disprove this fact
because there are no arguments which can prove an
illegal action to be legal.
126. It has been argued that the U'lited Nations
General Assembly can take up this mat\~er because it
concerns alleged breaches of the peace treaties with
Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania. This contention is
obviously false because everybody knows that the peace
treaties with those three countries were concluded between the governments of each of the countries re~
snectively, on the one hand,.and the countries which were
war with Bulgaria$ Hungary and Romania, on the
other" The parties 'to the treaties, then, are Bulgaria,
Hungary and Romania respectively, on the one hand,
and the former enemies of those three countries, on
the other. The United Nations is not a party to those
treaties, and it has no right whatsoever to take up
matters concerning their implementation.
127. Those peace treaties contain stipulations concerning the procedure which the contracting parties
are obliged .to follow in the ev:ent of disputes arising
as to their interpretation or implementation. All those
treaties clearly stipulate that any such dispute must
be dealt with by the parties tc the treaties themselves
-that is, Bulgaria or Hungary or Romania on the
one side and, on the other~ the three great Powers
signatories to the treaties, the Soviet Union, the United
Kingdom and the. United States, acting together on
behalf of all the signatories. I repeat, then, that any
disputes .which might arise in connexion with the interpretation or implementation of the peace treaty with
Bulgaria or Hungary or Romania must· be dealt with
only and exclusively by the representatives of the parties
to the treaty-·that is, in practice, by the representative
of Bulgaria or Hungary or Romania, on the one hand,
and the representative of the USSR, theUnited King..
dom and the United States appoinfed by them together
and requiring the consent of each pf them.
128. Only when the representatives of the two sides,
themselves appointed, cannot agree on a third member
of the arbitration commission envisaged by the peace
treaty, can they require the assistance of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, and ask him to appoint
a third member. This mention of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations clearly means that the power
of appointing the third member to the arbitration commission in. case of lack of agreement between the two
representatives of the treaty. signatories is given to the
Secretary-General in person and can in no event be
~onstrued as giving the United Nations a .right to
tnterfere 'in matters concerned with the interpretation
or implementation of the treaties.
129. From what I have just said it clearly follows that
the United Nations General Assembly had no right
whatsoever to take up the accusations levelled at Bul..
garia, Hungary and Romania by some of its members
because, in the first place, the accusations were concerned entir.ely with matters falling t:ssentially. within
the domestic jurisdiction of those States, secondly, the
Upi~ed Nations is notcotnpetent to deal with matters
ar~s111g out of the peace treaties because special· ma..
chlnery has been created for that purposel and, thirdly,
the accusers anyway do not constitute one of the sides
to the .. peace treaties with Bulgaria, Hungary. and
Romama..

at

.........~............-~~' ~ii;j

"1

130. It further follows froUl the aforementioned con'" I
siderations that those delegations which have raised
this matter in the General, Assembly of the United
Nations have made themselves guilty of a breach of
the stipulations of the peace treaties to which I have
referred and, in addition, have induced the ,General
Assembly to commit a violation of Article 2, paragraph
7 of the Charter and to assume powers which were not
given to it by the peace treaties.
131. As is well known, this unwholesome matter was
referred by the General Assembly to the Inter~ational
Court of Justice with a request for an advisory opi:pion
[resolution" 294; (IV)]. Although the governments of
the accused countries did not acknowledge the Court's
competence to deal with this matter) and although they.
refused'to give their consent or to appoint representatives, the International Court of Justice took up the
matter, thereby, committing a violation of Artic1e3q
of its own Statute. It should pe noted, however, thaj~
even the advisory opinion of the International Cou~t
of Justice, given at the price of violating its own Statute,
precludes any possibility for the accustts to misuse!
their unjustified charges asa pretext for further at.. ':
tempts at direct intederence in the internal affairs
of Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania with the help of
the United Nations or with the help oia fake arbitra... .
tion commission which they would have liked to appoint.
132. .So much for the formal side of the item under
discussion. As to its substance, I should like to make
certain remarks.
133. The peoplles of Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania,
as a result of the allied victories over the forces of
nazism and fascl\sm, and as. a result of the liberation
of their respectiv1e countries. by the Soviet army, chased
from power their' former ruling circles which had subjected their own peoples to economic exploitation and
political, racial, r~~1igious and cultural oppression.
134. It is well known that the former ruling classes of
these countries did not represent the interests of the
people, but only their narrow class interests. It isarso
well known that thpse former ruling circles very readily
allied themselves with Hitler and Ml1ssoliniand entered
with them into the crimhlal conspiracy which brought
about the Second World War. It is a historical fact
that none·. of the present self...appointed and would-be
accusers of the new Bulg?-ria, J.Iung:ary and Romania
moved a finger or even raised· hiS VOice when men like
B~ris,. Horthy. and An~onescu kept. their peoples in
misery, starvation and Ignorance and denied to them
all fundamentalfreedoms and. all rights to live a decent
human l i f e . .
.
135. Moreover, the conscience of these self-appointed
and would-be accusers ~oes. not seem to. he ~tirred by
the. real and flagrant vlOlatlons of humarirlghts and
fttndamet?-tal freedo1ns in ~ther. parts of the world. They
turn a blInd eye to such. vlOlatlOns of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in their own countries or in
terri~ories falling under their power, where, if they ·felt
!TenulOely concetned,an;d were not mere hypocrites, they
would be. able to alleViate the lot of scores of millions
of people.
rt36. ;But rio, a!1 .tha~ those hypocritical c~ampions
want IS to besmirch, 111 the eyes of the unmformed
those peoples who for the first time in· their historY
1:

r;~-

!

I

General Aamnbly-Fifth Sesehm-PltJ~ulrr Meetlnga
.

i"

.,

----

l~-,

! have been\,able.. to take their destinies in their own
hands and to recreate their countries in such a way
! as' to guarantee, to ee.ch and every member of their

alliance for peace and security, certainly wish to see
them flourish and prosper in the interest of genuine
freedom, progress and peace in the world..

sovereignty'. This real national independence and sov..
ereignty, cherished by every honest man and woman
\ in Bulgaria, H.ungaryand Romania, seems to be the
very factor WhICh has br6ughtabout the wrath of the
p~~ent accusers. Those accusers are trying to misuse
th~\ 'United..Nations as an instrument by means of which
the~l can bring ptessure on Bulgaria, Hungary and
Ro~)ania and induce them to -bow to interference in
'theft domestic. il.fimrs. And if they cannot attain this
ait,o.-and they must know by now that their efforts
t'Jwards this end will remain futile-they want at least
to misuse this Organization as their propaganda agency
against the peoples' democracies.
137. This is the real object and content of the draft'
resolution before us. My delegation thinks that it i~
irresponsible to debase this Organization into a mere
tool in the service of the spiteful, reactionary and aggressive policies of some of its Members, which try to
obstruct the development of peaceful communities and
of free peoplesl and which, at the same time, offer a
friendly hand to fascist Franco. That is why I Appeal to
all the delegations to reject this draft resolution and to
cause this matter, which never should have been on the
agenda (.\f the General Assembly, to be taken off the
programme of our· deliberations.
138. Everybody who cares to know, knows that Bulgana,Hungary and Romania are the scenes today of
considerable economic and cultural progress. Everybody
knowstbat those three nations have, within the last few
years, solved all the age-long disputes which, on the
instigation of their former rulers and foreign influences,
separated them froJ.n one another and at times directed
them against one another in deadly strife. Everybody
knows that those free peoples have buried. their longprotracted conflicts with th~it equally free neighbours,
with whom. they were at war only a few years ago.
139. There is, I submit, no other example of such a
far-reacning pacification to be found in any other part
of the world. Should this fact by itself tIot evoke a
greater interest on the part of ,the United Nations than
the impunity 6f that handful of individuals who, belong..
ing to the old, corrupt and unworthy ruling circles,
indulged in criminal activities in the service of foreign
interests, and were punished in accordance with laws
which they were consciously violating? This far-reaching
pacification was made possible only after the peoples
of these countries had themselv(·g become masters of
theircountcles, after they hadelilllinated the scheming
rulers and foreign influences which had never cared for ..
the welfare of the peoples and which had looked upon
them.......a nd look upon them-only as pawns in the inter..
play of their power politics.
140•. The initiators of the present dtCift resolution
should know that· the times when Bulgaria, Hungary
and Romania were used as such pawns 'in .the hands of
the imperialists are irretrievably passed. The newpeopIes' demo~ratic republics have come to st.ay, whether
the ruling circles of the United States, the United Kingdom and .their associates like it or l1ot. And we in
Czechoslovakia, . associated with them in a brotherly

141. Mr. BIRGI (Turkey) (h-anslat,d from French) :
T:,,~ draft resolution before us is a. touchstone, as its
acceptance or rejection by this Assembly will show
whether the United Nations consents ,or refuses to let
the' principles of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms become a dead letter. Those prirlciples
are the basis of the Charter; they are enshrined in that
moving documtmt, the Univeroaal DeClaration ofHwnan
Rights; and they will soon~ we trust,. be proclaimed
anew in a special covenant.
142. The first point we should note is that the text
which we ate considering refers to systematic' and. persistent violations of the great principles which r. have
just mentioned, in breach of contractual undertakings,
and to the refusal to account therefor, likewise in breach
of contractual undertakings recognit:ed by the International Court of Justice.
143. Hence it can certainly not be claimed that it is a
matter of picking a quarrel with the countries in qUeStionover isolated cases without compelling motives and
without sound legal grounds.
144. I wish to analyse briefly the moral and practical
scope of this draft. Its' !noral scope is certainly very
great, since it includes a formal censure.
145. Such moral judgments, although they may appear
to be purely theoretical, may on occasion prove to be.
rich in cot'lsequences for the future. r have ventured to
repeat this basic fa.ct in order to forestall any inclination on the part of representatives to be discouraged by
the omission, in this tex:t~ of a reference to a. material
penalty and therefore to feel a certain indifference about
the immediate fate of the draft resolution in this
Assembly.
146. It should also be noted thatpat'agraphs 5 and 6
of the draft have a certain practical' value; they keep th(~
issue. open, as it were, by inviting. Member States to
subl1lit evidence and by asking the Secretary-General t()
inform the Members of the United Nations of any
charges which may be conununicated to him. In. this wa;~
the United Nations will not shelve the case in so far as
it relates generally to the violation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. If.there should be new charges,
or if any fresh evidence should be discovered, suchevidence will be available to Members of the United Nations; they will be able to study it and to supplement
their own material so that it may be llsed at the proper
time.
147. For its part, the Turkish· delegation has some
very serious complaints to lodge against the .Bqlgariatll
Government straightaway, for thatgoverntnent is treat..
ing Bulgarian citizens of· Turkish origin without thE~
slightest considetationfor human rights and funda··
mental freedoms. I informed the Ad Hoc Political Committee of the intolerable position of this mass of approximately 900,000 members of a minority living iln
Bulgarian territory. I refer to it again today because
my delegation feels that the General Assembly, which
is just about to proceed to the final vote on this draft,
shoUld take note of these tragic fads which. have a direct
bearing on that draft.

f

, nations, adec:ent and dignified human life based on
, peaceful work and real' national independence and

I

l
'!

303rd Meetlng-8 November 1950
148. I shall be very brief, as the particulars of this

aerio1usquestiQn-serious both because of its extet;1t and
because of its nature-will shortly be placed at the dis..
'posa! of all Metnbers of the United Nations in doca...
menta\ry form. At this point, I wish merely to point out
a few saUent facts. Tne members of this minority apparently have some schools of their own and, according
to Bulgarian statistics, the number of those schools is increasing. They have their own mosques. They have
their newspapers in the Turkish language. On paper,
moreov(\r, they are ,assured of complete equality with
the other inhabitants of the country. In fact, however,
their position is such that unless they give up their traditional s\,:>cial standards and religious beliefs, and unless
they put themselves unreservedly. 'at the service of the
governrnent-and we know what kind of a government
-their property and sometimes,· indeed, their life, is
forfeit. ,This ha~ resulted in a discon~erting increase in
the. number of mstances of clandestine .escapes to Turkey and, to some extent, to Greece.
149. From about 1944 until about the end of 1948,
thos; who wished to itntnigrat~ to Turkey could not
obtain the necessary authorization from th~~ Bulgarian
Government, even though a $ettlement trea,ty in force
betwee~ the' two· countries expressly stipulated that the
Bulgal1an Government would not place dHnculties in
the.way of p"ersons who wishe~ to emigrate from Bulgana. Then, In 1949, the BulgarIan Government decided
top~rmit emigrati~n but did. n~t give effect to t~t
deC!slOn for some tIme. That perIod might be called a
penod of screening, during which the Bulgarian Government reviewed the cases of those who wished to leave
the .country and determined whether their· departure
would benefit the State and rid the country of "nonassimilable" eJements. When the records bad been completed, the Bulgarian Government began to allow people
to leave. Thi~ led to an ever-increasing influx into Turkey (approxunately 24,000 persons during 1949).
150. Turkey received and continues to receive as many
immigrants as its capacity for assistance .and resettlement pertnits. I· may add that the immigrants arrive in
Turkey completely destitute even though the settlement
treaty in force between the two countries explicitly provides that emigrants shall· be freely entitled to take with
!hem their goods 3nd chattels and to dispose of their
Immovable property. Last August, however, the Turkish
Government received a note· from the Bulgarian Gover1Utlent in which it was asked to receive 250000 emigrants within three months; the note also accused
Turkey of preventing immigration.
151. The Polish representative has just argued that
that "so-c~lled expulsion" had nothing to do with the
question of the 'violation of human. rights and fundamental freedoms. To create a situation where the emi, grants are so numerous that they cannot be received in
so shorp a time;. to insist nevertheless that. they should
be received; to leave them completely destitute; and to
concentrate them on the frontiers, taking advantage of
the. fac~ that they really wantt<? ipwigr~te to Turkey,
which IS only too true, whereas It IS poSSIble to collaborate with the otb.erpa~ty in order to arrange a reasonabl~pr?grammea1lowlOg not only for an orderly flow
of 11 :mtlgrants but also and above all for the transfer of
the property and the capitato! the persons concerneddot.'B not all this constitute overt eVIdence ·0£ a contempt

861 :

for. human rights and human dignity which is designed
to further discreditable ends?
.
152. These tactics, which· have been exposed by the
Press of various countries, are calculated to achieve a
number of purposes, chief of which are the following:
in the first· place, to confront Turkey with the overwhelming problem of. resettling the refugees, because it
is obviously impossible to resettle such a large number
of persons-250,OOO destitute individuals.. . . . .in the short
space of three months; secondly, to try to evade the
responsibility for the distress caused thereby;thirdly,
to get rid, en masse, of those who are no 19n9-er~ needed,
after they have beerl stripped of everything which COt.lId
be taken from thern.
.'~c'.O:\".
153. I shall not pursue this analysis of the meaning of
this mass deportation, as I do not propose at this stage
to speak of the political motives of Bulgaria. What I
want is to show that the Bulgarian Government is systematically flouting the rules of law, human ril:!hts and
fundamental freedoms, and manipulating hutn~;abei~s
like putty, using them as it sees fit in th~ int~rests 'of
its domestic and foreign policy. I hope. that this brief
account which I have tried to sketch for you has given
you some idea of the situation. Weare dealing with a
g~eat tragedy whichl t?gether with. other known tragedIes, we should bear 10 mind when we come to vote
on the draft resolution now before us.
154.. Mr. KYROU (Greece) : On the basis of rule 76
of our rules of procedure, I have the honour to move
the closure of. the debate. The points of view G<f the
majority and of the minority have been explained rather.
exhaustively, both in the Ad Hoc Political Committee
and again here tQday. More than that, thc)se points of
view have been e~plained during ;the last two sessio1J$
of the General Assembly. From his high S~ttl the Presi..
dent can see that exhaustion is felt by the', representa..
tives who still remain.
.
155. The PRESIDENT (translated frotn French) :
You have heard the proposal of the reprel?entative of
Greece. Under rule 76 of the rules of procedure, a repr~sentative may move. the .closure of the det)at~ at any
tIme. Only two representatives may then Spetlk ln opposition. I can already .see the signs being made to me by
the representatives of the Byelorussian SSR andPoIand,
who presumably wish to speak against the motion~.l shall
give them each ten minutes in which to. sl)eak and I
s~a11 .call first on the representative of the' Byelorus..
slan SSR. .
.
156.. Mr. KISELEV (Byelorussian SOvil~t Socialist
Republic) .(translated from Russian) : The Greek rep..
resentative's proposal for the closure of the debate must
be rejected. The t'epresentative of Turkey has just raised
an extremel}\' interesting question' concerning Turkish
nationals in Bulgaria. I had intended. to take.part in the
debate and reply to the representative of Turkey on that
question. That is my lawful rightl as the representative
of my country. I therefore eonsider that to dose the
debate at this moment would be ineort.ect, and I would
interpret such a closure as an attempt to muzzle the
delegations which want to answer the speakers who have
already made statements. We have toe moral and po"
litical right· to reply to them.
157•• Of course rule 76 of the rules of protedureclearly
prOVIdes that a debate may be closed'at any time. It also

I

368

I

General Assembly-Fifth SesetOln-Plenary Meetings

states that the President may limit the time allocated
to the speaker who takes advantage of that rule. That is
for the President to decide. But the closure of the debate
at this point would be absolutely incorrect.
158. Mr. DROHOJOWSKI (Poland) (translated
from French): I shall not take full advantage of the
ten minutes the Presideut has granted me. Despite the
formal rule in the rules of procedure, it seems to me that
it would be unjust to interrupt the debate when the list
of speakers has not been exhausted. The Polish dele"
gation does not intend to ~peak again, but it considers
that it would be fair to continue the discussion in view
of the number of speakers on the list.
159. I quite understand the Greek representative's desire to close the debate and go on to the vote. Nevertheless, I believe that the majority of this Assembly will
not wish to be unjust to the minority..
160. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Under the rules of procedure, only two speakers may
oppose a motion for the closure o-f the debate. The rep.resentative of Iraq is asking for the floor, but he may not
raise a new point of ordet until I have taken a decision
on the first question.
.
161. The two representatives who had the right to oppose the motion for the closure of the debate have stated
their views. I therefore call for a vote on the motion
for closure.
The motion for closure was adopted by 32 votes to
10, 'With 9 abstentions.
.
162. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
Does the representative of Iraq wish to speak?
.
t63• . Mr. AL..JAMALI (Iraq) : I wish to appeal to the
President to be a little more lenient with representatives
and to guide us more smoothly th.an he has been doin.g,
especially with regard to my own delegation. I wished
to know, before voting, whether closing the debate meant
that explanations.of votes were to be allowed or not.
My voting depended on the answer on that point. Had
the President permitted me to ask this question, I
might have voted this way or that. But the President
was in a hurry. I should like to ask: am I entitled to
explain my vote or not?
164. The PRESIDENT: Eirst of all, instea.d of saying that it was a point of order, it would have. been
better for the representative of Iraq to tell me that he
wished to ask a question. The closure of the debate does
not mean that a representative has no right to explain
bis.vot~. The representative of Iraq has the right to explam hIS vote.
165.. Mr. AL..JAMALI' (Iraq): My delegation is go..
ing to abstain on this proposal. We are not going to
abstain beca1~se of our lacl<: of sympathy for the aims
and principles which underlie this proposal; we are
going to aostain because we feel that any observation of
human rights should be dealt with universally, and
s~G'uldbe.treated univer,sal1y. We ~nnot thinkofhum.an
llghts bemg observed In Bul¥arla, Hungary and Romania a~ld forgotte", in Palestine and Africa, especially
in North Africa.
166. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shaU now proceed to the vote on the draftresolution submitted by the Ad Hoc Political Committee
[A/1437].

11

c

167. Mr. DROHOJOWSKI (Poland) (translated
from French) : I request that the draft resolution shQuld
be ptlt to the vote paragraph' by paragraph.
.
168. The PRESIDENT· (translated from French):
We shall theref<;>re vote on the draft paragraph by paragraph.
.
The first recital was adopted by 47 votes to none,
with 8 abstentions. ;1
.
The second recital "was adopted by 45 votes to 5, with
5 abstentions.
.
169. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I intend, if the representative of Poland does not object,
to put to the vote paragraph 1 of the operative part,
including sub-paragraphs (a) J (b) and (c).
Paragraph 1 of the operative part was adopted by
43 votes to 5, with 6 abst'entions.
Paragraph 2 of the operative part was adopted by
45 votes to 5, with 10 abstentions.
.
Paragraph 3 ~fthe operative part was adopted ~y
37 votes to 5,'Wtth 13 abstentions.
.
Paragraph 4 of the operative part was .adopted by
37 votes to 5, 'with 13 abstentio1'ts.
Paragraph 5 of the operative part was adopted by
40 votes to 5, with 10 abstentimns.
Paragraph 6 of the operative part was adopted by
40 votes to 5, with 10 abstentions.
The draft resolution as a whole was a,dopted by 40
votes to 5, with 12 abstentions.
170. Mr. BARANOVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Social"
ist Republic) (translated from Russian) : Owing to the
interruption of the discussion of the agenda item on
which a vote has just been taken, I was deprived of the
opportunity to give my government's views on the
question. I should therefore like to explain my vote.
171. Enough facts were adduced in the Ad Hoc Political Committee and in the General Assembly to show
that the governments which had brought the question
of the so-called observance of human rights and funda"
mental freedom.s· in Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania
before the United Nations were in fact pursuing aims
which had. nothing to do with the true protection of
human rights and fundamental freedom.s,
172. There can.be no doubt that the act of provocation
involved in the submission of this question to the United
Nations for its consideration, in the selfish interests of
the United States and its accomplices, has 'been un"
masked ~nd that the· .undertaking has failed.
.
173. That is why the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR
voted against a resolution which puts the UnitedNa"
tions to shame. and undermines jts prestige and the
confidence of the people.s of the world. The Government
of the Ukrainian SSR therefore does flot recognize this
resolution, which is 'a flagrant violation of the Charter
and of international law.
.
174. The PRESIDENT (translated' from Frena,,) :
~We now proceed to deal with the next item on. the
agenda : relations of States Members and specialized
agencies with Spain.
175. I shall ask Mr. L6pez, Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc
Political Committee, to submit his report. First, how-

303rd Meeting--3 November 1950
ever, I shall call upon the representative of Poland who
has asked to speak on a point of order.
176. Mr. DROHOJOWSKI (Poland):' A little while
ago the discussion. was abruptly closed, as was a list of
speakers. Of COUrse we abided by the President's ruling,
but at this time-5.50 p.m.-··I respectfully submit that
the meeting should be adjourned until tomorrow morn~
ing.
177. The PRESIDENT (translated jf0111, Fre1Jck) :
A motion for adjour~ment has priority, of course. But
when I"asked the Rapporteur of the Ad H QC Political
Committee to submit his report, my intention was, after
he had done so, to ask the Assembly whether it wished
to proceed to a discussion of the item. If so, I should
hav~ suggested that it should postpone the discussion
unttl tomorrow.
.
178. Does this procedure satisfy the Polish repre~
sentative?
1.79. Mr. DROHOJOWSKI (Poland): I do not be~
beve that the procedure suggested by the President

Printed in U.S.A.

369

would be altogether. fair because it may be that certaiti
delegations have different representatives for different
items. I presume that the report of the Ad Hoc Politi...
cal Committee in question is not very long, and that our
work would therefore not be very much delayed if it
were submitted at the beginning of tomorrow morning's
meeting. I wOtlld~ therefore, respectfully request the
President to adjourn this meeting now.
180. The PRESIDENT (translated froln French);
Since the Polish representative is not agreeable to my
suggestion, the proper cot'Lrse for me would be to put
his motion for the adjournment to the 'Vote. But this is
not even necessary since it is nearly 6 p.m.) and we can
satisfy him by closing the meeting.
181. The next item on the agenda, which we shall take
up tomorrow morning, will be the report of the Ad H QC
Political Committee on the question of the relations of
States Members and specialized agencies with Spain.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
