II.

ument of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 36 the first special session devott:d to disarmament,
Recalling further the role of the International Atomic
Energy Agency set out in General Assembly resolution
34/63,
Recognizing the increasing significance of the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy for economic and social development, in particular its important role in accelerating the
development of the developing countries,
Reaffirming the responsibility of States that are advanced
in the nuclear field to promote the legitimate nuclear energy
needs of the developing countries by participating in the
fullest possible transfer of nuclear equipment, materials and
technology under agreed and appropriate international safeguards applied through the International Atomic Energy
Agency on a non-discriminatory basis in order to prevent
effectively the proliferation of nuclear weapons,
Expressing its conviction that the Confere,1ce, through
the promotion of international co-operation in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, should contribute greatly to meeting
the increasing energy and other requirements of many countries, particularly developing ones.
Further expressing its conviction that progress in the work
of the Committee on Assurances of Supply, established by
the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency in June 1980, will greatly contribute to the success
of the Conference,
Stressing the need for timely and adequate preparations
for the Conference,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory Committee for the Conference, 37
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference
for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy;
2. Endorses the recommendations of the Preparatory
Committee contained in the annex to its report;
3. Decides that the Conference shall be held at Geneva
from 29 August to 9 September 1983;
4. Considers that the outcome of the Conference should
be embodied in appropriate documents, in a suitable format,
pertaining, inter alia, to ways and means of promoting
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear

energy;
5. Recognizes that the Preparatory Committee, in order
to advance its work, including as appropriate the preparation
of the documents referred to in paragraph 4 above for submission to and approval by the Conference, may need to
extend the duration of its second session, to be held at
Vienna in 1982, and also to hold a further session of appropriate duration in 1982;
6. Reaffirms its decision, as contained in paragraph 2
of General Assembly resolution 35/112, to take account of
the results of the work of the Committee on Assurances of

Supply;
7. Requests the President of the General Assembly to
finaliz~ the appointment of the members of the Preparatory
Committee, m accordance with the principle of equitable
geographical representation, not later than 30 April 1982;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements for the establishment,· at the appropriate
time, of a small secretariat for the Conference. to be headed
by a Secretary-General of the Conference;
9. Urges all States to contribute to the successful prep36

23

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Resolution S- I0/2.
Official Records of the General Assemhlv, Thirtv-sixth Sessum, Supplement No. 48 (A/36/48).

aration of the Conference by, inter alia, making available,
in conformity with international obligations, information on
their scientific and technological achievements and practical
experiences in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy;
IO. Calls upon all States which have not yet done so
to communicate to the Secretary-General, not later than 30
April 1982, their views on the matters relevant to the preparation and organization of the Conference;
11. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency to
fulfil its appropriate role within the scope of its responsibilities at all stages of preparation of the Conference, and
during the Conference itself, by contributing to the discussion of relevant issues, by providing technical data and
documentation as needed, particularly in relation to the
progress of the work of the Committee on Assurances of
Supply, and by participating in the secretariat of the
Conference;
I 2. Further invites specialized agencies and other relevant organizations of the United Nations system to contribute effectively to the preparations for the Conference by,
inter alia, making available studies, reports and other appropriate documents concerning the applications of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. as well as the results and
future prospects of such applications;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Preparatory Committee all the communications received
from Member States and to assist the Committee by providing it with all necessary facilities for its work;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled "Preparation of the
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy:
report of the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy".
90th plenary meeting
9 December 1981
*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly subsequemly inf,mned rhe
Secretar_v-General" that. in ac, ordance with ,wragraph 7 of' the ahove
resolution, he had appointed Ireland, the frory Coast, the Niger. Nigeria.
Senegal and the United Republic <if Cameroon as members of the Prt'paratory Committee for the Uni1ed Nwions Conference for the Promotion
of International Co-operation in !he Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energ1·.
As a resul!, the Preparatorv Committee is composed of !he fo/lowinK
Member States: ALGERIA, ARGF.NTINA, AUSTRALIA. AUSTRIA, BELGIUM,
BRAZIL. BULGARIA, BYELORUSSIAN SOVIET SonALIST REPUBLIC, CANADA, CHIU., CHINA, COLOMBIA, COSTA RICA, CUBA, CZECHOSLOVAKIA,
DENMARK, ECUADOR, EGYPT, FINLAND, FRANCE, GERMAN OEM<X'RA flC
REPUBLIC. GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF, GHANA, GREECE, GUATEMALA, HUNGARY, INDIA, INDONESIA, [RAQ, IRELAND, fTALY, [V0RY
COASl. JAPAN, LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA, MALAYSIA, MEXICO, MAURITANIA, MOROCCO, NETHERLANDS, NIGER. NIGERIA, NORWAY, PAKISTAN, f>ERU, PHILIPPINES, POLAND, ROMANIA, SENEGAL, SPAIN, SRI
LANKA, SWEDEN, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, THAILAND, TURKEY. UKRAINIAN SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLIC. UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON, UNITED STAfES
OF AMERICA, URUGUAY. YENEZl'ELA, YtJGOSLAVIA and ZAIRE.

'36/79.

Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea

The General Assembly.
Recal!ini ib resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November
1973. 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974. 3483 (XXX) of

37

"Al36/880

24

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

36/80.

Co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity

12 December 1975, 31/63 of 10 December 1976. 32/194
of 20 December 1977, 33/ l 7 of I O November 1978, 34/20
of 9 November 1979 and 35/ I 16 of IO December 1980.
Taking note of the letter dated 4 November 1981 from
the President of the Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea to the President of the General Assembly, 39 informing the latter of the decisions adopted by
the Conference regarding the holding of its eleventh session
from 8 March to 30 April 1982, the possibility of extending
the formal work of the Conference beyond that date, should
the formal decision-making stage have started, the meeting
of the Drafting Committee of the Conference from 18 January to 26 February 1982, the provision of facilities for the
Group of Seventy-seven to meet prior to the eleventh session, from 3 to 5 March 1982, and the arrangements for the
signature of the Final Act and the opening of the Convention
for signature,
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-GeneraJ 40
regarding the establishment of a scholarship under the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Fellowship on the Law of the
Sea, in recognition of the unique contribution made by the
late President of the Conference to the work of the
Conference,
Taking note further of the decision of the Conference
requesting the Secretary-General to continue the study on
the future functions of the Secretary-General under the draft
Convention and on the needs of countries, especially developing countries, for information, advice and assistance
under the new legal regime,
1. Approves the convening of the eleventh, final decision-making, session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, in New York. for the period
from 8 March to 30 April 1982;
2. Authorizes the Conference to extend its work beyond
30 April 1982, in consultation with the Secretary-General,
exclusively for the purpose of completing its work. should
the formal stage of adoption of the Convention, of the text
of the draft resolution on the establishment of the Preparatory Commission, of the Final Act and of other pertinent
decisions have started and more time be needed to finish
the decision-making process;
3. Approves also the convening of the Drafting Committee of the Conference in New York from 18 January to
26 February 1982;
4. Recommends that the Secretary-General should provide the necessary facilities for informal consultations to
delegations participating in the Conference, in particular to
the members of the Group of Seventy-seven:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to consult the Government of Venezuela in order to arrange for the signature
of the Final Act and the opening of the Convention for
signature at Caracas in early September 1982;
6. Invites the Governments of States participating in the
Conference, as well as universities, philanthropic foundations and other interested national and international institutions and organizations, to contribute to the Hamilton
Shirley Amerasinghe Fellowship on the Law of the Sea in
the form recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report.
90th plenary meeting
9 December I 9R I

The General Assemb/_Y,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity. 41
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity and the practical measures taken for their
implementation, in particular resolution 35/117 of 10 December 1980,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions, decisions and
declarations adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its thirty-seventh ordinary
session and by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of that organization at its eighteenth ordinary session, which were held at Nairobi from 15 to 27 June I 981, 41
Considering the important statement made by the current
Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity before the General Assembly on 24 September 1981, 4 ~ particularly on
matters of concern to the two organizations,
Noting with satisfaction the continued co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity in areas of common interest,
Deeply conscious of the special needs of the newly independent African States, particularly with regard to the
consolidation of their national independence, their endeavours towards social and economic betterment and the adverse impact on their economies of the current international
economic situation,
Gravelv concerned about the adverse effect on African
economies of the current international economic situation,
Recalling in this connexion the Lagos Plan of Action for
the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, adopted by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its second extraordinary session, held at
Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980, 44
Recognizing the need for closer co-operation between the
Organization of African Unity and all specialized organs.
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system in
realizing the goals and objectives set forth in the Lagos Plan
of Action,
Convinced that the attendance at the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva
on 9 and I O April 1981, bears evidence to the fact that the
Conference drew international public attention to the grave
situation and massive needs of African refugees, 45
Gravely concerned also at the need for special economic
and emergency assistance programmes for a number of
African States which face serious economic problems, in
particular problems of displaced persons, resulting from
natural or other disasters, to enable them to pursue effective
economic development,
Gravely concerned further at the deteriorating situation
in southern Africa arising from the continued domination
of the peoples of the area by the minority racist regime of
South Africa and conscious of the need to provide increased

'° Ibid., Thirtv-sixth Session. Annexes. agenda item 28. document .\
36/659.
40
A/36/697.

" A/36/317 and Add. I and 2.
"·' A/36/534. annexes I and II.
·" OJjicia! Records o(the Ge11aa! Anemhlv, Thirrv-si.,rh Session, Plenun Meelill!!,S. 11 th meeling, para,. 2-64. ·
"·' A/S-1 I 114, annex 1
.,, See A(l6i.1 ii,
