A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/47/115
26 April 1993

Forty-seventh session
Agenda item 149
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(on the report of the Third Committee (A/47/773))
47/115.

Situation of human rights in Estonia and Latvia

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1/ and the International Covenants
on Human Rights, l/
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and
protect human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and to fulfil the
obligations they have undertaken under the various international instruments
in this field,
Convinced that respect for human rights is an inalienable component of
maintaining and promoting good-neighbourly relations between States,
Taking into account the complaint of alleged violations of human rights
with respect to the Russian-speaking population in Estonia and Latvia,
Taking note of the conclusions and recommendations made by the United
Nations fact-finding mission that visited Riga in October 1992 at the
invitation of the Government of Latvia, 1/

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

l/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

1/

See A/47/748, annex.

I . •.
92-24300

A/RES/47/115
Page 2

1.
Notes with concern the existence of certain problems that involve
large groups of population in Estonia and Latvia;
2.
Welcomes the cooperation that the Government of Latvia has
extended to the United Nations fact-finding mission;
3.
Also welcomes the invitation of the Government of Estonia to
receive a similar United Nations fact-finding mission and its intention to
extend to it its cooperation;
4.
Calls upon the States concerned to intensify their efforts on the
bilateral level aimed at resolving concerns with regard to the situation ~f
the Russian-speaking population on the basis of generally accepted norms of
international law in the field of human rights;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member States informed of
the progress in the field of human rights in Estonia and ~atvia and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session under the item
entitled "Situation of human rights in Estonia and Latvia".
89th plenary meeting
16 December 1992
