S/PRST/2001/19*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 July 2001
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4349th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 July 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council takes note with satisfaction of the progress made
so far in the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
“The Security Council calls on all the parties to the conflict to fulfil all
their commitments, implement fully the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
(S/1999/815) and complete the disengagement and redeployment of their
forces in accordance with the Kampala plan and the Harare sub-plans, which
the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC) will verify.
“The Security Council finds it unacceptable that more than one year after
the adoption of its resolution 1304 (2000) of 15 June 2000 containing the
demand to completely demilitarize Kisangani, reiterated in resolution 1355
(2001) of 15 June 2001, the Rassemblement Congolais pour la Démocratie has
thus far failed to comply with it. The Council calls on the Rassemblement
Congolais pour la Démocratie to implement fully and immediately its
obligation under resolution 1304 (2000), and notes that continued failure to do
so may have future implications.
“The Security Council reminds all the parties of their obligation to
cooperate fully with MONUC and of their obligations with respect to the
security of civilian populations under the fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949. The
Council urges the relevant parties to expedite the conclusion of their
investigation into the killing of six International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) staff in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, to report their
findings to the ICRC and to bring the perpetrators to justice.
“The Security Council calls on all parties to facilitate and support
humanitarian efforts of the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations. It stresses the importance of the work of the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator.

* Reissued for technical reasons.

01-46721* (E) 260701

*0146721*

S/PRST/2001/19

“The Security Council reiterates its call for the cessation of the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In this regard, it calls on all parties to cooperate fully with the expert panel
and, looking forward to the addendum to the report of the panel, reiterates its
readiness to consider the necessary actions to put an end to this exploitation.
“The Security Council reiterates its demand on all parties to accelerate
the finalization and the implementation of comprehensive plans for the orderly
withdrawal of all foreign troops from the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration, repatriation
and resettlement of all armed groups referred to in Annex A, Chapter 9.1, of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
“The Security Council expresses serious concern over the activities of the
armed groups in the east of the country. It takes note with interest of the
invitation by the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
MONUC to visit the camps where some members of the armed groups have
reportedly been quartered by the Forces Armées Congolaises, and stresses the
importance of MONUC assisting, within its capabilities, in the early
implementation, on a voluntary basis, of the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, repatriation and resettlement of these armed groups, in
accordance with the authorization given in its resolution 1355 (2001). The
Council requests in this regard the donor community, in particular the World
Bank and the European Union, to provide financial and in-kind contributions
as soon as possible to MONUC in the implementation of this mission.
“The Security Council reiterates its firm support for the Inter-Congolese
Dialogue and the efforts of the Facilitator and his team in the field. It
emphasizes the importance of an open, representative and inclusive dialogue,
free from outside interference and involving civil society, leading to a
consensus settlement. It calls on the Congolese parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement to cooperate fully with the Facilitator to enable him to conduct the
process in a swift and constructive manner. It expresses the hope that the
Dialogue can be held on Congolese soil, respecting the choice that the
Congolese actors themselves will make. It encourages donors to continue to
provide support to the Facilitator’s mission.
“The Security Council welcomes the recent high-level meetings between
the Presidents of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda
and encourages them further to pursue the dialogue to find solutions to their
common security concerns in accordance with the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement.
“The Security Council reiterates its commitment to support full
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. It reaffirms that the
primary responsibility for implementing the Agreement lies with the parties.
The Council urges them to demonstrate the necessary political will by
cooperating with each other and with MONUC in achieving this goal. It
expresses its readiness to consider, subject to necessary progress made by the
parties and to recommendations of the Secretary-General the possible
expansion of MONUC if and when the mission enters its third phase.

2

S/PRST/2001/19

“The Security Council commends the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Kamel Morjane, for his outstanding work and
invaluable contribution to the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.”

3
