S/PRST/2002/28

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 October 2002
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4627th meeting of the Security Council, held on 18 October 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in the
Central African Republic”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the holding of the Summit of the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community in Libreville on 2
October 2002 to consider the situation between the Central African Republic
and the Republic of Chad. It commends the leading role played by the
President of the Gabonese Republic, El Hadj Omar Bongo, in organizing this
meeting. It welcomes the undertaking by the Central African Republic and the
Republic of Chad to relaunch cooperation at various levels. It strongly
supports the intention of the President of the Republic of Chad to visit Bangui
in the very near future. It encourages further confidence-building measures to
help normalize the relations between the two countries.
“The Security Council further also welcomes the readiness expressed by
the African Union to continue to contribute towards ongoing efforts to
normalizing the relations between CAR and Chad and to promote peace and
stability in the Central African Region as stipulated in the Communique of the
Eighty-Fifth Ordinary Session of the Central Organ of the Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution issued on 11 October 2002,
in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
“The Security Council further welcomes the final communiqué of this
meeting (S/2002/1113). In particular, it expresses its full support for the
decision to deploy in the Central African Republic an International
Observation Force (FIO) of 300 to 350 troops from Gabon, Cameroon, the
Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Mali with three main tasks:
ensuring the safety of the President of the Central African Republic; observing
and ensuring security on the border between Chad and the Central African
Republic; and participating in the restructuring of the Central African Republic
armed forces.
“The Security Council expresses once again its strong support for the
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Central African Republic,
General Lamine Cisse, whose efforts have been essential in this initiative. It
encourages him to continue to provide advice to the Governments taking part
in this initiative.
02-64988 (E)

181002

*0264988*

181002

S/PRST/2002/28

“The Security Council calls upon Member States participating in the FIO
to work in close consultation with the Representative of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations Peace Building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA). It requests the Secretary-General, through his
Representative, to establish appropriate liaison with the FIO.
“The Security Council encourages all Member States to provide
financial, logistical and material support to the Member States participating in
the FIO.
“The Security Council invites the leadership of the FIO to provide
periodic reports, at least every three months.”

2
