S/PV.8111

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8111th meeting

Tuesday, 21 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Amendola/Mr. Lambertini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Awad
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Trafficking in persons in conflict situations
Report of the Secretary-General on trafficking in persons in armed conflict
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2331 (2016) (S/2017/939)
Letter dated 17 November 2017 from the Permanent Representative of Italy to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/972)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-39216 (E)
*1739216*

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Trafficking in persons in conflict situations
Report of the Secretary-General on trafficking
in persons in armed conflict pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2331 (2016)
(S/2017/939)
Letter dated 17 November 2017 from
the Permanent Representative of Italy
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/972)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Belize, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
Croatia, Cyprus, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Morocco, Myanmar, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Rwanda, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; Ms. Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro, United Nations Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children;
and His Excellency Mr. Smaїl Chergui, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union.
Mr. Fedotov and Mr. Chergui are joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Vienna and
Addis Ababa, respectively.
2/76

21/11/2017

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting: Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé d’affaires a.i.
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations; Her Excellency Ms. Madina Jarbussynova,
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Representative and Coordinator for Combating
Trafficking in Human Beings; and Mr. Ashraf El Nour,
Director of the International Organization for Migration
Office to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/939, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on trafficking in persons
in armed conflict pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2331 (2016).
I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/972, which contains the text of
a letter dated 17 November 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of Italy to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I warmly welcome the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Security
Council, under the presidency of Italy, for convening
today’s open debate on trafficking in persons in
conflict situations.
Criminals and terrorists are capitalizing on and
perpetuating the disorder and mayhem of conflict. To
fund their crimes, they prey on the vulnerable. Their
brutality knows no bounds. Sexual exploitation, forced
labour, the removal of bodily organs and slavery are the
tools of their trade. Terrorist groups such as Da’esh, Boko
Haram, Al-Shabaab and the Lord’s Resistance Army
are forcing women, boys and girls into dehumanizing
servitude. Committed in the shadows, these actions are
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

serious abuses of human rights and may amount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
In recent days, we have all been horrified by
images of African migrants beings sold as goods in
Libya. It is our collective responsibility to stop these
crimes. We must act urgently to protect the human
rights and dignity of migrant populations. That
means bringing the perpetrators to justice; it means
immediately increasing humanitarian aid; and it means
helping the Libyan authorities to strengthen their own
capacity to protect and provide for vulnerable men,
women and children. But there is also an urgent need
to create more opportunities for regular migration, to
restore the integrity of the refugee protection regime
and to increase the number of refugees resettled in the
developed world. Slavery and other such egregious
abuses of human rights have no place in the twentyfirst century.
According to the Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons, issued by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), increasing numbers of victims
trafficked from Iraq, Syria and Somalia are appearing
in Asia, Europe and the Middle East. The Security
Council has taken important steps against trafficking,
including by unanimously adopting resolution 2331
(2016) last December and the draft resolution to be
adopted this morning (S/2017/973). These texts call for
the targeting of financial flows to traffickers. They urge
every nation to adopt and implement the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children. Along
with the political declaration on the implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons (General Assembly resolution
72/1), which was affirmed by every nation in September
of this year, we have built a framework for action
rooted in international law. Cooperation, mutual legal
assistance and information-sharing are the mainstays
of our activities.
The Council has before it my first report (S/2017/939)
on the implementation of resolution 2331 (2016), which
documents the ongoing work of Member States and
many parts of the United Nations system. These efforts
need to be intensified. We must make full use of the
data collection, analysis, tools and technical assistance
provided by UNODC and other United Nations actors,
particularly those operating in conflict and postconflict situations. Better understanding of human

S/PV. 8111

trafficking markets and routes will strengthen analysis
and prevention, and coordination will be crucial,
including through the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons.
Trafficking is also a development issue. Preventing
the situations that lead to trafficking means addressing
poverty and exclusion, in line with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We must also do more
to support the victims and survivors of trafficking.
Indeed, they should be treated as victims of crime
and not detained, prosecuted or punished for unlawful
activities in which they were compelled to engage in
order to survive. I also urge Governments, the private
sector and civil society to support the Blue Heart
Campaign and the United Nations Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children.
The international community’s commitment is being
tested. We need to show the world our determination to
end human trafficking, help its many victims and hold
those responsible accountable for their crimes.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: Today’s meeting demonstrates the
Security Council’s strong commitment to confronting
the crime of trafficking in persons in conflict and postconflict situations.
I thank the Italian presidency for its initiative and
for inviting the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) to brief the Council.
This meeting is also crucial, as it examines the
progress made in implementing resolution 2331 (2016).
The draft resolution to be adopted today (S/2017/973) sets
new goals and targets in combating human trafficking.
Since the Council’s last meeting on this topic
(see S/PV.7898), large movements of vulnerable
refugees and migrants, driven out by conflict, have
continued to be exploited by traffickers. We were all
outraged by images showing that criminals are openly
operating slave markets in Libya, where people are
sold like commodities. I join the Secretary-General in
condemning these appalling acts, and take note of the
assurances given by the Libyan Government that this
case is being investigated. Our collective horror at this
news serves an important purpose; it can quicken the

17-392163/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

pace of our actions and encourage a global partnership
against human trafficking.
What can we do? We can strengthen Libyan law
enforcement capacities to investigate and prosecute the
criminals, and align national laws to the United Nations
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime; its
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children; and its
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land,
Sea and Air. We can build partnerships among States of
the region against this crime, and improve the capacity
of the law enforcement authorities of Libya and other
countries to investigate the finances flowing from
these crimes. UNODC, as part of a complete response,
is prepared to engage with the Libyan Government.
In more general terms, the widespread and
systematic violations of people’s fundamental rights
in mass movements continue to be a cause for grave
concern. As the Secretary-General mentioned,
Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and other terrorist groups are exploiting
young boys and girls as sexual slaves or soldiers.
Thanks to the Security Council’s efforts and the
United Nations system’s work, including the General
Assembly’s recent review of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
there is forward momentum against this crime. The
international community’s resolve needs to be translated
into action across all regional processes and initiatives.
Such efforts are firmly rooted in international law. The
Palermo Convention and its Protocols provide that solid
legal foundation. I encourage parties to those treaties
to strengthen international cooperation, develop
comprehensive legislation and ensure that no offender
escapes justice. Early-warning and early-screening
initiatives must be used proactively, while offering
victims, especially women and children, protection and
affording them the assistance to which they are entitled.
UNODC’s response to resolution 2331 (2016) has
been extensive, including help to disrupt and dismantle
networks and tackle connected crimes, such as moneylaundering and corruption. We have designed tools for
United Nations bodies in conflict situations, enhanced
data-collection processes, engaged in developing
training of police officers seconded to the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, assisted victims under
the umbrella of the Trust Fund for Victims of Human
Trafficking and helped States to implement the
4/76

21/11/2017

Trafficking in Persons Protocol, among many other
actions. I welcome the recent contributions of Italy and
other States to the Trust Fund and call on everyone to
follow their example.
Greater coordination is needed among the United
Nations family, and the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons (ICAT) can help
achieve that goal, as recently acknowledged by the
General Assembly. To give new impetus to the joint
work and efforts of ICAT partner members, UNODC
is considering convening a meeting at the principals’
level in 2018.
UNODC stands ready to provide further briefings
to the Security Council on the implementation of the
draft resolution to be adopted later today, as well as to
work closely with it to end this heinous crime.
The President: I thank Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Giammarinaro.
Ms. Giammarinaro: It is a privilege for me to
have this opportunity to participate in this open debate
of the Security Council under the Italian presidency.
The Security Council has been actively committed to
this topic since the presidential statement adopted in
December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/25), and subsequently
through the annual reports of the Secretary-General
and the Council’s resolutions.
In fulfilment of my mandate, I have reported
twice on this subject to the General Assembly and to
the Human Rights Council, and recently submitted a
joint report with the Special Rapporteur on the sale and
sexual exploitation of children, focused on children’s
vulnerabilities deriving from conflict. I am convinced
that trafficking in persons in the context of conflict and
post-conflict situations, trafficking in persons fleeing
conflict, and the protection of the rights of victims
and potential victims require urgent, concerted and
effective action.
The shocking video broadcast a few days ago by
CNN showing an auction of young migrants, publicized
as slave workforce sold for a few dollars, shows that
trafficking for the purpose of exploitation and slavery
is a tragic reality nowadays. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his strong and inspiring words
on the subject.
Research carried out by United Nations
agencies — including the United Nations Office on
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Drugs and Crime, the International Organization
for Migration and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees — as well as by
non-governmental organizations, such as Caritas
Internationalis, among others, confirms that this human
rights violation is a systematic component of conflict
that, in certain circumstances, amounts to war crimes
or crimes against humanity. Trafficking is always
fuelled by political instability, and happens on a regular
basis in the context of large migration flows. Moreover,
as a form of gender-based violence, it disproportionally
affects women and girls, especially for the purpose of
sexual exploitation, and children and young adults on a
massive scale.
Egregious patterns of trafficking, forced labour
and slavery have been found to be a strategy of terrorist
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da’esh, Boko Haram and others. Furthermore,
such gross human rights violations are systematically
perpetrated in the context of every conflict, or in areas
at risk of conflict, by criminal or armed groups that
take advantage of the breakdown of the rule of law to
carry out the dirty business of trafficking in persons
and to become more powerful and dangerous. That is
one of the reasons that the prevention of trafficking for
any purpose is directly linked with the maintenance of
international peace and security.
In that light, a human rights perspective is crucial.
Human rights violations such as trafficking in persons
are not only a consequence but also a cause of conflict,
when they reach a massive dimension and amount
to gross human rights violations and serious crimes
perpetrated by criminal or armed groups, including
in the context of migration, and especially in transit
countries. Therefore, the Security Council agenda on
trafficking should be linked with the process leading
to a global compact on migration and refugees, as
well as the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development.
Moreover, trafficking should be addressed in connection
with the women and peace and security agenda and
with that on the six grave violations against children
during armed conflict.
A particular concern relates to the situation of
children who are used as child soldiers or sexual slaves
during conflict and are disproportionally affected by
displacement, often travelling alone to reach a safe
country and being subject to every form of trafficking,
exploitation and abuse. It is an obligation under
international law to protect them at all times. In that

S/PV. 8111

context, States should ban the detention of children for
violations of immigration laws and regulations.
States are required by international law to take
effective measures to ensure that victims of trafficking
are protected from further exploitation and harm,
including during conflict and humanitarian crises.
They also bear an obligation to prevent the violation
of, and respect and fulfil, the human rights of victims
of trafficking, including by exercising their due
diligence in holding non-State actors, including armed
groups and criminal groups, accountable at all times.
Moreover, an innovative approach is needed, based on
the good practices of some United Nations agencies,
regarding early screening and identification — not
only of victims of trafficking but of people vulnerable
to it among displaced populations, asylum seekers and,
in general terms, people fleeing conflict — aimed at
adopting tailored solutions to protect vulnerable people
from trafficking and exploitation. I am confident that
such an approach will be reflected in the new draft
resolution to be adopted later today.
Preventing and combating human trafficking
cannot be achieved by one State alone. The lack of
international cooperation is often a source of further
human rights violations, especially in the context of
migration. I would like to recall here the many who lost
their lives in an attempt to reach safe shores, in Europe
and elsewhere, and the many who survived their perilous
journeys to end up in situations of trafficking for forced
labour or slavery. States must respond quickly and
effectively and adopt a shared responsibility approach in
order to incorporate anti-trafficking in all humanitarian
interventions in conflict zones as a lifesaving activity,
to establish wider channels for regular migration, to
ensure full respect of the principle of non-refoulement,
to implement relocations in a preferred country, family
reunification procedures and effective child protection
systems, as powerful means to prevent trafficking and,
simultaneously, to ensure stability, peace and security.
The President: I thank Ms. Giammarinaro for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui: On behalf of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, I would like to thank
the Italian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this important meeting under the agenda
item “Maintenance of international peace and security:

17-392165/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/11/2017

trafficking in persons in conflict situations”. I will
focus my presentation on the situation in Africa.

agree on practical steps to address the plight of African
migrants in Libya.

The African Union Peace and Security Council
is currently seized with 15 conflict situations on the
continent, including countries engaged in war or
experiencing post-conflict tensions, while a dozen face
chronic vulnerabilities. In each of those situations,
trafficking remains an issue that continues to erode
the human dignity of individuals, in particular women
and children. The stories we hear from the victims in
countries such as Libya, South Sudan, Central African
Republic and Somalia, to name a few, are harrowing.
The Government of Burundi has recorded more than
356 women and girls who have been victims of human
trafficking since January. The tragedy is that once they
reach their destination, human rights abuse continues,
sometimes under the radar. Although the phenomenon
exists everywhere, the populations in conflict situations
are more vulnerable to sex trafficking, child sex
trafficking, forced labour, domestic servitude, forced
child labour and the unlawful recruitment and use of
child soldiers. According to the report just released by
the International Labour Organization, Africa has the
highest rate of modern slavery, with 7.6 per cent per
1,000 people.

The African Union believes that ending the
trafficking in persons in conflict situations must
start with the resolution of conflict. We are working
relentlessly to prevent and mediate conflicts, and to
address their root causes. Indeed, building on the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, the
United Nations and the African Union are currently in
the process of developing and a United Nations-African
Union framework for the implementation of Agenda
2063 and the Sustainable Development Goals.

Allow me to touch on the plight of migrants
in Libya. The African Union learned with dismay
of reports of the auctioning of African migrants
in Libya as slaves. We were lost for words when we
saw those images. The Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, has
strongly condemned such despicable acts, which are
at odds with the ideas of the founding fathers of our
Organization and the relevant African and international
instruments, including the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights. In addition, the African Union is
deeply concerned about the inhuman conditions across
Libya where migrants are being held. The business of
smuggling migrants has become so lucrative that it has
led to clashes among rebel factions, who are, in essence,
rent-seekers promising partners that they can contain
the issue of migrants in Libya.
The African Union has requested the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights to launch
an urgent investigation in support of the measures
announced by the Libyan authorities and to submit its
conclusions as soon as possible. The African Union also
intends to dispatch an envoy to Libya for consultation
with the Government and other stakeholders in order to
6/76

The African Union also maintains that a
multi-pronged but tailored and context-specific
approach that addresses the complexities and nuances
of the problem is the only way to make concrete and
sustainable progress. The African Union therefore
focuses on both prevention and response. The
preventive approach focuses on addressing the
conditions that lead to human trafficking. Interventions
should be tailored to address particular vulnerabilities
and provide meaningful and effective alternatives for
livelihoods and political participation. The African
Union Commission is undertaking various initiatives
aimed at addressing the structural vulnerabilities of
member States, through the Continental Structural
Conflict Prevention Framework.
The Commission is also supporting member States
in strengthening their national peace infrastructure to
enable them to respond to local realities and potential
threats. Within the framework of the African Union
Border Programme, the African Union’s work with
development partners has helped some of its members
in the Sahel and East Africa to enhance Government
presence in the border region by extending public and
social services. The African Union has also adopted
several legal and normative instruments that are
designed to tackle the trafficking of human beings
and the smuggling of migrants. Those instruments
have provided the basis for member States to enact
anti-trafficking legislation, which has protected and
rescued a great number of victims.
The second component focuses on strengthening
security response measures. Significant progress has
already been made through peace support operations
and ad hoc security arrangements. However, there are
considerable gaps in the criminal justice response to
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

human trafficking, which include outdated legislation
and weak institutional capacities to investigate,
prosecute and adjudicate human trafficking cases. The
Nouakchott and Djibouti processes on the enhancement
of security cooperation in the Sahel and East Africa,
established under the auspices of the African Union,
have served as the catalysts for robust cooperation
between the intelligence services of the countries of
the respective regions. Those processes have allowed
different institutions to develop and share their
understanding of common security threats, and devise
collaborative response measures to address them.
The African Union Mechanism for Police
Cooperation (AFRIPOL) is now fully operational.
AFRIPOL was established to enhance cooperation and
coordination between police and other law enforcement
agencies of member States at the strategic, operational
and tactical levels to coherently and effectively
combat all forms of crime. AFRIPOL will also play
a critical role in training and building the capacity
of law enforcement agencies to confront the range
of emerging transnational threats, including human
trafficking. We are also working on a framework that
will provide comprehensive victim-support services
for those affected by human trafficking. That includes
health services addressing the long-term needs of those
who have been physically injured, and psychological
support for the victims and their families. That is in
line with the three approaches of preventing the crime,
prosecuting traffickers and protecting the victims.
Each of our initiatives to combat human trafficking
is founded on the realization that the challenges of
human trafficking must be addressed from both
regional and global perspectives and be situated within
the context of sustainable development. Unfortunately
our efforts to prevent, protect and assist the victims
of human trafficking continue to be hindered by the
following challenges.
First, although we have a shared analysis of the mini
conflict situations on the continent, we do not always
have a common strategy. Take Libya, for example. We
all remember the pre-intervention period in the country.
The African Union wanted the mediated solution but
it was prevented. Even today, the repercussions of the
current situation in Libya or in neighbouring African
countries are not fully appreciated. We were not heard
before and we continue not to be heard, but we are
hopeful that that will change.

S/PV. 8111

Secondly, we must address Government deficits
and the lack of social a economic development on the
continent, which have led our youth to risk their lives
across the Sahara and Mediterranean Sea in search
of a better tomorrow or to become involved with
terrorist groups that can provide income and a sense
of belonging. Let us make sure that this time we move
from words to action, and ensure that we meet the goal
set for 2030.
Thirdly, there is a lack of cooperation among the
various actors involved in addressing the issue of
human trafficking. It is therefore very important for our
two organizations to hold regular consultations at the
highest leadership level.
Fourthly, there is an urgency gap, related to the
low level of importance accorded to human trafficking.
More must be done to mobilize international, regional
and national actors to bring the issue to the top of
our agendas.
Finally, there is a policy-implementation gap,
where policies at the national, regional, continental and
global level are not implemented. Let me again touch
on the situation in Libya. The slavery camps must
be dismantled without delay, the criminal networks
destroyed immediately and those behind the atrocious
crimes brought to justice. It is also our expectation that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees will establish a permanent presence in
Libya to assist the victims of trafficking. We are no
longer in a situation of failing to provide assistance to
persons in danger but are condemning those young men
and women to death if we fail to act.
In conclusion, let me say that our common humanity
is at stake. The expectation that we shall address the
scourge of human trafficking is immense, and time is
not on our side. We owe it to the victims of this tragedy
who have suffered for far too long.
The President: I thank Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/973, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Andorra, Austria,
Belgium, Belize, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, Peru, Poland,

17-392167/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, San
Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
States of America and Uruguay.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2388 (2017).
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Italian
presidency for organizing this very timely and
important debate on trafficking in persons in conflict
situations. We thank the Secretary-General; the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; the Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children; and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Ambassador Chergui, for their briefings on
the theme of our debate today. I wish in particular to
express my appreciation for the frankness with which
Ambassador Chergui delivered his briefing and spoke
on this critical matter.
Armed conflicts, poverty, inequality and the impact
of climate change, among other protection challenges,
increase the vulnerability of migrants and forcibly
displaced persons to falling victim to trafficking in
persons. Migrants continue to face unimaginable and
often fatal dangers along their journey at the hands of
traffickers, as opportunities for embarking upon a legal
path are very limited, thereby increasing the human
cost. That is particularly alarming in countries affected
by armed conflict, where armed transnational organized
criminal groups and terrorists have the space to engage
in trafficking in persons, as clearly indicated in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/939).
8/76

21/11/2017

Many migrants from Africa, including women and
children, who are fleeing persecution and/or searching
for a better life in Europe and the Middle East are
falling victim to those terrorists and criminals. In
that regard, we note with concern reports of serious
violations of international humanitarian law and
inhumane acts associated with trafficking in persons,
particularly reports of sexual exploitation and abuse,
forced marriage and the offering of women and children
as rewards to fighters and associates. The gruesome
stories of the victims, their trauma, torture and death
at the hands of those terrorists and criminals are a stark
reminder for us of the need to address that challenge
individually and collectively.
What we saw on the news only few days ago
concerning African migrants in Libya, who were
reportedly being sold as slaves, has certainly drawn
international attention to the challenge of human
trafficking. Let me say here that it is not the amount
of money involved in purchasing humans that should
be the centre of focus, but the very idea. It is against
that backdrop that we are holding this meeting, and we
strongly condemn such inhuman and despicable acts,
which, as many have said, should have no place in our
world today.
We fully support the statement issued by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Secretary-General on the matter calling, for swift
action to identify the perpetrators of that crime and with
a view to bringing them to justice. However, we know
full well that condemning such acts and calling for an
investigation of the crimes committed will not take us
very far in addressing the issue of human trafficking.
We need to have a very serious and honest conversation
about trafficking and tackling the root causes in a
holistic and comprehensive manner. Accordingly, two
very weighty issues would need to be considered in
connection with the painful reality of humans being
sold as slaves in Libya.
The first issue involves the actual situations that
migrants are running away from. At the root of that are
poverty and hopelessness. Such situations should remind
us of the extent to which there is virtually no alternative
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Secondly, there is an urgent need to sort out the
political situation in Libya so that the rule of law wll
prevail throughout the country under an authority whose
legitimacy is recognized by the Libyan people. In the
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

meantime, the role of the Security Council is becoming
much more relevant and significant, and we welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2388 (2017). We
hope that it will contribute to enhancing the Council’s
engagement in addressing human trafficking, which
has emerged as a very serious challenge to international
peace and security. We also appreciate Italy’s important
role in addressing this particular issue and its efforts in
facilitating negotiations on resolution 2388 (2017).
In terms of an effective international response to
the scourge of trafficking in persons, attention should
be paid to reducing the vulnerability of migrants and
refugees, particularly women and children, including
unaccompanied and separated children, as they are at
the highest risk of falling victim to human trafficking.
Recent reports clearly indicate that tighter immigration
controls and border security measures, as well as limited
humanitarian assistance, increase the vulnerability of
migrants and refugees to becoming victims of human
trafficking. As such, much more needs to be done
by countries of transit and destination in expanding
legal channels for migration or for the resettlement of
refugees, as that would decrease the number of potential
victims of trafficking undertaking a fatal or dangerous
journey in a manner consistent with international
humanitarian and human rights standards.
Recognizing the positive contribution of migration
to the global economy and sustainable development
is absolutely imperative. That requires developing
an agenda aimed at fostering fair migration that not
only respects the fundamental rights of migrants, but
also offers them real opportunities for decent work
and integration into the society in which they find
themselves. In that regard, countries of origin, transit
and destination might consider creating a framework
for well-regulated, regular and fair migration, while at
the same time prioritizing the human rights of migrants.
While searching for solutions and mechanisms to
prevent and combat trafficking in persons, maintaining
the capacity to respond to humanitarian emergencies
in countries affected by conflict remains central.
Lifesaving humanitarian assistance and international
protection of refugees and migrants, regardless of
their status, should continue to form the cornerstone
of humanitarian response, including in mixed flows.
The adoption of an open-door policy for people
seeking humanitarian assistance, regardless of their
status — particularly in the context of search, rescue and

S/PV. 8111

disembarkation of people on mixed movement — should
continue to be encouraged.
Ethiopia, for its part, has been trying to take
various measures to prevent and fight trafficking in
persons, including the ratification of relevant legal
framework such as the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. Aside from what each
of us can and must do at the national level, however,
there is certainly a need to enhance bilateral and
multilateral cooperation between countries of origin,
transit and destination regarding the identification,
assistance, protection, repatriation and reintegration of
victims of human trafficking.
In our view, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
and regional frameworks such as the Khartoum process
could provide a framework for such cooperation
and coordination.
In conclusion, discussions on the global compacts
on migration and refugees should be informed by
practical steps taken to address trafficking in persons,
and we hope that the discussions we are having today
will contribute to that objective.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting. Let me also thank the
Secretary-General, Executive Director Fedotov and
Special Rapporteur Giammarinaro for their useful
briefings. I also welcome the statement made by
Mr. Chergui.
I would like to align myself with the statement to
be made later on behalf of the European Union and the
statement by Norway on behalf of the Nordic Countries.
Trafficking in persons is a trade in human misery.
It is the lowest form of criminality, where illicit
conglomerates prey on those who lack protection or
whose desperate hopes for a better life leave them open
and vulnerable to abduction, exploitation and abuse.
Just yesterday we heard the bone-chilling reports from
Libya of outright slave trade taking place there. I echo
the Secretary-General’s and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General’s remarks on those appalling
acts as some of the most outrageous abuses of human

17-392169/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

rights, and call upon the competent authorities to
investigate these activities without delay. Slavery has
no place in our world and we must work ceaselessly to
end such practices.
As we discussed on Friday during our meeting on
security challenges in the Mediterranean region (see
S/PV.8106), there is a complex set of interlinkages
between conflict and instability, human rights violations
and abuses, serious crimes, terrorism, displacement
and trafficking in persons. Conflicts and humanitarian
crises amplify the risk of trafficking in persons, and
there is a link between trafficking and large movements
of migrants and refugees. This leaves displaced persons,
migrants and women and children particularly at risk.
This phenomenon is replicated in conflicts all over the
world, including — as we have discussed recently in the
Council — in Iraq, Syria and the Sahel.
Since trafficking in persons essentially entails
violations and abuses of human rights, the prevalence
and impunity of such criminality in turn undermines
the rule of law and can lead to the perpetuation of
other forms of serious crimes. Our resolutions on
trafficking, including the resolution 2388 (2017), which
we have just adopted, clearly acknowledge the link
between trafficking in persons and sexual violence and
exploitation. That is evidenced by the grotesque crimes
committed against women in conflicts. We have heard
ourselves, first hand, from the Yazidi survivor, Nadia
Murad Basee Taha, in December 2015 (see S/PV.7585).
Another example is the reports of violations and sexual
abuses against children in Myanmar and of their
trafficking for sexual purposes in Bangladesh as a
result of the mass displacement of persons along these
countries’ borders. Children are often the primary
victims of trafficking, with lifelong consequences.
We must ensure that we can identify and provide
proper aid and support to the victims of trafficking. To
effectively combat trafficking of persons, especially in
conflict situations, it is imperative that we secure the
evidence so that perpetrators can be brought to justice.
Let me make four points on how we can tackle this
horrifying crime.
First, the United Nations presence in conflict
situations can play an important role in response to
trafficking in persons through support for capacitybuilding and reform efforts in national institutions,
and by enhancing national authorities’ ability to fight
and ultimately prevent serious crimes. United Nations
10/76

21/11/2017

missions also have a role in the protection of civilians,
including those at risk of being trafficked. At the global
level, the Council can play its role by including relevant
criteria for the listing of traffickers and their supporters
in sanctions resolutions. The newly established
sanctions regime for Mali, which also targets organized
criminals that obstruct the implementation of the peace
agreement, is an example of this.
Secondly, building strong rule-of-law institutions
is essential. This includes improving our capacity
to secure evidence in conflict situations. In that
regard, we look forward to the work of the team being
established to secure evidence of crimes committed
by Da’esh in Iraq. Cooperation between global and
regional organizations such as INTERPOL and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
and between national law-enforcement agencies, is
also essential. The work of the UNODC on trafficking
in persons, which is enhancing our knowledge and
understanding of this topic, is particularly welcome. In
addition, international legal assistance arrangements
can play an important role as an essential tool to fight
transnational crime. Additionally, a robust international
legal regime on trafficking in persons should provide a
framework for all of our work.
Thirdly, we must remember that trafficking is, in
essence, a criminal, albeit cynical, business model,
capitalizing on the vulnerabilities of persons. Therefore,
we must hit traffickers where it hurts them most, by
going after their assets, which also help finance both
organized crime groups and terrorist groups.
Finally, traffickers are enabled by instability,
poverty and inequality. By creating peaceful, prosperous
and inclusive societies, the full implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development can be a
powerful tool. By working to combat these crimes, we
are also contributing to building and sustaining peace
in societies.
Human trafficking, by its nature, is a crime that
exists below the radar for the vast majority of people.
Those who are trafficked are a hidden population,
kept in the shadows where the unspeakable crimes
committed against them remain unseen. However, we
cannot allow the suffering and violations of human
dignity to go unheeded and unpunished. We must shine
a light into the darkness, we must name and shame
these criminals and work together to bring an end to
this despicable enterprise.
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We commend the Italian
delegation for convening this debate and keeping the
issue of trafficking in persons in conflict situations
on the Council’s agenda. The briefers have set the
right tone for the debate. Trafficking in persons is a
curse and disgrace of our times. It is a gross violation
of human rights and an extremely complex form of
organized crime.
In recent years, we have observed a significant
evolution of its forms, especially in conflict and postconflict situations. Numerous ongoing conflicts have
led to a rise in exploitation of civilians. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab,
the Lord’s Resistance Army and other terrorist and
armed groups engage in human trafficking, forcing
victims into sexual slavery, sexual exploitation
and compulsory labour. Trafficking is therefore a
transnational threat that requires a transnational
response, including from the Security Council. In that
regard, it is encouraging that the Council has addressed
the issue in two recent resolutions, 2331 (2016),
adopted last year, and 2388 (2017), which we have just
adopted today. Ukraine also fully supports the political
declaration on the implementation of the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
adopted by the General Assembly in September as
resolution 72/1. We must build on that momentum.
People who have been trafficked should be treated
as victims of a crime and not penalized for their
forced involvement in the unlawful activities of the
perpetrators. Along with the provision of psychological,
social and medical support to victims, we see the
fight against impunity as one of the key priorities in
this area. For traffickers, human beings are merely a
commodity to be sold for profit. The channels they use
for trafficking humans can also be used for smuggling
arms or transporting terrorists, if there is a greater
profit to be made. Terrorist organizations often engage
in such activities in order to finance themselves, and the
international community should therefore consolidate
its efforts to block those channels, treating them as a
major threat to international security.
Ukraine is not immune to the problem of trafficking
in persons, but our Government is taking firm steps
to address the issue and has put the fight against this
horrendous problem at the top of its agenda. In the past
decade, Ukraine has made significant progress towards
establishing a viable nationwide counter-trafficking
response framework, and has set up a national referral

S/PV. 8111

mechanism for identifying, assisting and protecting
victims of trafficking. We have enacted a law combating
trafficking in human beings in Ukraine.
Our approach therefore places victims and their
human rights at the centre of our actions. We are
working to eradicate trafficking in human beings,
taking into account the gender aspects of the issue
and the best interests of children. In that regard, our
priorities are, first, identifying, protecting and assisting
victims of trafficking; stepping up our efforts to prevent
trafficking in human beings; increasing the prosecution
of traffickers; enhancing coodination and cooperation
among key actors and institutions; and increasing our
knowledge of emerging concerns related to all forms
of trafficking in human beings and improving the
effectiveness of our response to them.
Ukraine has acceded to the main international
legal instruments related to the fight against human
trafficking and, as I have already mentioned, has a
solid national legal framework for dealing with this
shocking phenomenon. I should note, however, that at
the moment not all of those instruments can be properly
implemented in the areas of my country that are not
under the Government’s control. According to current
international data, the Russian aggression in Ukraine
has displaced 2 million people, who constitute a
population that is especially vulnerable to exploitation.
In the areas controlled by Russia and its proxies in the
Donbas region, the situation has become particularly
challenging. Displaced persons are often victims of
trafficking, and some Ukrainians have been subjected
to forced labor in the occupied territory, often under
torture. Their cases remain largely unaddressed,
however, owing to a lack both of safe access for and
proper attention from monitoring missions, especially
the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission
in Ukraine, as well as UNICEF and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. In that regard, I should
single out another issue of great importance for
Ukraine, which is ensuring that the perpetrators of
trafficking in persons are rendered accountable and
that they are prosecuted. The high level of impunity for
such crimes in the areas that the Government does not
control is unacceptable.
Trafficking in persons is a blatant violation of
human rights and an offence against human beings’
dignity and integrity. For our common fight against
this scourge to succeed, it requires the efforts of all
concerned. A long-term solution will come about only

17-3921611/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

through the international community’s consistent
political commitment and joint action in eradicating
this evil, promoting justice and accountability and
protecting the victims.
I would like to thank the President once again for
convening today’s important meeting.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Since it so happens that today we have
been given the floor immediately after the Ukrainian
delegation, we would like to begin by once again
repudiating the insinuations made about Russia as
inappropriate, unfounded and perhaps even absurd.
And now let me turn to the topic of today’s meeting.
We would first like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
and the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union for their substantive presentations
and assessments of the threat of human trafficking in
situations of conflict.
The topic of today’s meeting is not a new one
for the Council, which has dedicated resolution 2331
(2016) and presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25,
adopted in December 2015, to it. The problems treated
in those documents remain urgent. Considering the
transnational nature of crimes related to the trafficking
of persons in conflict situations, international
cooperation in combating them is becoming more and
more essential. Such cooperation should be based on
recognizing the interrelationship between trafficking
in persons and the persistent imbalances between the
socioeconomic development of various States and
regions, the increasing illegal migration flows around
the world and the activities of international organized
criminal associations. The best way to effectively
combat human trafficking is by taking an integrated
approach to the problem that includes prevention, the
criminal prosecution of perpetrators and assistance to
their victims.
The issue of human trafficking’s links to terrorism
and its financing is a specific and separate problem.
We urge everyone to work more actively to fight this
nexus, including by strengthen cooperation in exposing
and prosecuting those involved. It is important to use
all the available tools in order to suppress such activity,
and we support strengthening the mechanisms for
combating trafficking in human beings through various
12/76

21/11/2017

United Nations platforms as well as other global and
regional formats. Our country is a party to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children
and a member of the Group of Friends United against
Human Trafficking.
We consider the leading role of the United Nations
in consolidating international and national bodies’
efforts to combat trafficking in human beings very
important, and we welcome the measures taken in this
direction through the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, especially for giving specialized assistance
to interested States. We believe that such work deserves
support, and we plan to continue to contribute to it. We
firmly believe in the importance of further developing
the capacity of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
against Trafficking in Persons and its member
organizations’ active participation in implementing
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Human Beings. We consider it a key
reference point for directing States’ efforts in this area.
In that regard, we welcomed the General Assembly’s
adoption in September of resolution 72/1, on the political
declaration on the implementation of the Global Plan of
Action. We believe that the approaches that have been
agreed on in the United Nations to combating trafficking
in human beings constitute a solid basis for cooperation
on the issue. We should therefore adopt a cautious
attitude to attempts to modify or formulate alternative
platforms in this area, so as to avoid misunderstanding
or weakening the international anti-trafficking regime.
In conclusion, we would once again like to
emphasize that in order to avoid duplicating efforts
in combating human trafficking it is crucial to
strictly follow the terms of reference established by
United Nations bodies. In that way, it is appropriate
for the Security Council to consider issues of human
trafficking only in relation to the issues on its agenda.
As we understand it, one can address that issue in the
context of specific conflict situations, each of which
has its own particular features, and of efforts to curtial
the financing of terrorism.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to warmly thank Italy for having
convened today’s debate on an extremely topical
issue that touches all of our consciences. We also
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your tireless efforts
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

that allowed us to unanimously adopt resolution 2388
(2017). France also thanks the Secretary-General
for his exemplary leadership on this issue, and
Ms. Giammarinaro, Mr. Fedotov and Mr. Chergui for
their informative briefings.
France aligns itself with the statement that will be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I shall focus my statement on three points.
First, with respect to an analysis of the situation,
trafficking in human beings remains one of the most
profitable and widespread activities in the world. It
assumes numerous forms of exploitation: forced labour,
sexual servitude, kidnapping for forced prostitution and
rape, to give but a few examples. Tragically, recourse to
such atrocities, which are abominable and dehumanizing
by their very nature, is no longer the exception to the
rule in conflict and post-conflict situations. Armed
groups, be they terrorists and criminals, use human
trafficking not only as a means of sewing terror among
civilian populations, but also as a source of financing
and even as a recruitment tool.
We must make the chilling observation that
trafficking has become a key and a nefarious component
of many conflict situations. In Iraq and Syria, it is
women and children who have suffered and continue
to suffer the worst atrocities committed by Da’esh. In
West Africa, and more particularly in Nigeria, Boko
Haram tortures, rapes and holds hundreds of women
and children captive. In Libya, migrants are subjected
to inhuman treatment and violence by criminal groups
and militias who see them as nothing but a source
of income.
The second point that I want to emphasize concerns
the obligation to act collectively in the face of acts that
are not only morally intolerable, but also constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity and even crimes
of genocide. Their perpetrators must be brought to
justice for their actions. Thus, in the case of Libya,
France welcomes the activities of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court in pursuing her
investigation into the alleged crimes against migrants
transiting through Libya. Faced of such crimes, we
have a duty to act to protect not only civilians, but also
international humanitarian law and our principles. We
must also work tirelessly to settle by political means
conflicts that cause people to flee and suffer.

S/PV. 8111

In view of our determined commitment to
multilateralism on this issue, France is also heavily
involved at the national level in the fight against
trafficking in persons, especially women and children.
France has a highly developed legal arsenal and a
national action plan to counter that scourge. We
encourage all States to equip themselves with robust
national arrangements in the framework established by
the United Nations Convention Against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols, including the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children.
France is involved in many bilateral and regional
cooperation efforts to assist the most vulnerable States
to address this scourge. We participate actively in the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime capacitybuilding programmes, particularly in West Africa,
and contributes to the United Nations Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, since it was established in 2010.
The third element that I shall highlight, as have
previous speakers, is the fact that our common fight
against trafficking in human beings requires the
commitment of all States and heightened international
cooperation. States we must forge a global response
based on respect for human rights and oriented on three
main objectives: prevention, protection and punishment.
The Security Council has a special responsibility in the
fight against this scourge in conflict situations. Today,
we cannot deny that trafficking in persons by armed or
terrorist groups in conflict or post-conflict situations
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
Following the adoption in December 2015
of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25 and in
December 2016 of resolution 2331 (2016), resolution
2388 (2017), which we have adopted today, is a new
step forward in our common fight against trafficking
in and exploitation of human beings. It will, inter
alia, strengthen the action of States, with the support
of the United Nations, in two main areas: first, the
identification of victims and vulnerable persons, with
special attention to women and children; and secondly,
the ability to dismantle networks, in particular criminal
and terrorist networks, that deal in trafficking.
In the face of such horrendous crimes, we have a
collective responsibility to stop them and to prosecute
those responsible for such acts. The Security Council

17-3921613/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/11/2017

may rest assured of the full commitment of France to
that fight.

was forced into sexual slavery and kept underground.
She did not see the sun for nine months.

Mrs. Hailey (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, and Italy for your leadership on
this matter. We also thank all the briefers for their very
informative reports.

Those are just two examples among many. Across
sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East, vast human
displacement due to ongoing conflicts and dire economic
need has resulted in rampant human trafficking.
Violence on the part of State and non-State actors
alike has driven thousands across the region to Europe
in search of a better life, exposing already vulnerable
populations to human traffickers. The children who are
forced into those situations live in conditions that most
of us are blessed not to be able to imagine. For those
who have escaped traffickers, the nightmare is not over.
Their trauma continues long after the victimization
ends. Many will never fully recover.

We want to extend a special thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his strong condemnation of reports of
African migrants being sold as slaves in Libya. To see
the pictures of those men being treated like cattle and
to hear the auctioneer describe them as “big strong boys
for farm work” should shock the conscience of us all.
There are few greater violations of human rights and
human dignity than that. There is no place in our world
for slavery. The United States urges a full investigation
of those appalling acts. The perpetrators who are
responsible for those crimes must be held accountable.
That is literally why we are here today — to put a stop
to that barbaric practice and other acts of exploitation
of human beings.
Human trafficking is of concern to the United
States because of its destructive impact on individuals.
But it also has consequences beyond its immediate
victims. The United States was the first country to
bring human trafficking in conflict to the Council’s
agenda as an international peace and security issue in
2015. More recently, we have advocated treating far
more human rights abuses and violations as peace and
security issues.
Human trafficking in conflict is a prime example
of the kind of human rights abuses that threaten entire
regions and the world. Terrorist groups like Boko Haram
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) use
human trafficking to support their aggression, fuelling
a cycle of violence that leads to more vulnerable,
displaced people who are then exploited by traffickers.
A young boy named Abdul was kidnapped by Boko
Haram from his village in Nigeria when he was just
14 years old. The terrorists trained him in the use of
heavy weapons and forced him to carry out operations
in which he killed 14 civilians. He was also forced to
gather intelligence on Government forces for Boko
Haram. As far as we have seen, far too often kidnapped
girls and women play a different but no less horrific
role for those terrorist groups. Amal was captured by
ISIS in Libya, along with a group of 71 other migrants.
She testified that her captors separated the men from
the women and the Christians from the Muslims. She
14/76

The United States continues to combat trafficking
in persons by focusing our efforts on prevention,
protection and prosecution.
On prevention, we fund research to better
understand the connection between conflict and
vulnerability to human trafficking, especially in
places most affected by the outflow of refugees from
the Syrian civil war. We also support the International
Organization for Migration’s efforts to increase
screening, victim identification and services among
vulnerable populations.
On protection, the United States stresses the critical
need to immediately identify trafficking victims in
conflict situations, and to see that they are provided
with the necessary protection and assistance. As noted
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/939), victims
of trafficking by violent extremist groups, such as ISIS
and the Taliban, suffer from particularly severe trauma.
Not only is the United States fully committed to the
complete defeat of those violent extremist groups, but
we join the Council in our complete commitment to
helping those victims.
On prosecution, we appreciate the Council’s focus on
accountability for human trafficking. In addition to the
impressive efforts of our colleagues at the Department
of Justice to bring perpetrators to justice, we have
elevated our diplomatic engagement on that effort by
highlighting prosecution throughout the Department of
State’s 2017 Trafficking in Persons Report.
We believe that a victim-centred approach to the
investigation and prosecution of human trafficking is
critical to the overall success of law enforcement efforts.
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

That includes commitments by States not to prosecute
trafficking victims for acts committed as a direct result
of being subjected to human trafficking. We are also
committed to partnering with Governments in order to
enhance their capacity to document human trafficking
cases. We welcome the Council’s unanimous call for
an investigative mechanism in Iraq to document ISIS’
crimes, including its heinous practice of forcing women
into sexual slavery.
Finally, we are encouraged by the SecretaryGeneral’s focus on improved United Nations
coordination on trafficking of persons in conflict,
as expressed in his report. As armed conflicts and
trafficking in persons continue to converge and
contribute to global peace and security challenges,
the United Nations must also improve coordination to
address that challenge. We join the Secretary-General’s
call on remaining Member States to become party to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. That would be an important show of the
unified, international front against human trafficking.
We will continue to work with the Council and
partner Governments to end that barbaric assault on
human dignity.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia wishes to thank the Italian
presidency not only for the initiative to convene this
debate, but also for its leadership in the negotiations
on resolution 2388 (2017) and for all of its work on the
topic that brings us together today. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his work on
and commitment to this common struggle. We further
thank Mr. Fedotov, Ms. Giammarinaro and Mr. Chergui
for their briefings.
In recent days, the International Organization
for Migration has denounced the existence of a slave
market in Libya. We have all seen the horrible and
heartbreaking images of individuals being auctioned in
that country. Bolivia echoes the words of the SecretaryGeneral in condemning those facts in the strongest
terms, and supports the request of the African Union
for the urgent conduct an investigation into those
despicable acts and inhumane practices in order to
identify those responsible and bring them to justice.
The international community must be made aware
that we are at a critical juncture in history. According

S/PV. 8111

to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, we are facing the greatest humanitarian
crisis since the creation of the United Nations. That is
reflected by the 66 million people who, by late 2016,
had been forcibly displaced throughout the world as a
result of war, persecution, armed conflicts and violence,
representing the largest movement of people since the
end of the Second World War. Among those individuals
were children, women and men — all easily exploited
by traffickers.
As underscored in the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime 2016 Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons, armed groups also participate in trafficking in
persons in the territories in which they operate. They
recruit and use thousands of children as combatants in
various conflicts. They also traffic women and girls
to force them into marriage or subject them to sexual
slavery, and exploit men and boys with forced labour.
According to that report, 79 per cent of the victims of
trafficking in persons are women and children, two of
every three victims are girls under 12, and one of every
three victims is a girl between the ages of 15 and 18. At
the same time, according to the International Labour
Organization, more than 12 million people suffer from
situations similar to slavery as a result of trafficking
in persons.
We urge all States to address this issue through
cooperation and international, regional and bilateral
dialogue, and to work to strengthen effective measures
to combat and eliminate trafficking in persons, assist
victims and survivors in their reintegration, and bring
the perpetrators to justice. Likewise, we underscore
the importance of implementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and
we call on States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children.
It is clear that conflicts weaken State structures,
impair protection mechanisms and allow criminal
networks to act with greater freedom. It is therefore
necessary to fight against economic asymmetries
and address the structural causes of poverty, one
consequence of which is the large migratory flows
that are caused mainly by the concentration of wealth
in certain countries — the root cause of which is the
current economic and financial system.
That situation is exacerbated by policies of regime
change, interventionism and interference in the internal

17-3921615/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

affairs of other States. A clear example of that is the
crisis in the Sahel region, which is due, inter alia, to
the associated impact of the crisis in Libya, as reflected
in the transfer of arms and combatants to Mali, which
considerably strengthened the military capacity of the
terrorist groups that operate in the subregion.
Unfortunately, terrorism has capitalized on those
economic asymmetries and armed conflicts, creating
a growing link between terrorism and trafficking in
persons. International criminal groups and terrorist
groups, which the Council and all Member States
fight, profit from trafficking in persons and their
exploitation, and use the economic gains to finance
their terrorist activities.
By closing off borders, building walls, criminalizing
migration and denying access to refugees, we believe
that some countries not only negatively impact
trafficking in persons, but also give rise to xenophobia,
discrimination and racism, and serve to fuel the rhetoric
of the terrorist groups that we are all trying to combat.
Such rhetoric, of course, includes intolerance of
different religious beliefs. Similarly, it is important that
the international community continue to investigate
how the economic profits from trafficking in persons
are injected into the global financial system through
money-laundering and so-called tax havens.
We note that, since 2012, there has been
comprehensive legislation in Bolivia against trafficking
in persons, aimed at fighting the evil. In addition, the
State is providing the resources necessary to ensuring
that this fight is successful. Furthermore, in June
the World People’s Conference was held in Bolivia,
under the theme “For a world without walls, towards
universal citizenship”, in order to promote the concept
of universal citizenship with a view to reducing not
only trafficking in persons but also the barriers that
prevent refugees from fleeing war and armed conflicts.
We thank the Italian delegation once again for its
leadership on this matter. We are sure that all that has
been said in the Council and adopted in resolution 2388
(2017) will not remain empty words, but will become
concrete action to eliminate this scourge.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation wishes to warmly thank the
Italian delegation for its timely choice of this topic.
Trafficking in persons in times of conflict goes hand
in hand with the many briefings that the Italuian
16/76

21/11/2017

presidency has organized this month, including those
on Libya and security challenges in the Mediterranean.
We would also like to thank today’s briefers:
Secretary-General António Guterres; Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro,
United Nations Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children; and of course
our brother Mr. Smaїl Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, who joined us
from Addis Ababa.
This debate could not be more timely, given that
indignation mixed with anger continues to envelop the
world, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, following
media reports on the auctioning off of individuals of
sub-Saharan African origin in Libya. Certain questions
continue to be posed. How long has this despicable
practice been taking place? Who are the main players?
What inhumane fate have those who were sold been
subjected to? How can we put an end to this scourge,
which surely constitutes a crime against humanity
and a form of modern-day slavery? How can we find
and bring to justice the backers, the perpetrators, the
people smugglers and others who are complicit in this
heinous trade?
In a press statement released last week, part of
which I read out here in the Chamber on 17 November
(see S/PV.8106), the Government of the Republic of
Senegal appealed to the international community,
specifically — but not limited to — the African Union
and the United Nations, as well as the Libyan authorities,
to swiftly launch an investigation in order to shed full
light on the situation and identify the perpetrators, as
well as to take all the necessary measures required to
stop this crime and hold all those responsible to account.
What can the Security Council do? What must
it do? The Secretary-General has provided us with
an update on the current state of play in terms of
States’ implementation of the relevant provisions of
resolution 2331 (2016). Resolution 2388 (2017), which
we have just adopted this morning, equips us with
the ways and means to tackle this scourge. In March,
while reflecting on the same issue, we focused on
forced labour, slavery and other abhorrent practices
(see S/PV.7898). In September, the General Assembly
endorsed the political declaration on the implementation
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, having assessed the actions
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

taken and remaining challenges in the fight against
human trafficking in general.
For its part, Africa is highly mobilized, given
that our continent is home to the greatest number of
conflicts. My delegation would like to warmly thank
Commissioner Mr. Chergui for his unequivocal briefing
on the causes of this scourge as well as the ways and
means to eliminate it. On the global level, however,
no continent has been spared this scourge. The United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has shed further
light on the complex links that exist between human
trafficking and armed conflicts, revealing that 60 per
cent of those who fall into the webs of human traffickers
in situations of armed conflict are refugees and asylum
seekers in flight.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to underscore its grave concern regarding human
trafficking by non-State groups, especially terrorist
groups, in situations of armed conflict. Their goal is
to consolidate their power, strengthen their financial
sources and, most unfortunately, recruit foreign
terrorist fighters. Whether in Libya or anywhere
else engulfed in conflict, my delegation considers
it essential to be determined and coordinated in our
fight against all forms of human trafficking. This
crime not only constitutes a violation of human rights
and international humanitarian law but also leads to
further instability, allowing non-State armed groups,
transnational organized crime and terrorism to thrive.
In adopting resolution 2331 (2016), the Security
Council issued an urgent appeal to Member States to
take immediate and decisive steps to prevent and crack
down on human trafficking, particularly in situations
of armed conflict. It calls upon States to investigate
human trafficking networks active in armed conflict
situations in order to disrupt and dismantle them. It also
calls upon States to establish mechanisms to properly
identify victims and alleged victims, including on
the basis of information received from staff who are
in contact with the former. Moreover, States should
strengthen the bodies established to investigate illicit
financial flows and analyse the extent to which human
trafficking funds terrorism. States are also called upon
to accede to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children.

S/PV. 8111

Senegal has ratified almost all international and
regional conventions and protocols pertaining to human
trafficking, and we have incorporated the provisions
of those conventions and treaties in our national
legislation. We have also drawn up regulatory and
legislative texts at the national level that address the
human trafficking and migrant phenomena, particularly
through a specific law with a section in the criminal
code on human trafficking and analogous practices that
provides for the protection of victims, adopted in 2005.
In terms of measures to discourage, suppress
and prevent human trafficking, particularly in armed
conflict situations, my delegation would like to
underscore the need to ensure accountability, while
stressing the need to investigate alleged acts when
reported and to identify and prosecute the alleged
perpetrators. When national legal systems and courts
are not in a position to conduct such investigations and
prosecutions, then the international justice system must
take on those cases in the fight against impunity.
It goes without saying that frank and exhaustive
international and regional cooperation — within the
context of a global and united approach — is essential
here, particularly when it comes to information flow
and the identification and protection of victims.
Such cooperation must also translate into enhanced
coordination between mechanisms and frameworks
intended to prevent human trafficking and to protect
people from human trafficking in conflict situations.
To conclude, my delegation would once again
like to emphasize the importance of prevention,
protection, rehabilitation and accountability as tools
that we must utilize in our fight against all scourges
that threaten humankind, including that of human
trafficking in situations of armed conflict. To that end,
it is important to combine prevention, response and
reparation, while addressing the deep-rooted causes
of conflict, strengthening the protection of civilians in
such situations and bringing those who are responsible
to justice.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): First of all, allow me to warmly
thank Italy for convening this important meeting. My
appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Special Rapporteur and the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security for their
informative briefings. This open debate provides a

17-3921617/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

precious opportunity to discuss how to effectively
confront trafficking in persons in conflict situations.
Trafficking in persons poses a serious threat
to human dignity and integrity. Resolution 2331
(2016), the first-ever resolution to highlight the nexus
between trafficking in persons and armed conflict or
terrorism, stressed that armed and terrorist groups are
using trafficking in persons as a tactic for fundraising
and recruitment.
Regrettably, despite the increasing awareness about
this challenge facing the international community, there
has not been sufficient improvement on the ground.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/939) states
that armed and terrorist groups continue to recruit boys
and girls for combat or support functions and, in some
instances, radicalize them to commit terrorist acts,
using deception, threats and promises of reward.
Almost two years ago, in December 2015, the
Security Council held its first thematic briefing on this
subject (see S/PV.7585). Since then, it has continued
to deal with it proactively in various aspects, such
as sexual violence, exploitation and violence against
children, among others. Japan welcomes today’s
adoption of resolution 2388 (2017), which demonstrates
our strong will to take comprehensive and coordinated
action to combat trafficking in persons. The resolution
aims at promoting comprehensive methods to eliminate
this crime. To effectively identify potential victims of
trafficking, the resolution encourages Member States
to use refugee registration mechanisms and earlywarning and early-screening frameworks. Identifying
victims is the first important step in protecting victims
and prosecuting perpetrators.
Japan fully echoes the emphasis on the importance
to collect, analyse and share appropriate data
among Member States and United Nations agencies,
including the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. Accurate information is essential for
their activities to be able to assess and respond to
trafficking in persons in conflicts situations. In that
regard, Japan appreciates the fact that the upcoming
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Global
Report on Trafficking in Persons includes a chapter
dedicated to this aspect. I believe that such steps will
enable the international community to move forward
and strengthen its comprehensive approach.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/939) and
the relevant Security Council resolutions point out,
18/76

21/11/2017

the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, are widely accepted legal instruments
that enhance cooperation among Member States. Japan
will fully engage in the global fight against this heinous
crime as a State party through mechanisms established
by those instruments.
Japan will continue to implement measures to
prevent trafficking in persons, protect victims and
prosecute perpetrators, in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and the
pertient Sustainable Development Goals, as well as in
close cooperation with other Member States, relevant
United Nations organizations and civil society.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Italian
presidency for convening this very important open
debate in the Security Council and for initiating
the adoption of today’s resolution 2388 (2017) on
this extremely vital issue. My delegation takes this
opportunity to express its sincere gratitude to SecretaryGeneral Guterres, Under-Secretary-General Fedotov,
Mr. Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union, as well as Ms. Giammarinaro,
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children.
Trafficking in persons in conflict situations remains
an important matter for the international community.
We therefore welcome the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral’s on this problem (S/2017/939), and urge that
serious attention be paid to his recommendations. With
the alarming proportions this problem has assumed,
we need to take urgent measures such as harmonizing
legislation across countries, enacting new stricter
legislation, bringing perpetrators to justice, ending
all impunity, exercising more vigilant cross-border
controls and intelligence sharing. It is important to
freeze and block assets, as well as work closely with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and INTERPOL and their regional affiliates. While
conforming to regional and international norms, we
need to offer protection and appropriate assistance to
persons affected by this brutal crime.
We commend the tireless efforts and the application
of best practices by the UNODC and other relevant
United Nations system organizations in countering
human trafficking. We also value the UNODC’s able
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

coordination of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
against Trafficking in Persons and the United Nations
Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children. We support
strengthened coordination between the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons and
Member States so as to enhance the effectiveness of our
response to the current challenges of human trafficking,
at the global, national and regional levels.
Comprehensive strict measures must be taken
to ensure that trafficking in conflict situations does
not lead to sexual slavery of women and girls, forced
marriage or the most appalling human rights violations.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram,
Al-Shabaab and other terrorist organizations are using
trafficking and sexual violence as a weapon and tactic
of terror, and we need to enhance our capabilities to
fight them.
Human trafficking is one of the most shocking
challenges facing the international community. It
affects all regions of the world, without exception, since
every country is, or could become, an origin, transit or
destination country for victims of that threat. We must
be quite vigilant in ensuring that refugees, displaced
persons and immigrants — particularly women and
girls — are not recruited for human trafficking in
armed conflicts.
Combating trafficking in persons demands that
we first look to the root causes, namely, poverty,
underdevelopment, unemployment and the lack of
socioeconomic opportunities and security, especially
in conflict situations. We need to consider normative,
financial and technological advantages to address
this problem. It is also essential to mobilize funding
for poverty eradication, education and employment
in countries affected by conflict, by mobilizing
international as well as the domestic resources of such
States. Peace and development are a solid foundation
for a stable society and the rule of law.
We see a need for strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
African Union, the League of Arab State and other
regional organizations that have done significant work
in this area.
At the regional level, Kazakhstan effectively
interacts with the Commonwealth of Independent
States through its programme on cooperation against

S/PV. 8111

human trafficking for the period 2014-2018, and with
the OSCE as part of its Alliance against Trafficking
in Persons. We have also initiated the Almaty process,
which serves as a platform for nine countries of the
region to annually step up their response and enhance
cooperation with the United Nations Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration.
It is important that our fight against this heinous
crime be human-rights-centred. Kazakhstan is
party to more than 60 multilateral treaties on human
rights, including 13 directly related to counteracting
contemporary forms of slavery. My country is
committed to an integrated approach to address the
scourge by taking full responsibility for implementation
and fulfilling all obligations envisaged.
Kazakhstan has taken decisive measures, including
legislative actions, to counteract various aspects of
human trafficking. They include establishing a national
referral mechanism, joining efforts to protect the rights
of trafficked persons, introducing social standards
to assist victims and regulating the procedures for
identifying victims of human trafficking. Systematically,
we carry out the Stop the Traffick preventive campaign.
The relevant Government agencies regularly check the
activities of modelling, tourism and marriage agencies
that offer travel and employment services abroad, and
monitor mass media and the Internet to detect materials
related to trafficking in persons and child pornography.
We hope that today’s dialogue will make a
significant contribution in unifying the efforts made
by States, international organizations and civil society,
while helping to strengthen international activities,
prosecute and punish criminals and protect victims of
human trafficking. Kazakhstan, as a member of the
Group of Friends United against Human Trafficking,
supports all international efforts to counteract this
form of modern slavery, and calls on all States to fully
and effectively implement the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
successful presidency of the Security Council for this
month, during which you have offered valuable insights
into the work of the Council — the most important
being resolution 2388 (2017), adopted by the Security
Council today, on the issue of trafficking in Persons
in conflict situations. We would like to thank the

17-3921619/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secretary-General and all of today’s briefers for their
valuable contributions to today’s debate.
The delegation of Egypt aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. I would like to add the following points in
my national capacity.
Egypt believes that trafficking in persons is a
criminal act that goes against human values. Combating
trafficking in persons is a priority of the Egyptian
Government. Egypt is considered a State of transit and
destination for refugees and migrants fleeing the ravages
of war and armed conflict in the region — conflicts that
create an environment rife with trafficking in persons,
particularly carried out by terrorist groups, with the
purpose of exploiting migrants, especially women
and children.
Egypt has therefore been in the vanguard of States
to have ratified the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, as well as, in 2004, the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and
the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by
Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
Moreover, together with Belarus in 2005, we launched
an initiative to form the Group of Friends United against
Human Trafficking.
At the national level, Egypt has established a
legal and institutional framework that guarantees the
implementation of its international obligations through
a number of measures.
First, in October 2016, Egypt launched a national
strategy to combat trafficking in persons, which was
accompanied by a five-year action plan covering the
years 2016 to 2021. It includes projects, awarenessraising campaigns, media campaigns and capacitybuilding for those working in Egypt on preventing and
combating trafficking in persons.
Secondly, in 2010, Egypt promulgated a law to
combat trafficking in persons. We have set up a national
coordination committee to combat and prevent illegal
migration and trafficking in persons.
Thirdly, Egypt has established specialized criminal
departments within its courts of appeal in order to
guarantee that issues related to trafficking in persons
are dealt with more swiftly.
20/76

21/11/2017

At the regional level, Egypt makes active efforts
across all the regional initiatives in which it participates,
including the following measures.
First, Egypt hosted the second regional ministerial
conference of the African Union-Horn of Africa
initiative to prevent and combat trafficking in persons
and the smuggling of migrants, which was held in
Sharm El-Sheikh in September 2016.
Secondly, Egypt hosted the trilateral meeting for
the three main processes that are involved in preventing
and combating trafficking in persons on the African
continent, including the Khartoum process, the Rabat
process and the African Union-Horn of Africa initiative
to prevent and combat trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of migrants.
Thirdly, Egypt acceded to the Arab model law on
combating trafficking in persons and, in that regard,
actively participates in the meetings of the Arab
Regional Consultative Process on Migration.
At the international level, Egypt actively seeks
to cooperate with United Nations agencies and the
relevant international organizations in order to prevent
and combat trafficking in persons, especially the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and
the International Organization for Migration. Egypt
also actively participates in the ongoing consultative
process on two global compacts — on migration and
refugees — in order to pave the way for negotiations
on those compacts in the near future. Egypt looks
forward to arriving at two comprehensive and balanced
documents that take into consideration the interests of
all parties and States on migration and refugees.
The Security Council continues to set the legal
framework that is necessary to combat trafficking in
persons in areas of armed conflict. It has done so by
adopting resolution 2388 (2017) today, and we would
like to express our gratitude to the Italian delegation
for the great effort it has exerted in order to arrive
at a consensus resolution in the Council. In order to
ensure that the resolution is implemented in a way that
will guarantee its success, we would like to make the
following points.
The General Assembly is the main specialized
organ of the United Nations on the issue of trafficking
in persons.
The United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Palermo Protocoal are
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

considered the foundation for States to implement
Security Council resolutions, including everything
pertaining to the definition of the crime of trafficking
in persons and exploitation.
It is important that the international community
redouble its efforts in order to cut off all sources of
funding for terrorist organizations, including funding
from trafficking in persons, using all international
mechanisms available to do so.
The crime of trafficking in persons, including
women and girls, is not tied to any religion, nationality
or civilization. We also note the important role that
traditional and religious leaders can play in dispelling
the link that some extremist ideologies try to establish
and disseminate.
It is important to note in the General Assembly
the pioneering role of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in the field of trafficking in persons.
We would like to welcome the activities that the
UNODC has been carrying out in order to establish an
operational framework for the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
We recognize the important role of both the United
Nations and the private sector in rupturing the links
of trafficking in persons by following the chain of
consumption and purchasing.
In conclusion, Egypt would like to reiterate its full
support for the United Nations Global Plan of Action
to Combat Trafficking in Persons, which is considered
the governing framework for international cooperation
in fighting that crime — not only for States but also for
civil society and the private sector. Egypt supports the
political declaration that was adopted in September for
a second revision of that Global Plan of Action.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres; Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; Ms. Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children; and Mr. Smaїl
Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for their briefings. We also thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on a
subject that is of special interest to Uruguay.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2388 (2017),
which reaffirms the importance of resolution 2331

S/PV. 8111

(2016) and goes one step further in the fight against
trafficking in persons, especially in conflict situations.
Uruguay emphatically condemns trafficking in persons
in the broadest sense, as well as related crimes, which
are crimes that aim to exploit an individual and take
advantage of him or her or his or her situation of
vulnerability. This deplorable crime implies disregard
for an individual as a human being, and the debasement
of their human rights and their fundamental freedoms.
It also involves the destruction of their human dignity.
Without going any further, recent press reports
on the sale of slaves in Libya show that this scourge
continues to thrive under our very noses. It is an
aberration that should be unanimously and vigorously
condemned; it cannot and should not be tolerated.
Over the past few years, the proliferation of
armed conflicts and the persecution of ethnic and
religious minorities have brought with them a series
of consequences, including the phenomenon of
unprecedented mass migration and situations of
refugees, internally displaced persons and asylum
seekers, which are precisely the situations that can
be exploited by traffickers of human beings, who
are profiting in the vilest way possible from the
vulnerability and misfortune of these individuals.
Trafficking in persons in situations of conflict is
an issue that is global in reach, because it concerns not
only countries of origin, but also countries of transit
and destination of victims, as well as countries where
criminal networks operate and where those networks’
profits are transferred. Consequently, efforts aimed at
combating trafficking in persons should be undertaken
as a commitment of the international community as a
whole. This is the point on which I wish to focus.
There is a series of initiatives that all States can
promote so as to combat this scourge, whether or not
they are involved in an armed conflict. As can be seen
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/939), of
particular relevance are State policies in taking up the
fight against trafficking in persons and related crimes,
but also migration policies in the area of refugees as
well as judicial cooperation.
The United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, constitute the international legal
framework that sets forth obligations and standards
to assist States in developing national instruments

17-3921621/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

for combating trafficking in persons. Accordingly,
Uruguay would like to congratulate the Governments
of Fiji and Japan for recently becoming parties to the
Convention and the Protocol, and urges those States
that have not yet done so to join them.
The efforts of States should be focused not only
on fighting and combating trafficking in persons
in situations of conflict, but also on guaranteeing
the fundamental rights of victims by strengthening
measures and mechanisms of prevention and protection.
Those persons who are fleeing conflicts not only
move around within the political borders of their own
countries, but they also try to find a better lives across
borders, in other States. As stated in the latest report
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on
this topic, 60 percent of trafficking victims are female
foreigners in the country where they are identified.
Bearing that in mind, as we prepare to start
negotiations on a global compact for safe, orderly and
regular migration, Uruguay would like to stress the
principle of non-criminalization of irregular migration,
providing migrants with the tools they need for coping
in countries of transit and destination, so that they can be
less vulnerable to trafficking in persons. States should
promote and protect the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their status.
In terms of refugees, it is important to ensure that
those who seek refuge — until their applications are
resolved — are provided with the basic means they need
for access to social services of the country in which
they find themselves. In that way, we can take concrete
steps to prevent trafficking in persons.
Positive and inclusive national practices in the
area of refugees and migrants set the right path for the
international community to take in order to combat
trafficking in persons, especially in situations of armed
conflict. In addition, those responsible for such horrific
crimes must be held accountable. In that regard, we
congratulate the Secretary-General for establishing
an investigative team to compile, preserve and store
evidence of acts of terrorism, as well as humantrafficking activities. We would like to express in this
forum the wholehearted support of Uruguay for this
initiative, and we encourage other States to do the same
and work with the investigative team where necessary.
Finally, I would like to emphasize the importance
of addressing the needs of the most vulnerable groups,
such as women and children, by adopting appropriate
22/76

21/11/2017

and specific measures at the domestic and international
levels. We must acknowledge that we are the ones who
must bring about real change by adopting a broad,
comprehensive and multidimensional approach to the
issues of human trafficking in conflicts. To that end,
determination and political will are necessary. In this
endeavour, the international community can count on
Uruguay’s unwavering commitment. The enactment
of, and compliance with, modern legislation that is
inspired in solidarity and international cooperation will
be key for all these practices to be effectively pursued.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Italy’s initiative in convening today’s
open debate and welcomes Under-Secretary of State
Amendola, who has come to New York to preside over
the meeting. I thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his briefing, as well as Executive Director Fedotov,
Commissioner Chergui and Special Rapporteur
Giammarinaro for their statements.
At present, protracted regional hotspot issues and
unceasing armed conflicts have led to increasingly
rampant activities by armed groups, terrorist
organizations
and
transnational-organized-crime
groups. Crimes in conflict situations, trafficking in
persons included, are on the rise, posing a threat to
people’s lives and dignity. China supports international
cooperation in addressing trafficking in persons in
conflict situations.
First, we should enhance efforts to solve hotspot
issues and help achieve peace, stability and sustainable
development in conflict-affected areas at an early date.
The international community should have a greater
sense of urgency in seeking political settlement of
hotspot issues, follow the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and assist countries in
conflict in promoting peace and national reconciliation
and settling disputes peacefully through dialogue
and consultations.
Meanwhile, the root causes of conflicts must be
addressed. The countries concerned must be supported
in capacity-building for sustainable development,
thereby creating a sound external environment for
addressing trafficking in persons in conflict situations
and protecting women and children in such situations.
Secondly, we must resolutely combat terrorism.
All countries must follow a uniform standard and use
comprehensive political, economic and cultural means
to steadfastly combat all the terrorist organizations
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

listed by the Security Council and totally cut off
terrorists’ chains of funding fuelled by trafficking
in persons. Effective measures must be taken to stop
terrorist organizations from using the Internet to spread
terrorists’ audio- and video-messages or to conduct
recruitment and incitement and to prevent people
from being misled by terrorist and extremist ideology,
thereby falling victim to human trafficking.
International counter-terrorism efforts must bring
into full play the leading role of the United Nations and
the Council, adhere to the purposes and principles of
the Charter and other recognized fundamental norms of
international relations, and enhance coordination.
Thirdly, we should properly address the situation of
refugees and migrants facing the mixed challenges of
terrorism, regional conflicts and the mixed movements
of refugees and migrants. The international community
must make joint efforts to address the refugee problem
within the international law framework of the 1951
Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol. More
support must be given to refugee host countries;
xenophobia and discrimination against refugees must be
eliminated; root causes must be addressed; and greater
development assistance must be provided to developing
countries in order to create conditions for the return of
refugees and promote the stability and development of
the countries of origin of refugees.
Fourthly, we should foster the capacity-building of
the countries concerned and international cooperation
to establish synergy in combating trafficking in persons
in armed conflicts.
Countries in conflict have a primary responsibility
for protecting their people and combating trafficking
in persons, but they also face difficulties, such as
inadequate resources and capacities. The international
community must, while respecting national sovereignty
and at the request of the countries concerned, provide
constructive assistance in such fields as counterterrorism and border control. Countries of origin, transit
and destination must strengthen cooperation on border
control, financial monitoring and judicial assistance.
Relevant international and regional organizations
should also play their unique roles in accordance with
their own mandates, strengthen coordination and make
joint efforts to address trafficking in persons in armed
conflicts.
China will continue to support the international
community in its efforts to address trafficking in

S/PV. 8111

persons and strengthen the protection of vulnerable
groups, such as women and children in armed conflict
areas. We remain committed to helping to achieve
peace, stability, security and development in conflictaffected areas.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes this debate and resolution 2388
(2017). They are further steps towards more robust
Security Council action against trafficking. I also
thank you, Under Secretary of Sate Amendola, for
your presence at the debate, and I also thank all of
our briefers.
It was just last week that we discussed the security
challenges in the Mediterranean and their consequences
(see S/PV.8106). The trafficking of humans is one of
those most devastating of consequences: not only to
those involved, but also to all of us who value the most
basic of human rights. It was also last week that so many
of us were outraged by that shocking video footage on
CNN of modern slavery in Libya. As we know too
well, the nature of today’s conflicts has encouraged
the growth of armed groups, terrorists and powerful
criminal networks. They all thrive in the absence of the
rule of law, and they profit on an unprecedented scale
from the chaos of ungoverned spaces. Such groups prey
on the most vulnerable, many of whom have already
lost their families, their homes, their livelihoods,
to steal the one thing they have left: their freedom.
Such exploitation takes on many forms in conflict
zones, including child labour, slavery and slavery-like
practices, forced labour and sexual exploitation.
Two issues raised in the recent report of
the Secretary-General on trafficking in conflict
(S/2017/939) stood out to me. The first, as others
have noted, was the call for improved data gathering,
evidence collection and information sharing. Improved
data is central to deepening our understanding of the
problem. Evidence gathering allows us to prosecute
perpetrators more effectively, and information sharing
means victims are identified and supported faster.
The second issue was the report’s call for a
more coordinated United Nations response. Human
trafficking cuts across all of the United Nations
pillars. It is a security threat, a human rights violation
and a development problem. Therefore, rather than
competing with one another over resources or territory,
we need United Nations agencies coordinating and each
working to their comparative advantage. We strongly

17-3921623/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/11/2017

support the Secretary-General’s efforts to resolve this
persistent challenge.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the Under Secretary of State of Italy.

After several debates, the Security Council is
now well informed of the problem of trafficking in
conflict situations and, with resolutions 2331 (2016)
and 2388 (2017), we are now well equipped to act. I
would like to draw attention to three issues that merit
greater attention.

This open debate today confirms the consistent
commitment of the Security Council to effectively
address the issue of trafficking in persons and the serious
violations of human rights related to it. The unanimous
adoption of resolution 2388 (2017) is a concrete step
forward in preventing and countering this scourge. The
Security Council thereby builds upon resolution 2331
(2016), and the comprehensive report (S/2017/939) of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of this
resolution to reaffirm the paramount importance of
aligning national legislation to the international legal
framework set by the Palermo Convention and other
relevant international instruments.

First, violent extremists profit financially from this
trade in human misery, and it is vital that we integrate
this understanding into efforts to combat terrorism.
Without the robust use of the full range of existing
mechanisms to counter terrorist financing and oppose
sanctions, it will be impossible to eradicate the use of
slavery as a means to resource and further the aims of
terrorist groups.
Secondly, we must act to ensure that global supply
chains, which often reach into conflict zones, do not
fuel the crime of trafficking. We welcome the fact that
resolution 2388 (2017) calls on the United Nations to
enhance transparency in is procurement and supply
chains. The whole international community can go
further in this area.
Thirdly, just as we understand how trafficking
drives conflict, we should acknowledge how efforts
to address trafficking contribute to peace. Measures
to address trafficking by field missions — whether
through human rights monitoring or capacity-building
for police — should not be seen as add-ons, but as core
to efforts to build stability. More broadly, we should
consider how anti-trafficking features in the sustaining
peace agenda, which is all about using a cross section
of United Nations tools to prevent conflicts and
build peace.
Finally, let us not lose sight of who it is that we
are working for: the victims and the survivors. Those
images on CNN shocked because they showed that this
most degrading form of exploitation is tragically not
a thing of the past; it just happening today and it just
happening on our watch. No matter how we choose to
describe it — human trafficking, modern slavery, forced
labour — let us stand together in our commitment to
end the exploitation of human beings and safeguard the
dignity of those who are most vulnerable. It is only by
doing so that we can hope to succeed in the maintenance
of international peace and security.
24/76

It also moves forward by emphasizing the urgency
for Member States to strengthen identification,
registration, protection and assistance for displaced
persons falling prey to trafficking. Timely detection
of routes and victims is key to effectively countering
this plight while addressing the specific needs of the
most vulnerable, especially women and children, who
make up the vast majority of the victims of trafficking.
The importance that the Council attaches to a victimcentred approach is also testified by the special attention
given to unaccompanied and separated children, whose
increasing number is a matter of great concern.
The resolution also endorses the comprehensive
approach promoted by the Secretary-General to make
the United Nations system’s action more effective and
coherent and, to that end, opens the way to further
discussions on the role of United Nations peacekeeping
and special political missions in supporting host State
efforts’ to prevent and combat trafficking in persons.
As proven by our action as a member of the Council,
we strongly condemn trafficking in persons, especially
when it involves women and children, and we remain on
the front lines in combating it, as we do on a daily basis
in the Mediterranean, while prioritizing the protection
of human rights.
Trafficking in persons is a complex phenomenon and
a crime with a global dimension that must be prevented
and countered through an effective and coordinated
response by the entire international community. In
fact, as highlighted in the Global Report on Trafficking
in Persons of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) in 2016, within the massive migratory
movements of the past few years — the largest ever seen
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

since the Second World War — figures related to the
exploitation by smugglers and traffickers of vulnerable
children, women and men are increasingly concerning.
International efforts should follow a victim-centred,
gender-specific and child-sensitive approach and should
take into consideration the links between transnational
organized crime, terrorism and trafficking networks.
Equally, the response of States should be based on a
common understanding of trafficking in persons and a
widely accepted legal framework. We therefore confirm
and support the importance of a universal ratification
and implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, especially Women and Children.
Increased international, regional and bilateral
cooperation with countries of origin and transit
of migrants is of paramount importance, as many
speakers have underscored. As a concrete contribution
to that process, our country decided to support the two
projects implemented by UNODC aimed at enhancing
legal cooperation in the fight against traffickers in
West, North and East Africa. As stated in the political
declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons, adopted by the General Assembly at the
high-level meeting in September, human trafficking is
often more likely to happen in situations where social,
economic cultural, political and other factors make
people more vulnerable to trafficking.
We should therefore insist on a comprehensive
approach aimed at addressing high-risk factors, such
as poverty, unemployment, inequality, humanitarian
emergencies, social exclusion and marginalization.
Human trafficking is a multidimensional phenomenon
that entails threats to respect for fundamental human
rights and to international peace and security. For those
reasons, the Council should continue to keep that issue
high on its agenda. We all need to make additional
efforts, to work to prevent and to counter it and to give
to its victims relief and new opportunities to rebuild
their lives.
In that regard, we recently contributed to the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

S/PV. 8111

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour, as
we have a large number of participants.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries during this open
debate on a matter of great importance.
At the outset, we would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing, as well as Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro,
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, for their presentations.
The Non-Aligned Movement has consistently
expressed its concern about trafficking in persons in
the belief that such trafficking is increasingly becoming
a global challenge that affects all countries around
the world, as demonstrated by the growing number
of victims. The issue therefore requires a concerted
national and international response in order to fulfil the
commitments made by adopting the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, among other reasons.
Moreover, States members of the Movement are
particularly concerned about the serious humanitarian
emergencies that have been triggered by various factors,
including armed conflict, poverty, gender inequality,
human rights violations, violations of fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law, at both the national and
the international levels, injustice and impunity, political
instability, the breakdown of democracy, foreign
occupation, terrorism, genocide and ethnic cleansing.
All those elements have caused millions of people to
become displaced in their own countries or to migrate
or to seek refuge overseas in the pursuit of safety,
stability, opportunities and development at the risk of
greater vulnerability by being subjected to crimes such
as human trafficking.

17-3921625/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/11/2017

In that regard, while recognizing that victims
of those crimes are particularly exposed to racism,
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
among others, we reaffirm the Movement’s
commitment to preventing human rights violations
in line with the rule of law and its obligation under
international law, in particular international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law, and in accordance with the relevant
General Assembly resolutions.

conflict in various regions of the world. One of the
many examples that we could unfortunately mention
is the current situation in the Sahelo-Saharan region,
where hostage-taking, involving ransom payments, and
terrorist acts threaten regional security and stability due
to, among other factors, the ever-increasing links among
the illicit trafficking of firearms, illicit drug trafficking
and trafficking in persons, hence the importance of
resolutely and effectively combating transnational
organized crime, including human trafficking.

Likewise, States members of the Movement
underscore the need to ensure that people who have been
trafficked, with whom they express their solidarity, are
treated as victims of crime and, in line with national
legislation, are not penalized or stigmatized for their
involvement in unlawful activities in which they have
been forced to engage. Similarly, it is imperative to
break any cycle of impunity that may exist and to hold
accountable those responsible for committing such
crimes, which, in some circumstances, may amount to
war crimes or crimes against humanity.

In that regard, the Movement urges States to address
that issue through international, regional and bilateral
cooperation and dialogue and, inter alia, to implement
and to strengthen effective measures to combat and to
eliminate all forms of transnational organized crime,
including trafficking in persons, in order to counter
the demand for trafficked victims and to protect the
victims, in particular women and children subjected
to forced labour, sexual or commercial exploitation,
violence and sexual abuse, and to bring to justice
the perpetrators of those crimes. At the same time,
we underscore the importance of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and call on States that have not yet done so to consider
becoming parties to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, and the Protocol against the Smuggling
of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air. Likewise, States
members of the Movement call on the international
community to consider establishing national and local
institutions dedicated to the fight against that scourge.

As rightly noted in the concept note for this open
debate (S/2017/972, annex), human trafficking is both
a cause and a consequence of conflict and instability,
affecting in particular women, children, refugees,
migrants and internally displaced persons. That
phenomenon must be addressed both collectively and
comprehensively, including by examining its root causes
and drivers and taking into account its multidimensional
nature, in order to adopt a consistent, comprehensive
and coordinated approach. At the same time, it is also
important to recognize the role and responsibilities
of the countries of origin, transit and destination in
effectively promoting and protecting the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of individuals subjected
to such crimes and in committing to coordination of
their efforts and active cooperation with one another.
That means adopting a preventive rather than a military
approach to address such a complex issue, including
through enhanced international cooperation.
In addition, as noted earlier, that global phenomenon
has been triggered by, inter alia, armed conflict, which
serves as a breeding ground for terrorism. In that
regard, the Movement expresses its concern over the
growing links between that scourge and transnational
organized crime, taking into account that human
trafficking is being used as a way to finance and to
recruit for terrorist activities. In recent years, that
situation has been exacerbated by situations of armed
26/76

Moreover, while stressing the importance of the
full and effective implementation of the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons
in the comprehensive fight against that scourge, States
members of the Movement commend the high-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the implementation
of that Plan of Action, held in New York on 27 and
28 September, and the political declaration adopted at
that time. We would also like to take this opportunity
to emphasize the historic opportunity presented by
the intergovernmental conference on migration to be
held from 10 to 11 December 2018 in Morocco, and
to express our commitment to contributing actively to
the negotiation process on a global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration.
In discussing the central theme of today’s open
debate, we must also take into account the current
unprecedented flows of refugees and migrants, an
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

issue that was discussed at length at the seventeenth
Summit Conference of Non-Aligned Countries, held
in September 2016 on Isla de Margarita in Venezuela.
The Heads of State and Government at the Summit
acknowledged the humanitarian emergencies that this
global and growing phenomenon has created, along
with an enormous number of refugees, chiefly the
result of conflict, with particular repercussions for
women and children.
The member States of the Movement also
emphasize the importance of ensuring that all States
address the problem of trafficking in persons and
international migration through a cooperative dialogue
on an equal footing. In that regard, we strongly urge
the international community to refrain from taking
any measures that stigmatize particular groups or
individuals, including third-country nationals and their
families. We should also point out that there is no one
solution to the problem of trafficking in persons. We
must therefore formulate strategies adapted to national
ownership and aimed at preventing and combating
illegal practices such as these that violate victims’
human rights.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement,
in rejecting any politicization of the fight against
human trafficking and attempts to use it as a tool for
undermining States’ political stability, would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate its concern about
the Security Council’s continued usurpation of the
functions and powers of the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council by its consideration
of issues that traditionally fall within the remit of
those bodies. In that regard, and on the subject under
discussion in today’s open debate, the member States
of the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirm the role and
authority of the General Assembly, including in matters
related to international peace and security, as the main
deliberative, normative and representative organ of the
United Nations, in line with the provisions of Article 12
of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and your
country, Italy, for convening today’s open debate and
for the concept note (S/2017/972, annex ) that you
have prepared for us. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the United

S/PV. 8111

Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and,
of course, Ms. Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
for their briefings.
I echo the words of so many who have preceded me
in emphasizing the horror of the images that we have
seen on television of slavery in the Mediterranean,
showing human beings being sold like merchandise,
and the condemnation of the Secretary-General, which
says it all. Slavery has no place in our world. By its
nature and its global effects, trafficking in persons, a
twenty-first-century form of slavery, leads to serious
violations of human rights whose effects have touched
my country too. Every year we identify and assist many
victims of crimes that range from sexual exploitation to
forced labour and begging. For that reason, we welcome
the renewed support for the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, shown
by the General Assembly’s adoption in September of
the political declaration on the implementation of the
Global Plan of Action (resolution 72/1), along with
the various related Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which are unequivocal, as
well as the New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants, which adopted at the high-level meeting on
refugees and migrants in 2016.
Next
year’s
intergovernmental
conference
on migration in the General Assembly will be an
opportunity for all of us to adopt a global compact for
safe, orderly and regular migration and will create an
additional framework for cooperation among States. As
the concept note says so eloquently, such mechanisms,
agreements and plans will enable us to continue to
eliminate the legal loopholes that organized crime
takes advantage of in our countries by increasing the
exchange of good practices and lessons learned on ways
in which Member States can tackle such transnational
crime more effectively.
Colombia considers trafficking in persons as
a type of transnational organized crime. Many
countries simultaneously become points of origin,
transit and destination for victims, which makes the
process of preventing such crimes and investigating
and prosecuting criminal organizations and the links
between them much more difficult. We join those who
have been promoting the universal ratification of the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children
supplementary to the United Nations Convention

17-3921627/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

against Transnational Organized Crime. It has served
as a platform for Colombia to accede to and implement
eight memorandums of understanding and bilateral
agreements with countries in our region.
Following the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/939), we support
the efforts of UNODC and other agencies in the United
Nations system with experience in the fight against
trafficking to help Member States combat it. Our goal is
zero trafficking. Let us commit to stronger cooperation
for decisive global action that can put an end to the
abominable trade of human beings forever.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important open debate. Ireland
aligns itself fully with the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union (EU).
Ireland was proud to be a sponsor of resolution 2331
(2016) on trafficking in persons in conflict, adopted
last December. It is crucial that we continue to build on
that momentum.

21/11/2017

at preventing girls from falling prey to traffickers.
The New York Declaration on Refugees and Migrants
commits all States to ensuring that our response to
large flows of refugees and migrants mainstreams a
gender perspective. As a strong supporter of resolution
1325 (2000) and the women and peace and security
agenda, and as current Chair of the Commission on the
Status of Women, Ireland believes that women must be
empowered to act as agents of change in addressing the
issue of human trafficking.
Ireland’s commitments to preventing and combating
human trafficking are set out in our national action
plan, which is now in its second phase. We have
contributed substantial funds in support of the fight
against human trafficking. That includes providing
support to the EU’s Emergency Trust Fund for Africa,
which has a particular focus on the fight against human
trafficking, as well as the anti-trafficking mechanism
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe. We also provide funding to a range of
international organizations and civil-society partners
focused on conflict-related sexual violence around
the world. We believe that raising public awareness is
key to preventing and combating human trafficking.
Civil society has a crucial role to play as a watchdog
in conflict situations, a role that should be respected
and supported.

We welcome the report of the Secretary General
(S/2017/972), as well as his remarks here this morning.
While some progress has been made on this issue, a
great deal clearly remains to be done. We know that
human trafficking is complex in its nature, scope
and causes. Poverty, economic hardship and a lack of
opportunity are of course significant factors in making
people vulnerable to human traffickers. That is why
we must all work to ensure implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. But we also know
that armed conflicts and humanitarian crises increase
people’s risk of falling into the hands of traffickers.
Our collective focus on sustaining peace, particularly
in the context of support to conflict-prevention
initiatives at the national, regional and international
level, will also directly contribute to stemming the tide
of human trafficking.

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s open debate.

As others have said, it is often the most vulnerable
who are targeted by human traffickers — women,
children, migrants, refugees and displaced persons. In
particular, women and children are more vulnerable
when social, political and legal structures break down.
Trafficking for sexual exploitation is a form of genderbased violence. That is why we believe that there
should be an increased focus on programmes aimed

Trafficking in persons is the commodification of
human bodies. It is probably one of the most degrading
experiences that human beings can be subjected to.
Simply put, it is a modern version of slavery. I would
like to make five proposals, based on a simple premise.
Human trafficking typically occurs, or occurs more
easily, in conflict situations. In such situations, the rule
of law is very clearly broken, the judiciary is inadequate

28/76

As the Secretary-General has said, we must
strengthen our efforts to better protect people affected
by conflict and at risk of trafficking and to bring those
responsible for trafficking to justice. That includes
strengthening national responses, as well as working
better together internationally. It also means that the
issue of human trafficking must be embedded in our
discussions on peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.

17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

and States are unable to address those challenges.
That is why the Security Council has to take action,
as was outlined in resolution 2331 (2016), which was
adopted under Spain’s presidency of the Council, and
which today has been superbly complemented with
the Council’s adoption of resolution 2388 (2017) under
Italy’s leadership. These are my five proposals.
First, we must combat fragmentation. I think it
is clear that we are working to combat trafficking in
persons from various areas within the United Nations,
such as the Security Council and General Assembly.
However, what we are lacking is a comprehensive vision
and strategy. I propose that we ask the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime to prepare a report on the
basic guidelines for such a comprehensive strategy.
Secondly, there is a very close link between
children and armed conflict and trafficking in persons.
Unfortunately, they go hand-in-hand. In that regard, I
would like to commend the sterling work undertaken by
the delegation of Sweden, and I urge Sweden to monitor
situations where there is a connection between children
and trafficking in persons.
Thirdly, I believe we should enhance and leverage
our peacekeeping operations and special political
missions as much as possible. Listening to some
statements today, we have all understood that there have
been tragic events in a certain Mediterranean country,
and everyone has emphasized that. What I want to say
is that we should make the best possible use of our
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
with a view to detecting such incidents of human
trafficking and reporting them to the Security Council.
My fourth proposal is about the victims of
trafficking, whom we have sometimes compared to the
victims of terrorism. We must not forget them, for they
need all the attention we can give them. I would like to
underscore the importance of resolution 2379 (2017),
which established an accountability mechanism for the
fight against Da’esh in Iraq. I believe that it is a model
that we can follow. Lastly, there is the role of States.
I believe we cannot always blame multilateralism.
Nation States are also responsible and I urge them to
take measures to combat trafficking in persons.
In conclusion, I would like to bring up a proposal
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain, which I
believe is of great interest, for establishing a worldwide
network of anti-trafficking coordinators that could
effectively address this issue, which is one of the worst

S/PV. 8111

scourges of the twenty-first century. It costs almost
nothing and a form of it already exists within the
European Union. I call on all other nations to take the
same steps.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I would like to thank Italy
for putting this very important issue on the Council’s
agenda and for convening an open debate for all of us.
I would also like to recognize the work of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and to join others
in thanking Secretary-General António Guterres and
Special Rapporteur Maria Grazia Giammarinaro for
their informative briefings. Hungary fully aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
Human trafficking is a global threat, and we must
fight it together globally. In that regard, we welcome
the Council’s adoption today of resolution 2388 (2017),
of which we were a sponsor, as it is an important step
forward in the fight against such heinous crimes and
the wave of human rights violations they have led to.
We are especially appalled by the recent news reports
showing migrants in Libya apparently being sold as
slaves. Horrendous crimes are being committed again
and again.
Hungary is of the view that a number of steps
must be taken if we are to fight this global threat more
effectively. First, an approach to human trafficking that
is genuinely centred on human rights and survivors
should be based on protecting those survivors, with a
special focus on women and children. Furthermore, our
response should be gender- and age-sensitive, as well as
specific to the particular type of exploitation involved.
We must ensure a holistic approach from the local to
the global level, using the tools available within the
United Nations system.
Secondly, in order to effectively implement the
relevant resolutions at the national and international
level, close and comprehensive cooperation and effective
partnerships are needed among States, international
organizations, civil society and business groups. We
recognize the importance of international cooperation
in combating human trafficking from the perspective
of both law enforcement and victim assistance. In
that spirit, Hungary maintains close cooperation
with destination countries for human trafficking. For
example, we have established a transnational referral

17-3921629/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

mechanism with the Netherlands and Belgium, and we
recently concluded a similar project with Switzerland.
Internationally, we continue to cooperate actively both
during investigation and asset recovery, and Hungary’s
police have participated in numerous joint actions. In
our opinion, inter-agency cooperation must start at the
national level. In Hungary, significant measures have
been taken to combat human trafficking, including
establishing a national coordination mechanism.
Thirdly, we advocate for greater compliance
with international humanitarian law, and for greater
accountability, by ending impunity and bringing the
perpetrators to justice. Certain acts associated with
trafficking in persons, such as sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution, forced pregnancy and other forms of
sexual violence, may constitute war crimes, in our
view. Furthermore, acts associated with trafficking in
persons could constitute elements of genocide or crimes
against humanity. Hungary therefore supports including
perpetrators of trafficking in persons on United
Nations and unilateral sanctions lists. As a member
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, Hungary is committed to supporting all
initiatives aimed at preventing and ending genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, including the
adoption of a code of conduct in the Security Council.
Lastly, we should also explore the role that existing
mechanisms tasked with investigating allegations of
violations of international humanitarian law could
play in ensuring that those crimes are investigated by
the competent authorities. Last year, for examople,
Hungary became a member of the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission. We actively
support national and international efforts in that
regard, and we greatly appreciate the work of the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Recognizing that
women can be especially vulnerable to trafficking in
persons in conflict situations and to conflict-related
sexual violence, Hungary is proud to contribute to the
invaluable work of the gender advisers deployed in the
framework of the collaboration between UN-Women
and the Justice Rapid Response initiative, as well as the
work of UN-Women on preventing violent extremism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome
today’s discussion and its thematic focus and would
30/76

21/11/2017

like to see it become a regular item on the agenda of
the Council, with annual reporting by the SecretaryGeneral. We would like to thank you, Sir, for ably
coordinating the preparation of resolution 2388 (2017),
adopted earlier today, of which we were happy to be
a sponsor.
Human trafficking and modern slavery are
phenomena whose relevance goes well beyond
situations of armed conflict. They need to be tackled
on the basis of the comprehensive agreement reflected
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. A
strong law-enforcement response to human trafficking
is imperative. We particularly call on all States to
contribute to ensuring the universal acceptance of the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land,
Sea and Air supplementary to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
However, prevention requires a more comprehensive
approach, as reflected in the resolution adopted
this morning.
Irregular migration creates high levels of
vulnerability and poses a particular challenge. We
will need a strong outcome from the forthcoming
negotiations on the global compact for migration.
Some of the situations on the Council’s agenda starkly
illustrate the drastic consequences of the lack of
regular migration channels. Libya is one such case, as
the Council has recognized in its pertinent resolutions,
and as has been brought to broader public attention by
recent media reports. The recurrence of the crudest and
most brutal forms of modern slavery both exacerbates
the situation in Libya itself and puts us all to collective
shame. The Convention on the Abolition of Slavery
predates the creation of the United Nations by many
years and has led to a universally binding norm under
international law that prohibits slavery. And yet in
Libya and in other countries and regions — some on
the Council’s agenda, some not — this assault on the
most basic sense of human dignity continues, often as
part and parcel of organized crime.
The recognition in today’s resolution that
offences associated with trafficking in persons may
constitute war crimes or crimes against humanity is
important. It is a further indication of the potential
role of international criminal justice in tackling human
trafficking and modern slavery when national legal
systems are unable or unwilling to do so. It underscores
the importance of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in situations where it has jurisdiction, such as
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

in Libya, where the Security Council’s own referral
established ICC jurisdiction.
Our national efforts to contribute to the fight
against human trafficking and modern slavery are
focused on the financial side of the crime. This is a
business that generates some $150 billion in revenue
every year. On the basis of resolution 2331 (2016), we
have undertaken, in particular through our partnership
with United Nations University, to design measures
aimed at disrupting financial chains associated with
human trafficking and modern slavery. The tools that
have been developed to combat other forms of organized
crime can also be effective in the fight against slaveryrelated crimes. We have formulated a set of concrete
measures in that regard that we will make available
through our website and on social media, and we are
grateful that the initiative is reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/939).
Our financial intelligence unit has worked with its
counterparts in the framework of the Egmont Group,
Moneyval and the Financial Action Task Force to
discuss and disseminate these measures. In parallel,
we are reaching out to our own financial institutions
to discuss how best to work together to analyse and
address the relevant risks, and we encourage others to
do likewise. We are confident that this is a promising
path and look forward to effective follow-up on it in the
Security Council and elsewhere.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
would like to thank the Italian presidency of the
Council for organizing today’s debate. We also thank
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons for their valuable contributions.
I align myself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Trafficking in persons, especially in conflict
situations, is becoming a global challenge, with growing
numbers of victims. As such, it requires a resolute
response at the national and international level. Human
trafficking is both a source and a result of conflict
and instability, and it especially affects society’s most
vulnerable members. It must be addressed collectively

S/PV. 8111

and comprehensively, including by taking a close look at
its root causes. This growing global challenge, linked to
acute humanitarian emergencies, is usually a symptom
rather than a cause. It is underlying factors — particularly
foreign aggression and intervention, occupation, war
and protracted conflicts, political instability, terrorism,
genocide and ethnic cleansing — that create conditions
in which millions of people become displaced within
their own countries or seek refuge overseas in a quest
for safety, stability and opportunity. These journeys can
themselves put migrants at great risk of falling victim
to human trafficking, forced labour and contemporary
forms of slavery.
Dealing with these root causes is a primary
responsibility of the Security Council, but if the
Council chooses to focus instead on symptoms, it will
undoubtedly fail to address the causes effectively.
The current situation in Libya and the concerns about
reported enslavement are examples of such issues.
Where is the accountability for the States whose
invasion created the current situation in Libya?
At the same time, I would like to underscore the
vital importance of impartial and reliable data on
trafficking in persons at different levels. Those Member
States whose destructive military options have left
millions at the risk of exploitation and trafficking are
in no position to produce politicized reports labeling
others and denying their own responsibility.
We believe that addressing root causes, working for
prevention, protecting victims, prosecuting traffickers
and establishing partnerships at the global level must be
the pillars of any comprehensive approach to combating
trafficking in persons. The Islamic Republic of Iran
is committed to preventing and fighting all forms of
human trafficking and to countering this horrible
crime. To that end, in 2004 our Parliament adopted
a law on combating human trafficking that has since
been revised to fill gaps and strengthen the domestic
legal regime.
We urgently need to scale up international
cooperation, including in capacity-building and
technical assistance, to combat trafficking in persons.
We support joint measures by Member States,
including through regional and subregional initiatives,
to step up implementation of the Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. Indeed, the
complex synergy that exists between trafficking in
persons and certain organized crimes, such as drug

17-3921631/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

trafficking and the smuggling of migrants, requires
better information-sharing, technical assistance and
enhanced capacity-building for law-enforcement
and justice departments. Meanwhile, education and
awareness-raising on the issue of human trafficking
should be an integral part of the policies of countries of
origin, transit and of destination. People who knowingly
or inadvertently use the services provided by persons
who have been trafficked are as much in need of
training as those who are at risk of being trafficked.
In conclusion, we recognize the important role of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the
global fight against trafficking in persons, because
of the significant role it can play in promoting the
partnership pillar of the global campaign against
trafficking in persons, as well as its function in
collecting and analysing relevant information. Its
biennial Global Report on Trafficking in Persons is an
important element in efforts to implement and follow
up on the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons and in fostering international cooperation in
combating this heinous crime.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
today’s open debate on the dreadful issue of trafficking
in persons in conflict situations, which has become
increasingly widespread. We support the Security
Council’s continued consideration of this issue and its
examination of ways to address a phenomenon that is a
flagrant violation of human dignity and human rights.
While emphasizing the significance of the
proposals for countering the issue outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/939), it is our view
that predicting and preventing outbreaks of armed
conflict and their exacerbation, as well as employing
preventive diplomacy, are the best ways to avoid the
untold tragedies and human suffering that such conflict
causes. Regrettably, such hopeful efforts are usually
obstructed by numerous negative foreign interventions
motivated by competing interests that frequently help
to create and exacerbate these conflicts, resulting in
serious hardships reaching far beyond national borders
and becoming a matter of growing concern to the
international community.
We agree the view expressed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that regions suffering from the effects
32/76

21/11/2017

of armed conflict and instability are particularly
vulnerable to the practices of human trafficking
networks. Such networks see a State’s fragility as an
opportunity to achieve their immoral objectives. Libya
is no exception to that rule. It is, however, anxious
to address any violations perpetrated against illegal
migrants to the extent that its means and capabilities
permit. We were deeply shocked by the information
in paragraph 7 of the report, which noted that media
outlets have been reporting on incidents of trafficking
in persons in Libya in which migrants are being
auctioned as commodities in slave markets. In that
regard, I would like to highlight a statement by the
Libyan Foreign Ministry that we have transmitted to
the Council condemning and denouncing such acts. If
substantiated, the reports describe inhumane practices
that are incompatible with our national legislation and
that Libyan society’s values and morals abhor. The
Foreign Ministry’s statement confirms that the Libyan
authorities have launched an investigation into the
allegations and will hold the perpetrators and anyone
involved accountable. Libya’s Ministry of Justice has
also issued a statement in which it underscores its
willingness to investigate the allegations.
We reaffirm our commitment to the international
agreements that criminalize trafficking in persons.
We are eager to continue to cooperate with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and look forward
to the return to the Maghreb of the subregional office
on drugs and crime so that it can resume its activities
in Tripoli.
Human-trafficking network have benefited from
communications technologies and have become
transnational. That is one reason why we hosted
a border security conference in Tripoli in 2013 in
which neighbouring countries took part, along with
representatives from countries of the Sahel, the
European Union, the United Nations and others. The
conference reached important conclusions that, if
implemented, would help to reduce organized crime,
illegal migration, trafficking in drugs and persons, and
other crimes. We stand ready to hold consultations in
order to reactivate those conclusions.
Libya is a transit country for large and constant
flows of illegal migrants. We have been experiencing
great difficulties that have affected our own citizens.
It is therefore unfair to single out Libya for blame for
the consequences of such migration, which we all agree
exceed the capacities of any one State. We support the
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

view that a practical way to deal with this issue is by
addressing the real reasons that drive people to leave
their homes, with a view to developing long-term,
lasting solutions. We believe that devising plans to
prevent migrants from entering countries of destination
and to force them to return to our country are simply a
way to shirk responsibility and represent an additional
burden for Libya, which has repeatedly expressed
its need for technical support in order to manage its
borders in a sound and sustainable manner. We affirm
our rejection of any attempts to settle migrants in
our country, because of the dangerous repercussions
they could have for the social and cultural fabric of
Libyan society.
In conclusion, we call on the international
community to join forces to help Libya address the
challenges posed by irregular migration by adopting
an effective approach to migration and its root causes,
rather than by exploiting unsubstantiated media reports
for the purposes of defamation, which will not help us
to achieve the progress we desire in reducing the risks
and consequences of that type of migration.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me also join others in
thanking you, Sir, for convening today’s debate on
such a vital issue. We appreciate the insightful remarks
by the Secretary-General earlier today, and thank
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
for their briefings.
We align ourselves with the statement made earlier
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Trafficking in persons is an abomination, a
modern-day equivalent of slavery. Sadly, it is a global
phenomenon that violates the principles of morality,
human rights and human dignity. It undermines our
efforts to achieve sustainable development. Like others,
we are outraged by recent reports that African migrants
in Libya have been exposed to the indignity of slavery.
We joined the Secretary-General in his condemnation
of such egregious actions, which have no place in our
world. The international community must unite in
fighting this scourge.

S/PV. 8111

The increasing numbers of conflicts, growing
economic inequality and a widening gap between rich
and poor provide fertile ground to those who exploit
human suffering. Human trafficking as a consequence
of conflict, and its increasingly worrisome links to
terrorist groups, are a global concern. On the other hand,
human trafficking has also become a cause of friction
among States. Human traffickers typically work with
organized crime networks and underworld mafias.
The unprecedented ease of communication and
transportation in an increasingly globalized world
enables human traffickers and terrorist networks to
permeate societies. According to the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/939), raging conflicts and
humanitarian crises have resulted in record levels
of displacement, with 24.2 million people newly
displaced, the majority of whom are women and
children. Those harrowing numbers, the countless
stories behind each of the victims and the spreading
patterns of exploitation by terrorist groups compel us
to redouble our efforts to combat this scourge and to
call for united and collective action by the international
community. The transnational nature of this complex
crime demands enhanced international cooperation
among the countries of origin, transit and destination.
The United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, together with its Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, provides
the blueprint for concentrating and focusing our efforts
on preventing, protecting and prosecuting. The adoption
of resolution 2331 (2016) by the Security Council last
December was another positive step that acknowledged
the connection between trafficking in persons,
sexual violence, terrorist groups and transnational
organized crime.
Let me also take this opportunity underscore my
country’s commitment to fighting the egregious crime
of trafficking in persons.
First, Pakistan is a party to the various relevant
international instruments, including the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Traffic in Women and Children, and the Convention
concerning the Abolition of Forced Labour. Secondly,
we have implemented a comprehensive policy, the
National Action Plan for Combating Human Trafficking.
Thirdly, we are implementing our National Strategic
Framework 2016-2022 on trafficking in persons and

17-3921633/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

human smuggling, under which, inter alia, a number
of victims have been provided shelter. Fourthly,
provincial Governments are strengthening traffickingrelated legislation, with more focus on investigation,
prosecution and convicting traffickers.
Given the vulnerabilities of men, women and
children to numerous forms of exploitation, including
sale and trafficking in the context of conflict and
humanitarian crisis, a comprehensive and rightsbased response is needed. The global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration will provide us with
an opportunity to correct some of the past mistakes
and protect people on the move from trafficking and
other forms of exploitation. We earnestly hope that its
adoption will help strengthen the existing global legal
framework. Increasing States’ capacities with longterm politicaland financial commitment holds the key.
Additionally and above all, the Security Council,
as the primary body tasked with maintaining peace and
security, also needs to address the root causes of conflict
to remove the grounds where such crimes breed. Unless
we deal decisively with those breeding grounds, the
rest of our efforts, however well intentioned and well
focused, might just be in vain. They are necessary but
may not be sufficient until we really address the root
causes of conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): We thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/939)
and briefing, and extend our appreciation to all the
other briefers.
Human trafficking is among the most despicable
crimes known to humankind, as it affects those most
vulnerable. This debate is an opportunity to renew our
political commitment to eradicating human trafficking,
while recognizing the multifaceted nature of the
problem. Brazil reaffirms the importance of prevention
and the provision of assistance to victims, alongside
enforcement actions.
We cannot shy away from acknowledging that
long-term solutions will arise only from multilateral
approaches to peace and security that tackle the
underlying causes of conflicts and firmly set dialogue
and mediation as priorities. More often than not,
military intervention leads to increased civilian
suffering and vulnerability.
34/76

21/11/2017

Brazil supports every effort aimed at recovering
the dignity of the victims and ensuring that they have
access to justice. Closer cooperation among States and
international agencies can help rescue victims and
put in place measures to bring the perpetrators of this
serious crime to justice. Advancing the universality of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
would also contribute to ensuring accountability for
those responsible for these crimes in the context of an
armed conflict.
It should be clear that terrorism and transnational
organized crime are different problems, requiring
different remedies. An interrelationship between these
phenomena might arise in specific circumstances, but
should in no way be deemed universal. It is critical to
pay attention to the forum in which these issues are
primarily discussed.
While human trafficking may occur in some
scenarios plagued by armed conflict, there are
no intrinsic or automatic linkages between these
phenomena. Human trafficking also takes place in
situations that are not related to threats to international
peace and security, such as displacements following
natural disasters.
If the scourge of human trafficking is to be
effectively addressed by the United Nations, the
Security Council should be mindful of the mandate and
technical expertise of the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
as well as of the role of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in this regard.
Individuals crossing borders are especially
vulnerable to human traffickers. The international
community has a responsibility to resolve the refugee
crisis. It is not coherent to defend the responsibility to
protect and the protection of civilians, while turning
our backs on those fleeing conflict and persecution.
Brazil is proud to welcome Syrian refugees through the
issuance of humanitarian visas.
Brazil reiterates that the criminalization of
irregular migration is unacceptable, since it ultimately
strengthens human trafficking and leads to the disrespect
of the fundamental rights of migrants. It is critical not
to confuse the criminalization of the trafficking of
persons with the criminalization of migration in and of
itself. Our actions should aim at protecting the rights of
and providing assistance to those people who are forced
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

to leave their homes and fall prey to human traffickers,
and not to victimize them yet again.
The Brazilian experience of granting humanitarian
visas to Haitians since 2012 has shown that one of the
most effective means of dismantling criminal human
trafficking networks is to provide regular and safe
ways of entry for those forced to move. It is also worth
mentioning that, last year, Brazil adopted a new national
law on human trafficking that includes strengthened
measures aimed at providing protection and assistance
to the victims. It sets forth more severe penalties for the
perpetrators of the crime and provides the possibility of
issuing residence permit to the victims.
Let us all work together to ensure that human
trafficking is brought to a definitive end, keeping ever
in mind the best interests and dignity of the victims.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): I have the honour to address
the Security Council on behalf of Latvia, Lithuania
and my own country, Estonia. We would like to thank
Italy for convening this open debate and to commend
you, Sir, for your leadership on and commitment to this
important issue.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Today the world is facing persistent challenges in
the fight against human trafficking, in particular in
conflict situations. The international community should
confront this phenomenon in the most comprehensive
manner. We are gravely concerned about the alarming
increase of connections between armed groups,
including terrorist groups, and trafficking in persons.
Resolution 2388 (2017), which was adopted by the
Security Council today and which we co-sponsored,
is an important milestone in that regard. Building on
resolution 2331 (2016), it condemns all acts of trafficking
in persons in areas affected by armed conflict, which
are used by terrorist groups both to terrorize and to
finance terrorism.
We also note with concern the criminal misuse
of information and communication technologies,
particularly the Internet, to facilitate trafficking in
persons. We emphasize the importance of countering
this phenomenon while fully respecting human rights
and fundamental freedoms.

S/PV. 8111

Trafficking in persons is considered to be one of
the most difficult problems in the context of migration
as well. The fact that women and children are at greater
risk of being trafficked and subjected to forced labour
is recognized in the New York declaration for refugees
and migrants. We welcome the adoption by the General
Assembly, at the high-level meeting in September, of
the political declaration on the implementation of the
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons
(General Assembly resolution 72/1). The declarations
show the political will to end human trafficking, and
now we need to start their implementation.
The nexus between situations of conflict and human
trafficking, facilitated by the absence of the rule of law,
means that human trafficking can exacerbate conflict
and foster continuous insecurity. The exploitation of
vulnerable people, especially women and children who
find themselves in a situation of conflict, by traffickers
is appalling. It is imperative to investigate, prosecute
and convict the perpetrators of human trafficking
crimes and to put an end to impunity.
The focus on prevention is pivotal and is central
to the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. Together with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, it advances sustainable
and inclusive development in order to address the root
causes and vulnerabilities. We also need to find ways
to actively combat the demand for trafficked people for
exploitation in the destination and transit countries. As
long as there is a will to pay criminals and a demand
for such purposes as sexual exploitation, forced labour
and slavery, we cannot put an end to human trafficking.
Finally, we fully support the central role of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the
global fight against trafficking in persons, particularly
in providing technical assistance to Member States
to implement the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. In that context,
we reiterate the call of the European Union for more
cooperation at the United Nations level and emphasize
the role of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons in ensuring that efforts to fight
against human trafficking across the United Nations
system are coherent.

17-3921635/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/11/2017

Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened today’s important debate.

organized training for its military personnel deployed
in humanitarian contexts and is planning further
training in the future.

Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union, and
I would like to make the following comments in its
national capacity.

Whether in times of peace, conflict or humanitarian
crisis, different agencies and institutions have valuable
expertise to share. The scale of the phenomenon of
human trafficking makes it necessary for us to make
every effort to ensure the unreserved collaboration and
coordination between agencies and organizations, in
respect for the skills and expertise of each ,especially by
making greater use of mechanism of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons.

Trafficking in human beings attacks the very
core of the societies it affects. It constitutes a serious
violation of human rights; it undermines the rule of
law; it denies the very principle of human dignity.
Aggravating circumstances and situations of conflict or
humanitarian crisis — due to their inherent instability
and precariousness — are breeding grounds for this
most abject trade, the effects of which are devastating.
Belgium will therefore continue to make a commitment
to combat this phenomenon.
At the international level, my country will continue
to insist on the importance and the coherence and
continuity of action of the multilateral system and
Member States in the face of this scourge. Strong
action is needed at all levels, from the prevention of
the phenomenon to the effective identification and
interception of existing networks and the prosecution of
individuals and organizations guilty of this crime. My
country’s participation in international initiatives like
the Alliance 8.7 — the Global Alliance to Eradicate
Forced Labour, Modern Slavery, Human Trafficking
and Child Labour — illustrates our commitment to
this issue.
We join calls for increased stakeholder awareness.
Trafficking should not be fought only in the countries
of destination, but at every possible stage of the
ordeal of victims, whether in the country of origin
or in transit countries. That consciousness-raising
requires the training of the various actors involved
in the phenomenon. I am thinking in particular of
the international and national personnel deployed in
the field of conflicts and in humanitarian crises or
their surroundings. We must also ensure the training
and awareness of local authorities. We would support
any United Nations initiative to ensure the structural
mainstreaming of measures to deal withtrafficking in
persons within mission mandates.
In our view, it is essential to integrate actions to
combat human trafficking in an active and systematic
way in our response to emergent or protracted
humanitarian situations. Belgium has, in the past,
36/76

Many studies confirm the nexus between terrorist
organizations and trafficking networks. In the face of the
military defeat of Da’esh, we must double our vigilance
to dismantle the networks that continue to fund that
organization and others like it. We must also adapt our
approach to new developments, particularly the plight
of minors, children and families of combatants, who are
all particularly vulnerable to human trafficking.
As a destination country, Belgium assumes its
responsibility to fight impunity in the area of human
trafficking. Our experience has shown us that it is
valuable to have specialized magistrates designated to
handle cases involving the investigation and prosecution
of human trafficking. We note that the appointment
of specific magistrates for human trafficking in each
judicial district has proved particularly effective and
has resulted in a significant number of convictions for
both sexual and economic exploitation. We would be
delighted to share our experience with other countries
that so desire.
I would like to end my statement by reaffirming our
support for the victim-centred approach. The reception
and protection of victims of human trafficking is an
essential element of the debate. I would therefore like
to stress the importance of ensuring that the principle
of non-punishment of victims of trafficking is properly
applied. In our view, punishing victims is a violation
of human rights and helps traffickers who can in turn
bring more pressure to bear on the victim. The issuing
of residence permits to enable victims to recover and to
take part in the legal proceedings against their abusers
is, in that regard, a key element. Here too we would also
be happy to share our experience on that matter.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes today’s debate and highlights the importance
of sharing perspectives and experiences so as to more
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

effectively and coherently fight human trafficking
in situations of conflict, which increases human
vulnerability
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/939) and his briefing, as well as the briefings
by the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
and the Director of the International Organization for
Migration Office to the United Nations.
Human trafficking is as complex as the horrors
it generates, in which persons, in addition to being
coerced into giving up their freedom, are deprived of
their dignity, exploited as commodities in prostitution
networks, subjected to forced labour or forced to sell
their organs to the highest bidder. We have looked on
in horror at images of African migrants sold as slaves
in Libya.
That is why we welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2388 (2017), which my country has had the
opportunity to co-sponsor, with a view to responding
to this problem in a more efficient, coherent and
coordinated manner — in accordance with the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children. In that regard, we highlight three elements
that we consider of crucial importance.
First is the importance of analysing the increasingly
clear and complex nexus between transnational
organized crime and situations of conflict, in particular
terrorism. Indeed, there is a perverse dynamic in which
terrorist groups benefit from lucrative transnational
crimes, including human trafficking, which they in
turn use to consolidate their power and control over
vulnerable groups and individuals.
Second is the almost inherent relation between
human trafficking and migrant trafficking. In their
search for better living conditions, in many cases
generated by humanitarian emergencies, migrants and
refugees are often easy targets for criminal networks.
In that regard, we stress that neither crime should imply
the criminalization of natural migration processes.
Thirdly, we need a targeted approach for the
protection of children and women, which includes
identifying vulnerabilities with a view to improving
prevention mechanisms and caring for victims. A

S/PV. 8111

gender perspective should also guide the creation and
implementation of relevant laws and measures.
Peru believes that it is imperative to address those
three elements through a complete, comprehensive and
coordinated strategy to combat this crime. That is why
our National Plan against Trafficking in Persons 20172021 — the result of an inclusive process of thinking
and preparation — takes into account the social,
structural and institutional factors that exacerbate
the vulnerability of individuals, including insecurity,
violence and institutional weakness.
In addition to that, we take into account the
transnational scope of the crime of trafficking. We
believe firm action by the international community is
essential, including active promotion of cooperation
at the regional and global levels. The United Nations,
in particular through the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, should head up such action and make
it effective.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé d’affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Ms. Adamson: I have the honour of speaking on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
I thank Secretary-General António Guterres,
Executive Director Fedotov, Special Rapporteur
Giammarinaro and Ambassador Chergui for
their briefings.
We would like to commend Italy for convening this
debate and for its keen commitment to addressing the
issue of trafficking in human beings during conflict.
Today’s debate and the adoption of resolution 2388
(2017) are an important contribution to the fight against
trafficking in conflict situations, building on the
momentum created by resolution 2331 (2016). The EU
is strongly committed to the implementation of both
resolution 2331 (2016) and the resolution adopted today.
Trafficking in human beings is a threat to human
and national security alike — a threat to peace, human

17-3921637/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

rights, democratic governance and the rule of law.
Trafficking in the context of conflict takes many forms.
We know that vulnerability to trafficking is heightened
in the context of conflict and that victims are all too
often subjected to horrific crimes of sexual violence.
Special attention should be paid to the protection of
children, who are particularly vulnerable to trafficking,
especially in conflict situations.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
trafficking in persons in armed conflict (S/2017/939)
pursuant to resolution 2331 (2016). The report highlights
the prevalence of the problem in a number of specific
conflict situations, but also sets out many positive steps
that have been taken by Member States and by United
Nations agencies. The EU welcomes those efforts and
the recommendations set out in the report. We reiterate
our support for the recommendations in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2017/249), issued in April 2017, including on the need
to continue to address the nexus between trafficking in
persons and conflict-related sexual violence, including
by terrorist groups.
By upholding and promoting international
standards, as enshrined in the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its Protocols and other international legal instruments,
we contribute to ensuring strong foundations for the
rule of law. We must renew and invigorate our efforts
to implement the existing legal architecture. The EU
has built an ambitious and comprehensive legal and
policy framework to combat trafficking in persons. The
EU approach is human rights-based, victim-centred,
gender-specific and child-sensitive. Anti-trafficking
actions also form a key part of our external policies and
funding, and we are committed to the comprehensive
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, including targets 5.2, 8.7 and 16.2. of the
Sustainable Development Goals.
In September, the EU and the United Nations
launched a new partnership, the Spotlight Initiative, to
eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls,
backed by an initial dedicated financial envelope of
€500 million. That initiative will focus on all forms of
violence against women and girls, including trafficking
in human beings and sexual and economic exploitation.
We work closely with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the International Organization
for Migration and many other United Nations agencies
38/76

21/11/2017

via joint programmes across the globe, and we will
continue our cooperation. We call for greater coherence
across the United Nations and stress the role of the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons.
There is a market for trafficked human
“merchandise,” including those trafficked in the
context of conflict. We need to investigate, prosecute
and convict the perpetrators of those crimes, and we
need to put an end their impunity. Prevention must
remain central to all actions against trafficking in
human beings. Effectively preventing this heinous
crime necessitates reducing demand.
The European Commission will shortly publish its
priority actions to address trafficking in human beings.
They will build on the ongoing work, taking stock of the
achievements of the EU Strategy towards the Eradication
of Trafficking in Human Beings 2012-2016 on ensuring
the continuation of efforts, including coordination with
stakeholders, on increasing the knowledge base, and on
victim protection. Strengthening cooperation among
countries of origin, transit and destination is paramount
to preventing, detecting and addressing this scourge.
Our members work with the private sector and on our
own public procurement to ensure that supply chains
are free of trafficking.
Finally, just as the Security Council has recognized
that trafficking can drive conflict, we should also
recognize that our efforts to combat trafficking can
contribute to peacebuilding and to sustaining peace.
As we continue the fight against trafficking in human
beings inside the European Union, we will maintain
and enhance our cooperation with our international
partners with the goal of eradicating trafficking in all
countries, including those experiencing conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Representative and Coordinator for Combating
Trafficking in Human Beings.
Ms. Jarbussynova: I wish to commend the Italian
presidency of the Security Council and the speakers who
took the floor for keeping all of us focused on this often
hidden yet unquestionably despicable offence against
human dignity. I also thank the Italian presidency for
inviting me to take the floor today.
As the world’s largest regional security organization
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) wholeheartedly takes part in fighting
human trafficking. In that regard, I echo our strong
support to the Secretary General and the whole United
Nations system in implementing concrete steps to
strengthen the international response to counter the
crime in all its forms, wherever it occurs.
It became sadly clear how important it is for
the international community to act unanimously on
preventing, protecting from and prosecuting human
trafficking stemming from conflict around the globe. I
will not elaborate further on those loathsome practices,
or indeed on how conflict is both the cause and
consequence of heightened vulnerability for millions
around the world. Rather, I would like to focus on
two points.
First, how do we make sure we effectively remedy
the risks of trafficking stemming from conflict? How
can we foster better synergies to achieve long-lasting
results? Secondly, it is imperative that we now adopt
a multidisciplinary, cross-sectoral and transnational
approach and that we implement it unconditionally. It
should be an approach where inclusion, collaboration
and sharing of best practices become watchwords in
our combined endeavours to ensure more effective
investigations, timely prosecutions and prompt
identification of victims, especially in countries of
destination for victims of trafficking.
Drawing upon almost two years of fact-finding
missions in countries most impacted by large migratory
flows, my team and I are finalizing a report framing
the challenges and opportunities of anti-trafficking
responses at first-identification and reception facilities
for migrants and refugees in the OSCE region. We
are more convinced than ever that the establishment
of a multi-agency co-ordination mechanism would
ensure sufficient expertise to identify vulnerabilities,
facilitate information-sharing on presumed victims
of trafficking throughout their journey and guarantee
the sustainability of assistance efforts. I commend the
Governments of Italy and Greece for their enormous
efforts to date and for their readiness to promote
more-elaborated anti-trafficking responses.
Yet, we shall not limit our action to the development
of policy and legislative frameworks. We need all hands
on deck to deliver tangible responses. It thus gives
me great pride that my Office so far trained 200 law
enforcement officials, prosecutors, labour inspectors,

S/PV. 8111

financial investigators and civil society representatives
from 40 countries in an intensive, innovative simulation
exercise to combat trafficking along migration routes.
That endeavour would not have been possible without
the engagement and active cooperation of the United
Nations family: the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Organization for Migration, EUROPOL
and INTERPOL.
Our aim is for that format to become a role
model of international cooperation at its best. We
already have plans to translate the material from the
simulation exercises — up until now conducted only in
English — into Italian, as we are organizing simulation
exercises for Italian professionals in Vicenza at the
end of January. We are then planning to translate
it into Russian so as to engage more professionals
from OSCE participating States. I am glad that my
country, Kazakhstan, has offered its regional hub on
transnational threats to security as a venue for exercises
potentially to take place in September. We are also
translating the material into French to not only engage
OSCE representatives, but also to train representatives
from our partner countries from which large migratory
flows arrive on the European continent.
Such practical initiatives are not only necessary
to foster better synergies; they are critical if we are
to achieve long-lasting, concrete results. In terms of
the latter, I am pleased with the response of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine to the training
offered by myself and my staff on how to monitor and
report trafficking-related trends in the context of a
conflict situation. I applaud the efforts of UNODC to
develop guidelines on trafficking in persons in conflict
and post-conflict situations, and we stand ready to
support its regional implementation and evaluation.
We also dwelled on what is often a sophisticated
system of recruitment, along with a number of worrying
trends, including the steadily increasing numbers of
recruits — girls and young women — who join terrorist
organizations to serve as wives, the appearance of mixed
forms of exploitation within terrorist organizations and
the engagement of young male and female high-school
graduates for various exploitative purposes.
That information led to the research project that
we launched in June 2017 to better understand the
links between recruitment, exploitation patterns of

17-3921639/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

traffickers and terrorist groups. With the overall
aim of preventing that new emerging form of human
trafficking, that research will detail and discuss real
cases of deceitful and forced recruitment for sexual and
labour exploitation.
Finally, given that children and unaccompanied
minors are particularly vulnerable to violence and
exploitation, we made a pledge to help enhance the
coherence of international efforts and develop more
integrated, effective and expert recommendations to
adequately respond to child trafficking in all its forms,
in line with the findings of our seventeenth high-level
Conference of the Alliance against Trafficking in
Persons, which took place last April.
I will conclude with a word on the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons
(ICAT). As a platform to promote synergies and advance
the global anti-trafficking agenda, I could not be more
proud that the OSCE is its first partner member. I call
upon Member States, however, to secure the necessary
funds and resources to capitalize on its demonstrated
potential. To that end, I commend the Government of
Belarus for promoting its vital role, and I look forward
to the OSCE Ministerial Council this December, where
we will jointly discuss ICAT’s achievements.
I agree that human trafficking survivors should
guide our responses and actions. We cannot turn our
backs on the immense injustice and denial of dignity
that they face. As such, a human rights-centred approach
must remain the overarching principle underpinning
all our efforts. Too many human traffickers act
with impunity, as low global conviction rates sadly
demonstrate. It is high time that they were forced to
think twice before acting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to thank Italy for convening this debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for remaining vigilant on this
important challenge and the briefers for their detailed
accounts concerning the situation on the ground. My
delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered by
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Before I start, allow me to express our deep shock
and condemnation, as well as condolences, to Nigeria
for the cowardly attack on a mosque today. Our prayers
and thoughts go to the bereaved families.
40/76

21/11/2017

Martin Luther King, Jr. once said that our lives
begin to end the day we become silent about the things
that matter. Human trafficking is an offense and a
serious threat to human dignity, physical integrity,
human rights and sustainable development. Indonesia
therefore again reiterates its strongest condemnation of
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
and calls on all countries to strengthen and enhance
their commitment to the global efforts to combat this
crime. Sadly, so far, despite our joint efforts to combat
that menace, it remains a grave challenge to humankind.
According to the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime 2016 Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons, more than 33,000 people were trafficked in
2016, while the International Labour Organization
estimates that 21 million people are victims of forced
labour and trafficking globally. Furthermore, as we
speak, there are 22.5 million refugees worldwide. We
must all work together to ensure their welfare and
safety so as to prevent them from becoming victims of
human trafficking in any form.
In another part of the globe, news reports show
alarming incidences of African migrants in Libya
allegedly being sold as slaves. We applaud the
Secretary-General’s swift response on that issue, and
urge the international community to work together in
fighting that heinous crime.
At this juncture, allow me to share some of
Indonesia’s views on this matter.
First, it is critical that we reinforce all the global
norms and legal framework that relate to human
trafficking. In that regard, we call on countries that
have not ratified the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children to do so. We should
also strengthen efforts to implement all anti-trafficking
instruments, including the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and
resolution 2331 (2016).
Furthermore, Indonesia also welcomes, and
co-sponsored, the new resolution 2388 (2017) on
trafficking in persons in situations of armed conflict,
which, among other things, is aimed at strengthening
detection with a victim-centred approach and a United
Nations-coordinated response and contributions of its
field missions. We look forward to the implementation
of resolution 2388 (2017).
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, we must prioritize efforts to strengthen
cross-border collaboration aimed at investigating,
disrupting and dismantling human trafficking networks
that are profiting from conflict and human suffering.
At the regional level, Indonesia, working with other
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), stands ready to fully implement the ASEAN
Convention against Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children.
Indonesia is also committed to implementing the
Bali Declaration on People Smuggling, Trafficking
in Persons and Related Transnational Crime to create
safe and orderly migration in the region and to engage
the private sector in preventing trafficking in persons.
To that end, in August, Indonesia and Australia, as
co-Chairs of the Bali process, successfully organized
a Government and business forum that provided an
avenue of engagement for Governments and businesses
in curbing trafficking in persons.
Thirdly, Indonesia advocates greater focus on
increasing awareness and response capabilities of
peacekeepers through better predeployment training
to enable them to respond effectively to victims of
trafficking in persons during conflict situations, in
accordance with the mandate and basic principles of
peacekeeping. We also recognize the increasingly
important and positive role of women peacekeepers
in responding to women and children who have
fallen victims to sex traffickers and exploitation in
conflict areas. We are now preparing another 140 women
peacekeepers to be deployed. The United Nations and
its Member States must therefore do more to further
strengthen the role of women in peacekeeping, as
clearly outlined in the London communiqué of 2016.
Lastly, peace and development lay the foundations
for a stable society and human well-being. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development provides a means
for countering instability and the resulting economic
desperation, which amplify the risks of conflict and
encourage human trafficking. Allow me to conclude
by reaffirming Indonesia’s unwavering commitment to
putting an end to that heinous, centuries-long crime; we
must not allow it to exist for another second.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): Let me begin by adding
our voice to those expressing their solidarity and
condolences to the Government and the people of Nigeria

S/PV. 8111

in relation to the recent senseless terrorist attack. Like
others, we have been extremely worried about those
developments, and we need to continue our joint efforts
to address the issue of international terrorism.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union,
and we would like to share a few additional points in
our national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, for their briefings. I would also like to extend
a special word of thanks to the Italian presidency for
convening this important open debate focusing on
today’s very critical issue. Last but not least, I would also
like to thank Council members for adopting resolution
2388 (2017), which helps to sustain the momentum and
attention on this important agenda.
Trafficking in persons is one of the worst crimes
among the violations of human rights. It violates a
person’s dignity and undermines his or her basic
humanity. That heinous phenomenon has spread
worldwide and is present in some form in almost every
country in the world — in other words, no one can say
that they are immune to that particular scourge.
Human trafficking counts millions of victims
and provides enormous profits. Its victims would, in
fact, constitute one of the most populous countries in
the world, with a population of more than 40 million
people. Its revenues are comparable to those of the top
20 companies in the world at $150 billion annually.
Those figures clearly show that we are dealing with a
phenomenon of massive proportions that really requires
concerted efforts from the international community
as a whole. Research estimates that we would need
to spend only 15 per cent of the profits from modern
slavery to completely eradicate that evil practice, a
task that could potentially take us two decades. But
what we need most are political will and determination
translated into concrete action on the ground, as well as
further enhanced international cooperation, as I have
already mentioned.
Slovakia remains deeply committed to combating
human trafficking. After ratifying all of the major
international treaties and having implemented the
relevant European Union legislation, we have also
strengthened our national laws in order to increase

17-3921641/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

the protection of victims. Our State Secretary of the
Ministry of the Interior is the national anti-trafficking
coordinator, who covers the national referral mechanism
in Slovakia and chairs the expert group on combating
trafficking in human beings. We are pursuing the
objectives and steps contained in the national action
plan for combating human trafficking, which covers the
period 2015-2018.
Less than two months ago, we agreed here at the
United Nations on the political declaration on the
implementation of the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons (General
Assembly resolution 72/1). We emphasized the need
to address the factors that increase vulnerability to
trafficking, particularly poverty, unemployment,
inequality and conflicts. In that connection we
must focus our efforts on prevention rather than on
response. When needed, the protection of victims and
prosecution of perpetrators must be timely, accurate
and comprehensive.
Raising awareness about the existence of human
trafficking reduces the risk of becoming a victim of
that scourge. Education, awareness-raising campaigns,
events focusing on human trafficking and informing
specific groups are but a few of the means of prevention.
We have to improve the protection of victims by
providing them with special assistance and a professional
approach, but we have to work also on their ability to
self-identify as victims. Our action against perpetrators
must be resolute, coordinated and effective. We have to
improve the knowledge of procedures and the methods
and forms of detection and prosecution on the national
level and enhance international cooperation and joint
investigations of transnational organized criminal
networks and illicit financial flows.
In conclusion, human trafficking is, as I stated
earlier, present in almost every country in the world, and
every country in the world must, therefore, do its part
to tackle it. It is our view that working individually, but
at the same time in a coordinated manner and in close
cooperation, is the only way in which we will be able
to start referring to human trafficking in the past tense.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to thank the
President for placing this issue on the Security Council’s
agenda today. We have heard impressive statements this
morning, including those by the Secretary-General, the
42/76

21/11/2017

Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Special Rapporteur. I also
found the statement made by the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, Mr. Chergui,
very interesting and encouraging, especially in the
sense that the African Union takes this challenge very
seriously and that they are working very hard on the
matter across the African continent, which, as we know
from recent reports in Libya, faces many problems
relating to human trafficking.
Allow me to make three points. The first is, of
course, to support what the Secretary-General said. I
think his report (S/2017/939) makes for a very impressive
document. I want to highlight his consideration of the
issues of impunity and the need to gather evidence
from both within and beyond conflict areas so as to
pursue perpetrators.
The second point is that we must make trafficking
unprofitable. Trafficking is, unfortunately, a highly
profitable business. The risk of being caught is not very
high, nor is the risk of being put in prison. That is what
we need to work on, and so I refer once again to what
the Secretary-General underlined in his report: we
must devote more attention to the analysis of financial
flows. In that context, we note that the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and
the Financial Action Task Force have been carrying out
very professional work in following those illicit flows.
I also believe that we should profit from the expert
recommendations of the OECD. In following money
flows, it is important that we, at the same time, uphold
the rule of law and find the right balance between
effective law enforcement and the protection of the
right to privacy.
Next, I wanted to share with the Council the steps
taken by the Federal Government. As members knows,
we have had a lot of refugees from various backgrounds
arrive in Germany over recent years. The first step is to
identify the victims and provide services so as to give
them direct psychological support and assistance when
they are in refugee shelters.
With regard to the psychological work that has to
be done, the Council of Europe’s Group of Experts
on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings
has provided a lot of advice, and we should give our
support to the draft report that it is still preparing.
As mentioned earlier on the subject of impunity, we
have to look at law enforcement. Within the crime of
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

trafficking, there are those who are responsible for the
direct exploitation of people in need, such as refugees,
and those people who knowingly and willingly take
advantage of persons being trafficked for labour or
sexual exploitation. Since 2016, we have had a new
provision in the German Penal Code, under which such
people — the indirect benefiters of trafficking — are
punished. It is important that people benefiting from
trafficking be criminalized.
The Slovak representative, speaking just before me,
mentioned that we have to get business and enterprises
engaged. On the subject of labour exploitation, the
German Government included a provision in its 2016
national action plan on business and human rights, under
which international companies are made responsible for
ensuring that decent labour conditions are implemented
in their supply chains. It is important, therefore, that we
focus on the victims, law enforcement and companies.
We have received various impressions from the
pictures that have come in from Libya. Last year, the
Chancellor received Nadia Murad, a Yazidi, as the
Council knows, and Germany among other countries
had an exhibition in this Chamber on the plight of
the Yazidis. It is always good to follow up on what
has happened to witnesses, and Nadia Murad is an
example of someone who has contributed to keeping
our response to the Yazidi situation alive. Germany
hopes that today’s debate and resolution will lead to an
improvement in that situation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): At the outset, I would
like to extend our heartfelt sympathies and deepest
condolences to the people and Governments of Nigeria
and Iraq for the dastardly terrorist attacks that have
taken place in those countries today. Our thoughts and
prayers are with the victims of those terrorist attacks.
We thank Italy for organizing today’s debate and
the briefers for their interventions. We appreciate the
attention that the Security Council has devoted to the
issue of trafficking in persons over recent years.
Turkey welcomes the adoption today of resolution
2388 (2017). We consider the implementation of
resolution 2331 (2016) to be very important in advancing
the normative agenda set out by the Security Council.
We are pleased to see that today’s resolution once again
recognizes that trafficking in persons entails grave

S/PV. 8111

violations of human rights and strongly condemns all
instances of trafficking in persons.
As an offence against the dignity and integrity of
human beings, trafficking in persons also constitutes
a serious transnational organized crime. The recent
unspeakable pictures of the slave trade are a case
in point. In situations of conflict and complex
emergencies, human trafficking can drive conflict,
finance terrorist organizations and amplify the risks for
the most vulnerable, namely, women and children. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/939), as well as the
recent studies by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, demonstrate that situations of conflict
pose various sorts of challenges to efforts to counter
trafficking in persons.
I should also note that trafficking is a global
problem that requires global responses. Therefore, in
preventing and countering trafficking in persons, we
should always address the four pillars of prevention,
prosecution, protection and partnerships. In addition,
the international community has to continue
developing inclusive, human rights-based and victimcentred approaches, including legislative and criminal
measures. Such measures should be informed, first and
foremost, by the United Nations Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children.
Owing to its geographical location, Turkey has
been adversely affected by the rising trends in human
trafficking and related malpractices. During this time
of crisis in our region, criminal and terrorist networks
resort to various forms of exploiting human beings,
commit gender-based sexual violence and force the
recruitment of adults and children in order to fund and
sustain their criminal operations.
The Secretary-General’s report explains how
Da’esh, the Lord’s Resistance Army, Boko Haram
and Al-Shabaab resort to human trafficking for the
purposes of forced labour, slavery, abuse against
minors and sexual exploitation. Such tactics are, sadly,
not limited to those terrorist groups. It is important
to emphasize that terrorist organizations such as the
Kurdish Workers Party and the Democratic Union
Party of Syria also widely employ such methods aimed
in order to exploit human beings, in particular, through
the forced recruitment of children and young women.

17-3921643/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

Turkey is actively fighting against the terrorist
organizations in its region. We also support our partners
in their efforts. In doing that, we are of the view that
investigating, disrupting and dismantling criminal
networks operating in the context of armed conflicts
can serve as a contributing factor for sustaining
peace. We also recognize the need to address the
vulnerabilities of victims trapped in conflicts and to
ensure accountability for perpetrators of trafficking.
Turkey remains strongly committed to eradicating
human trafficking by implementing a progressive
approach. With that understanding, we have introduced
comprehensive administrative and legal measures
aimed at combating that phenomenon. At the domestic
level, our efforts have been focused on strengthening
our legislation and improving the implementation of our
obligations. In that regard, a Coordination Commission
against human trafficking has been established. The
Commission will put into practice an updated national
action plan on the fight against human trafficking in the
coming period. Moreover, the regulation on combating
human trafficking and the protection of victims has
been issued and put in force last year. Through those
steps, we are making further strides towards better
identification of victims and ensuring adequate
protection for them.
At the international level, Turkey is a party to the
Palermo Convention and its relevant supplementary
protocols. As to efforts the regional level, Turkey put
into force the Council of Europe Convention on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings in February 2016.
Human trafficking can be prevented if we
recalibrate and coordinate our ongoing efforts, in line
with the commitments agreed in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the World Humanitarian
Summit, the New York Declaration for Refugees
and Migrants and most recently through the Political
declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons. Strengthening the role of the United Nations
system, including through today’s resolution, will assist
the entire Council in achieving our common objectives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
The Secretary-General’s first report on the issue of
trafficking in persons in armed conflict (S/2017/939),
drafted pursuant to resolution 2331 (2016), provides an
44/76

21/11/2017

excellent point of reference for considering the activities
undertaken by the United Nations agencies in that regard.
It also offers an insight into the best practices developed
by Member States. It is encouraging to see that several
issues have been acted on that were discussed and
recommended at the Council’s previous open debate
in 2016 (see S/PV.7898). Nevertheless, the report once
again shows the scale of the repercussions on peace and
security — including human security — resulting from
trafficking in persons. For that reason, Switzerland
thanks the Italian presidency for organizing this open
debate on trafficking in persons in armed conflict and
for submitting today’s timely resolution 2388 (2017),
which addresses, inter alia, the particular vulnerability
of children in conflict situations.
Trafficking in persons can be a consequence
of crisis and armed conflict. Migration and forced
displacement, including internal displacement, increase
the risk of trafficking and exploitation. The problems
that arise as a consequence affect all countries along
the migration routes. While the absence of peace and
security favours the business model of traffickers — as
is clearly the case in Libya — countries at peace and
with a strong rule of law are by no means exempt from
the scourge.
That is why Switzerland is working on
strengthening measures to identify and protect persons
in the asylum procedure. The revised national action
plan to fight human trafficking 2017-2020 establishes
a number of actions in that regard. One such initiative
is the systematic training of front-line workers in
asylum reception centres. The action plan also puts a
special focus on unaccompanied minors in the context
of trafficking. The recent UNICEF-International
Organization for Migration report on children and youth
on the move across the Mediterranean Sea presents
facts and figures that confirm the need for prevention
and protection measures for that group, in particular
unaccompanied minors, who are not only particularly
vulnerable to trafficking, but are also disproportionally
represented among the people on the move.
We also welcome the references in the SecretaryGeneral’s report to the value of regional organizations,
such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). The OSCE is contributing effectively,
through its action plan on combating trafficking in
human beings, to the development of an operational
response and a counter-trafficking policy covering
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

every dimension of the trafficking phenomenon,
particularly in conflict and post-conflict environments.
Let me also highlight the importance of factfinding and monitoring mechanisms in fighting the
impunity of those involved in human trafficking.
Such mechanisms allow us to build an important
knowledge base on that phenomenon and contribute
to strengthening accountability for that crime. Human
trafficking is a crime that goes beyond national borders.
In the light of that, the fight against that phenomenon
is the fundamental duty of all States. Switzerland will
persevere in its efforts to combat that scourge, both as a
cause and a consequence of armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Let me take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your country for assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month and wish you all the best in the
stewardship of the work of the Council. You can rest
assured of South Africa’s continued support for and
cooperation with the work of the Council.
We consider this debate very timely, as it is an
important follow-up to the adoption of resolution 2331
(2016) and provides an opportunity to evaluate our
collective response aimed at ensuring that women,
children, refugees, migrants and internally displaced
peoples are protected from trafficking.
It is inexcusable that in this day and age, and in
almost every conflict situation throughout the world,
human trafficking thrives. It has been established that
the illicit trafficking of drugs, stolen antiquities and
small arms and light weapons often follow the same
routes used by human traffickers. Those activities
threaten international peace and security, for instance
by sustaining terrorism, criminals and armed groups.

S/PV. 8111

trafficked. Trafficking operations often flourish in
circumstances where Government institutions and law
enforcement capacities have been eroded and weakened
by sustained conflict. That undermines the rule of law,
which in turn contributes to other forms of transnational
organized crime, exacerbating conflict and insecurity.
Our ultimate objective should be to address the
conflict that has given rise to the scourge of human
trafficking, including its root causes. That requires us
to address development challenges and the dangers of
external interventions that we have witnessed in Libya,
Iraq and Syria, which have led to the proliferation of
refugees and internally displaced persons.
It is also imperative that we work together to
address underdevelopment, which lies at the root cause
of migration. That is manifested through poverty,
joblessness, inequality, conflict and trafficking in
persons, factors that force people to migrate beyond their
borders seeking better opportunities. In that regard,
South Africa stresses that issues related to trafficking
are not just an issue for the Security Council to deal
with; all related organs of this Organization ought to
work in concert to address the matter collaboratively,
so as to strengthen development and thereby sustainable
and durable peace.
The United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons provides a robust framework
for addressing trafficking in persons. However, it
remains imperative that international instruments are
properly supported by tangible actions and political
commitments at the international, regional and national
levels in order for them to fulfil their respective
mandates effectively.

The appalling reports over the past few days
showing that African migrants in Libya are being sold
as slaves is a clear indication of the urgent need for all
of us to commit to the eradication of that scourge. As
the Secretary-General said in his statement earlier in
the meeting, slavery has no place in our world and these
actions are among the most egregious abuses of human
rights and may amount to crimes against humanity.

Although human trafficking remains a significant
international challenge, we are encouraged by the
findings of the 2016 Global Report on Trafficking
in Persons, which shows that many countries have
criminalized trafficking, as required by the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. We note that the
number of countries that have done so increased from
33 in 2003 to 158 in 2016. That impressive increase has
contributed to a commensurate increase in the number
of prosecutions and, importantly, to the provision of
more assistance to victims.

My delegation is mindful of the fact that one of
the highest risks to displaced persons — specifically
refugees fleeing conflicts — is the threat of being

No single country can solve the problem alone.
The transnational nature of trafficking demands a
transnational response. It is critical that we strengthen

17-3921645/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

and expand partnerships among stakeholders, including
civil society, academia and the private sector, in
supporting prevention, protection, and prosecution
efforts. It is also important to deepen cooperation with
the private sector in order to ensure that trafficking is
eradicated within global supply chains.
We also need to further strengthen efforts to
build the capacity of our front-line actors, including
criminal-justice system officials, social-service
providers, medical personnel, and law-enforcement and
border authorities in order to deal effectively with that
scourge. Particular attention should be given to gender
and age issues, exploitation and abuse in the context
of trafficking, smuggling and the contemporary forms
of slavery. We must also strengthen our capability
to prosecute such crimes through the provision of
technical assistance in areas such as international
law and practice, intelligence gathering, risk analysis,
investigative skills and interviewing the suspects and
victims.
In addition, we need to work to improve the
collection, sharing and analysis of data, including
data on the modus operandi and the economic models
and conditions that drive smuggling and trafficking
networks. Effective short- to medium-term strategies,
including awareness-raising campaigns and education
and training initiatives, are needed. In that regard, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is to be
commended for its efforts to assist States to improve
such capabilities.
In conclusion, we welcome this opportunity to take
stock of the implementation of the efforts to address
trafficking in persons in conflict situations, including
through resolution 2331 (2016). We are confident that
this review will assist the international community in
achieving its ultimate goal of eradicating this terrible
crime.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Monsignor Kassas (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic):
The Holy See thanks the Italian presidency for
convening today’s debate and for keeping the issue of
trafficking in persons in conflict situations high on the
Security Council’s agenda.
Resolution 2331 (2016), which was adopted a year
after the landmark presidential statement contained
in document S/PRST/2015/25, issued at the Council’s
46/76

21/11/2017

first-ever meeting on trafficking in persons (see
S/PV.7585), refers to a correlation between trafficking
in persons, sexual violence, armed conflict, terrorism
and transnational organized crime. The Council has
underscored that acts or offences associated with
trafficking in persons in conflict may constitute
war crimes.
However, the full potential of international criminal
justice needs to be utilized exhaustively if we are to
be effective in our fight against that heinous crime.
In order to eradicate trafficking in persons, we must
confront all of its economic, environmental, political
and ethical causes, and it is particularly important to
prevent and end the wars and conflicts that make people
especially vulnerable to being trafficked.
Wars and violent conflicts have become the biggest
driving force behind forced human displacement. The
state of war provides an enabling environment for
human traffickers, who increasingly exploit a tragic
humanitarian situation to target refugees, forced
migrants and internally displaced persons in their
criminal enterprises. In that regard, the Holy See would
like to highlight the importance of the implementation
of the responsibility to protect in the context of
the migration and refugee crises, which facilitate
trafficking in persons.
When States and the international community fail
to protect people from war and atrocities to such an
extent that people feel compelled to flee their homes,
we all have a great and urgent responsibility to protect
them from further harm, including from falling into
the hands of human traffickers. The criminalization
of forced migrants and undocumented and irregular
migrants in general exacerbates their vulnerabilities,
drives them further into the clutches of traffickers
and other extreme forms of exploitation, and renders
them less likely to collaborate with law-enforcement
authorities in efforts to catch and punish traffickers.
Achieving the specific targets of the Sustainable
Development Goals aimed at ending trafficking in
persons is an integral part of our efforts. Like the
Sustainable Development agenda as a whole, those
targets present immense challenges that no individual,
organization or State can deal with alone. Despite
significant progress and efforts, such as the high-level
meeting on the United Nations Global Plan of Action
to Combat Trafficking in Persons, held on 27 and
28 September, much more still needs to be done to
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

achieve better coordination among Governments, the
judiciary, law-enforcement officials and civil society.
Likewise, leaders and followers of the various
religions around the world must do everything in their
power to save the millions of children, women and men
who are forced to live in slave-like conditions. In that
context, my delegation wishes to thank all faith-based
organizations and religious communities, in particular
women’s organizations, which have long been at the
forefront of the fight against trafficking in persons
and have shown their commitment by accompanying
survivors with loving concern on the long journey back
to living a life in freedom and dignity.
On the World Day against Trafficking in Persons
this July, Pope Francis warned us all against getting
used to trafficking in persons or treating it as if it
were a normal thing, when in reality it is, as he said,
ugly, cruel, criminal, an aberrant plague, a modern
form of slavery and a crime against humanity. In his
name, my delegation renews the appeal for a universal
commitment to ending that heinous crime.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Ansari (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for presiding over the Security Council for this month
and thank you for organizing today’s important debate
on a matter that concerns basic human rights.
Unfortunately, trafficking in persons has become
a global phenomenon, especially in countries suffering
from conflicts. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres; Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC); Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro,
United Nations Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children; and Mr. Smaïl
Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for their valuable briefings.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/939)
on trafficking in persons in armed conflict pursuant
to Security Council resolution 2331 (2016) includes
important information and recommendations that we,
as members of the international community, must
take into account in our efforts aimed at combating
the phenomenon of human trafficking, especially in
countries and regions in conflict. The indicators in the
report show an increasing number of victims of that

S/PV. 8111

heinous crime, especially women and children. We must
therefore intensify our efforts to meet the obligation set
forth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
not to leave anyone behind.
As stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
the phenomenon of trafficking in persons has become
increasingly more dangerous, owing to the fact that
terrorist groups are using young victims to perpetrate
terrorist acts and are diverting the proceeds of
trafficking to finance such acts. The State of Qatar
is committed to international law and believes in
the importance of enhancing and protecting human
rights and upholding human dignity. We continue to
contribute to international efforts aimed at combating
that heinous phenomenon.
The State of Qatar focuses its efforts on addressing
the root causes of human trafficking, whether they
be social, economic, cultural, political or ideological,
or the result of the absence of the rule of law. The
State of Qatar is also working on enhancing the
complementarity and cooperation among concerned
entities working on drafting and implementing national
plans and strategies to combat terrorism and corruption,
provide humanitarian relief, and combat and eradicate
human trafficking at the national, regional and
international levels.
At the national level, the State of Qatar has
implemented a number of legislative and executive
measures that criminalize human trafficking in all
its various forms, punish perpetrators and provide
protection, rehabilitation and reintegration into society
for its victims. We have established a national committee
on combating human trafficking to coordinate the
efforts of State institutions and civil society aimed at
dealing with that horrific phenomenon. At the regional
level, we have supported the Arab initiative to build
national capacity in combating human trafficking in
Arab States in cooperation with the UNODC and the
League of Arab States. At the international level, the
State of Qatar contributes effectively to the efforts of the
Group of Friends United to Combat Human Trafficking.
The State of Qatar has been one of the largest
donors to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Victims of Human Trafficking, Especially Women and
Children, since the Fund’s establishment. We are also
one of the biggest supporters of UNODC, which is the
United Nations focal point for combating the crime
of human trafficking. In addition, in 2015, we hosted

17-3921647/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

the thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, where a comprehensive
approach to fighting human trafficking, based in part
on the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, was adopted in accordance
with the Doha Declaration. We also recently facilitated
negotiations, together with Belgium, on the political
declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons (General Assembly resolution 72/1), adopted on
27 September at the tigh-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the appraisal of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm that the
international community continues to be unable to
reach fair settlements to conflicts, which contributes to
exacerbating the phenomenon of human trafficking. We
must put an end to that crime through concerted efforts
and by addressing the root causes of human trafficking
and armed conflict. We will make every effort to assist
the international community and the Security Council
in eradicating human trafficking and providing peace,
security and welfare to all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
efforts at the helm of the Security Council this month.
I would also like to thank you for having convened this
important debate. I thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his briefing and for his report on today’s
agenda item (S/2017/939) and its recommendations.
We also thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, as well as all of this
morning’s briefers.
One year has passed since we adopted resolution
2331 (2016), in which we vehemently condemned
instances of human trafficking in armed conflict, and
yet we continue to be confronted with that alarming
phenomenon, specifically after seeing the revolting
images shown by the media recently. Those images
showed trafficking in persons in Libya. Human beings
were sold like merchandise, despite the international
community’s efforts to combat terrorism and the
barbaric ideas of terrorist organizations. The conflicts
plaguing our world today, as well as unprecedented
48/76

21/11/2017

waves of refugees, have contributed to that phenomenon,
which is rising to a crescendo.
The 2016 Global Report on Trafficking in Persons
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) shows an increase in the number of victims
in countries plagued by conflict, such as Syria, Iraq
and Somalia, but also in Europe, Asia and the Middle
East. For that reason, we emphasize the importance of
arriving at political solutions to the crises facing us
so that we can put an end to violence and bloodshed
and safeguard the dignity of people. It is also our duty,
as the international community, to maintain a holistic
vision of those issues. We must not focus solely on the
hot spots. We must have a comprehensive overview of
all parts of the world. We need programmes providing
interregional responses aimed at combating such
phenomena and the underlying causes thereof. For
that reason, Jordan will continue to work at the United
Nations with our various partners to achieve that goal.
We also need a holistic approach to the issue,
not merely a political one. We must take into account
security and human-development issues and we must
link them to our efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the sustaining
peace agenda in order to achieve a peaceful world
in which societies are fair and nobody is left behind.
Our societies must be prosperous and should provide
freedoms for all. All people must be able to live without
the fear of violence.
In our view, it is critical to redouble our efforts
to fight human trafficking, specifically trafficking
perpetrated by terrorist groups. For that reason, we
must work nationally, regionally and internationally to
fight terrorism and extremist thought by prioritizing
women, girls and children, who remain the weak links
in the chain. We must also empower young people
and build capacity through technical assistance to
all countries in need. That must be part of a global
preventive strategy. In that regard, we underscore the
fundamental link between trafficking in persons and
the crises afflicting our societies, specifically the
phenomena of terrorism and extremism. We need to
a comprehensive understanding of that link. We must
analyse all its dimensions and implement strategies and
programmes to combat that scourge.
To that end, Jordan and Norway created the Group
of Friends of Preventing Violent Extremism in New
York, which comprises some 40 countries. We are
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

striving to ensure empowerment for young people
and women in the fight against violent extremism. In
particular, we are striving to build the capacities of
women at the international level so as to ensure conflict
prevention and effectively respond to urgent crises in
order to build a lasting peace where all people can work
and live in prosperity.
We also emphasize the importance of stepping
up cooperation in the exchange of information and
capacity-building between States and international
organizations, together with the UNODC, which plays
a critical role in the fight against the scourges we have
been discussing. Treatment and recovery for victims
must also be ensured, and I would like to emphasize the
role of women and children in that process.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan lauds the
Political declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, and it emphasizes the importance of General
Assembly resolution 64/293, adopted in 2010. That
resolution is a testament to the robust political will
of the international community to fight such heinous
crimes. We also emphasize the importance of the
recommendations contained in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/939) and its analysis of the
control of illicit financial flows as a means of fighting
trafficking in persons.
Jordanian law has criminalized all types of human
trafficking. We have also ratified the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
as well as the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. We
have also criminalized forced labour, modern slavery
and trafficking in persons through our Anti-human
Trafficking Law No. 9 of 2009.
We have created a national commission tasked with
fighting human trafficking. The commission brings
together representatives from various ministries and
governmental and non-governmental bodies. We have
also set up a national strategy for the prosecution of
and fight against trafficking in persons for the period
2010 to 2012. We are currently working on follow-up
measures to that strategy. We have created hot lines
for victims to report instances of human trafficking.
We have also set up a mechanism to refer instances
of human trafficking to the competent authorities and

S/PV. 8111

to law enforcement, hospitals and various treatment
centres. We have also set up a national strategy, with
a mandate through 2025. It brings together the various
aspects of the 2030 Agenda, and it addresses violence
against children and sexual exploitation linked to
human trafficking.
We have also set up an entity called the Home
of Dignity, which is an organization linked to the
Ministry of Social Development. It enables assistance
to be delivered to human trafficking victims of
all nationalities. Other relevant authorities also strive
to deliver all necessary assistance to victims, in
particular the children of Syrian refugees. We enable
those children to have access to high-quality education
through assistance provided by UNICEF. We have also
established a fund to combat violence against women of
Jordan and of other countries.
Finally, Jordan will continue to step up its efforts
to combat the phenomenon of human trafficking, in
particular crimes perpetrated by terrorist organizations.
We stand ready to cooperate with various regional and
international bodies to raise awareness among all of
such phenomena and to fight against those scourges.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would like to start by
commending Italy for holding this debate and for the
adoption today of the important resolution 2388 (2017),
which Israel is proud to cosponsor.
Human trafficking is a crime by humankind
against humanity. It debases our fellow human beings
and erodes societies. It is a multibillion-dollar industry
of lies that can manipulate anyone in its path. It leaves
people trapped and alone. Trafficking in persons takes
many forms but has most recently become a preferred
tool of terror for non-State actors. Terrorists target
the world’s most vulnerable people, using trafficking
to exploit innocent civilians, trapped in the crossfire
of brutal armed conflict. And the situation is only
getting worse.
Today, we must remind ourselves of the humanity
of the problem — the names, the faces and the stories
of the victims of human trafficking. Adnan Ali had to
choose between joining the Houthi rebels on the front
lines in Yemen and selling his organs. He chose to
sell his kidney. Zara was kidnapped by Boko Haram
in Nigeria. She was forced to become a prostitute to

17-3921649/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

survive. Haifa, a Yazidi woman from Iraq, was sold
into sex slavery by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham. She was one of thousands of women whose
bodies became commodities for terrorists to trade and
from which to make money.
Too many innocent people die as a result of
trafficking. The ones who survive, those who manage
to escape, are forced to live with the physical and
emotional scars of abuse. The fundamental freedoms
of the trafficking of victims, too many of whom are
women and children, are compromised eternally.
No human life can ever be up for sale. No person’s
identity can be stripped away by someone else. As
stated in the political declaration on the implementation
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons (General Assembly resolution
72/1), adopted in September, we cannot reach the
2030 Sustainable Development Goals if we do not end
human trafficking. Every country must do its part to
end that barbarism.
Fighting human trafficking is a high priority
for Israel. We faced a serious trafficking problem
throughout the 1990s and into the early 2000s. So, in
2006 we introduced a comprehensive anti-trafficking
law and adopted national plans of action. Israel is a party
to the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, and is fully committed to the four Ps:
prevention, prosecution, protection and partnership. It
is our goal to make every Government official, student,
business executive, police officer and ordinary citizen
aware of trafficking and of its victims.
To do that, we start by appointing anti-trafficking
coordinators to Government agencies. Then we focus
on training. Israel’s National Anti-Trafficking Unit
holds over 50 training sessions for officials annually.
Lawyers in the State Attorney’s Office receive special
training to enhance the law enforcement element
of anti-trafficking. For the general public, we offer
lectures, seminars and interviews with survivors at
universities and through the media. We also distribute
leaflets that provide information to raise awareness
among our citizens and work hard to reduce the stigma
that can accompany human trafficking and further
isolate its victims.
On the international level, Israel partners with
other countries to combat trafficking on a global scale.
50/76

21/11/2017

In Israel, we have hosted delegations from Albania,
Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and the European Union, to
name but a few, for training and consultations. Our
national coordinator participates in the Working Group
on Trafficking in Persons of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime in Vienna. Israel is proud to partner
in the global effort to end human trafficking.
Israel has not been spared from the cruelty of human
trafficking, but we are doing our best to combat it on all
fronts. We are proud to be considered a tier-1 country by
the United States Department of State on account of our
comprehensive anti-trafficking training measures and
services for victims since the early 2000s. Our shelters
are Government-funded and legal aid is free. We offer
work visas and medical and psychological support. We
work closely with civil society and strongly support
our partner non-governmental organizations, which are
invaluable in the fight against trafficking. Ultimately,
our goal is to provide rehabilitation, recovery and
reintegration for every victim of trafficking who walks
through our doors.
Israel is ready to share its best practices with the
world. We are eager to hear the world’s best practices
as well. If we shy away from cooperation and from
sharing our knowledge, we move only further away
from defeating human trafficking. Let us work together,
share our knowledge and end this terrible practice
for good.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Panama.
Ms. Navarro (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me first of all to commend the initiative of the Italian
presidency of the Security Council to convene this
timely open debate. We also appreciate the initial
contributions of the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially in women and children, which make
clear the current situation of a scourge that does not
recognize borders and that, regrettably, with its various
faces and manifestations, affects all our countries.
Panama has participated in the past three debates
of the Security Council on this issue because it
understands that collective responsibility is required to
address a global phenomenon, which, together with all
the related factors, jeopardizes the integrity, security,
stability and economic, social and cultural development
of our peoples.
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Clearly,
resolution
2331
(2016),
adopted
unanimously by the Council almost a year ago, further
underscored the intention of States to address any
form of trafficking in human beings in conflict areas,
understanding that that degrading practice constitutes
a violation of the human rights of the victims. It
undermines their human condition for the benefit of
criminal networks.
We have taken due note of the observations and
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/939) on trafficking in
persons in armed conflict pursuant to resolution 2331
(2016) . We would underscore our clear concern over
the need to focus analysis on the close links between
the trafficking of children in conflict situations and
the serious violations facing them. We therefore
commend the Security Council for taking action in that
regard. Panama echoes the strong condemnation of the
Secretary-General yesterday following news reports
that revealed the existence of slave markets in Libya,
where the degrading auction of migrants and refugees
is a shocking reality.
In the current context, in which conflicts generate
mass migration flows, and as we work towards the
global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration,
international cooperation efforts must address that
serious issue through the holistic and fully unified
approach that it demands of us by focusing on its causes.
For Panama, preventing and combating trafficking
in persons is a priority of the citizen security
strategy, designed to safeguard the human rights of
all individuals and, at the same time, to protect the
network of services of our country from actions of
organized crime in order to prevent those services
from being used for illicit activities, such as financing
terrorism. In line with the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, adopted in
2010, Panama has implemented a set of specific actions
to prevent human trafficking, prosecute traffickers,
protect victims and establish partnerships to mobilize
resources for cooperation. In terms of data collection,
our biometric database made it possible to prevent
people with links to criminal networks from entering
the country or avoiding migratory controls.
As a country of transit and destination for migrants,
Panama has acted responsibly by enacting up-to-date
legislation to address the phenomenon and its related
activities, and is committed to the implementation of

S/PV. 8111

the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime; its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially in Women
and Children; its Protocol against the Smuggling
of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air; and the Protocol
of 2014 to the Convention Concerning Forced or
Compulsory Labour.
We are pleased to be a member of the regional
coalition against human trafficking and to hold the
vice-presidency of the Board of Trustees of the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, which is
represented by our Minister of Public Security, as we
confidently rely on regional actions with global reach.
Panama also recognizes the value of joint initiatives
with international organizations. That is why the
efforts of our national commission against trafficking
in persons, together with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the International
Organization for Migration, to strengthen mutual legal
assistance mechanisms in the exchange of information
that facilitates the investigation and prosecution of the
crime of trafficking in persons has yielded significant
results. This confirms our belief that action cannot
be undertaken in isolation. We therefore welcome the
agreement that has been signed with UNODC for the
construction in Panama of the first shelter for victims
of trafficking in the region, which will meet the highest
relevant international standards.
I conclude by once again renewing the strong
commitment of Panama to fighting against this form
of modern slavery, without ignoring the value of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as we see
that the link between sustainable development and the
promotion and protection of human rights as a means to
confront the asymmetrical structural factors that fuel
this scourge.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour
of making this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.
Trafficking in persons, including forced labour
and slavery, is a serious form of organized crime and
a grave violation of human rights. For the perpetrators,
trafficking is an enormously lucrative business. These
criminal networks exploit displaced persons and are a
factor that causes people to migrate. Terrorist groups
like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko

17-3921651/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

Haram, Al-Shabaab and the Lord’s Resistance Army
are using trafficking as a tactic of terror and war.
Moreover, trafficking raises money for their operations
and criminal infrastructure. Women and children are
particularly exposed, often in the form of sexual slavery
or forced labour, or as soldiers, spies or infiltrators. In
that regard, we welcome the adoption last week, at the
margins of the United Nations Peacekeeping Defence
Ministerial Conference in Canada, of the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. We call on
parties to conflicts to take concrete action to address
such violations and abuses and to protect the victims.
We need to develop combined tools from the
security and development communities to address the
convergence of armed conflict, terrorism and trafficking
in persons. Therefore, we welcome resolution 2331
(2016). We need better and more effective utilization
of international organizations and instruments. That
includes the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, which are important
to ensure effective international cooperation across
borders and regions, as well as between countries’ law
enforcement authorities.
In that regard, we welcome the capacity-building
activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime. Furthermore, we need to improve conflict
analysis, conflict prevention and cooperation through
data-sharing and monitoring between countries and
across United Nations entities. We welcome SecretaryGeneral Guterres’ initiative to strengthen the conflict
and threat analysis of the United Nations. In addition,
we need to improve our ability to trace trafficking
networks and related financial flows and give priority
to the development of financial disruption strategies
and operations.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
gives us an important platform on which to tackle
trafficking in a more holistic manner. In line with
resolution 1325 (2000) and resolution 2250 (2015), we
also need to engage more women and young people
in both peacebuilding activities and actions against
human trafficking.
We support the Secretary-General’s reform agenda
and would like to underline that the peace, security
and development architecture needs to be coherent
52/76

21/11/2017

and mutually supportive in that regard. The Nordic
countries are strongly committed to tackling all forms
of trafficking and organized crime. We are already
deeply engaged in anti-trafficking programmes,
in partnership with developing countries, regional
organizations and the United Nations. Strengthening
multilateral cooperation and partnerships is more
important than ever.
Mr. El Khadir (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, let me thank the Italian presidency of the
Security Council for the month of November, for
convening today’s open debate and for its choice of the
theme “Trafficking in persons in conflict situations”.
Today’s meeting takes place in a context
characterized by mass displacements of people,
particularly refugees. Fleeing wars and natural
disasters, migrants aspire for better futures. Due to
their vulnerability, migrants are exposed to the risk of
trafficking. We are convinced that today’s debate and
resolution 2388 (2017), adopted today, will strengthen
the international community’s resolve to prevent and
combat all forms of trafficking in persons.
As one of the three elements of Morocco’s new
migration policy, adopted in September 2013, the fight
against trafficking in persons is a priority with respect
to upholding human rights and fighting organized
crime. Thanks to our national migration and asylum
policy, Morocco has positioned itself at the forefront of
our region in the fight against trafficking in persons and
smuggling of migrants. The first stage of our policy has
led to the regularization of the status of approximately
25,000 migrants. The second stage will capitalize on
the success and gains realized during the first stage,
and will help to continue to facilitate the integration of
migrants as part of an integrated humane approach to
sheltering migrants from human trafficking networks
and ensuring that the rights of refugees and migrants
are upheld on our territory.
Morocco has adopted a series of measures at the
national level by updating its legal and institutional
frameworks with respect to migration, asylum and
human trafficking. Adopted in 2016, our law against
human trafficking is further testament to the Kingdom’s
active commitment. My country has also demonstrated
its commitment at the international level by adhering
to the main human rights conventions related to the
prevention of and fight against human trafficking
and the smuggling of migrants, including the United
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, which we ratified in April 2011. Furthermore,
at the twenty-sixth session of the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, Morocco presented
its six-month action plan for the implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. We are among the 13 countries
that were strategically selected throughout the world
to develop and implement national plans to fight
smuggling and illicit trafficking in persons.
Extreme poverty, inequality, conflict, political and
economic instability, human rights violations and the
lack of education and prospects create vulnerabilities
that criminals exploit. No country can resolve the
issue of trafficking alone. The solution cannot rely
solely on a security-based approach. It requires a
comprehensive and multisectoral approach and close
cooperation among countries of origin, transit and
destination to tackle the root causes of people falling
victim to trafficking networks. A preventive approach
to trafficking is intrinsically linked to our shared goal
of sustainable development.
In that regard, Morocco reiterates its full
commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals
under the 2030 Agenda. The Kingdom of Morocco
takes this opportunity to emphasize the historic
opportunity represented by the convening of the
international conference on migration to be held on
10 and 11 September 2018 in the Kingdom of Morocco
with a view to contributing to the implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons.
To conclude, I would like to stress the following
points. An effective response to human trafficking
cannot be solely limited to criminal prosecution. There
must be measures in place to prevent people from
falling victim to it. The fight against human trafficking
hinges on the establishment of a stable political context
conducive to an effective campaign against trafficking
in persons through, inter alia, the promotion of and
respect for human rights, democracy, good governance,
the fight against corruption and impunity, a reduction of
social fragility, sustainable development and inclusive
growth. Lastly, we must ensure that people residing
in refugee camps are registered as a way to fight the
threat of human trafficking and to identify instances of
trafficking and potential victims.

S/PV. 8111

Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the delegation of Italy for
convening this important open debate and for its efforts
resulting in our adoption of resolution 2388 (2017) this
morning. In that regard, I thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing, as well as Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime; Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, United
Nations Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially in women and children; and Mr. Smaïl
Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for their briefings before the Council
this morning.
I also like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the
readiness of my delegation to cooperate with the Council
towards the fulfilment of our commitments under
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women
and Children, and to put an end to such heinous crimes.
The heinous images and recent news of African
refugee victims make a clear statement about a horrific
crime that should be uprooted by the international
community. I would like to take this opportunity
to assure those present of the support of my country
for the call made by the head of the African Union to
undertake a neutral and immediate investigation of that
atrocious event.
I would like to reassure members of the Council
of the support of the Sudan for all other international
efforts related to human trafficking, given the threat
it poses to international peace and security. As we are
all aware, the number of victims of that phenomenon
is on the rise. Many criminal networks are profiting
from and exploiting humanitarian crises to implement
their criminal schemes, making use of vulnerable
environments that give rise to conflict. Those networks
also exploit vulnerable groups, especially women and
children, to serve their own purposes, such as sexual
exploitation, forced labour, organ trafficking, servitude
and all other heinous crimes, as reiterated in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/939) on trafficking in
persons in armed conflict.
We confirm that combating all forms of
transnational crime, which is used by human
trafficking groups, requires international, regional and
bilateral cooperation, especially in terms of exchanging
information and monitoring suspect financial flows, as

17-3921653/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

well as building the capacities of individual countries to
address such crimes. In that vein, we must not neglect
the economic, development and social dimensions in
addressing the root causes of the crime, namely, poverty.
This will further require that we adopt an integrated
approach that includes international and regional
partnerships and the measures necessary to prosecute
and punish human traffickers and protect victims, in
addition to providing them with psychological and
health-care services.
The unprecedented massive movements of
refugees and migrants from neighbouring countries
transiting my country have led to enormous challenges
and developments that the Sudan has had to address,
including mixed migration flows, illegal immigration
and refugees fleeing the countryside to cities. Such
incessant demographic mobility includes the smuggling
of women and children. We are sparing no effort to
combat human trafficking and transnational organized
crime, in accordance with our international and
regional commitments. In that regard, we recall certain
achievements that we have accomplished in the Sudan.
First, we enacted an anti-human trafficking law in
October 2014, and established a national committee to
combat human smuggling and trafficking. Upon the
law’s enforcement, police forces were able to liberate
thousands of victims of smuggling, especially women
and children, on their way to Libya, and thence to
Europe as the final destination.
Secondly, we amended the refugee law of 1974 in
2014 so as to align it with regional and international
developments, including with new provisions regarding
human trafficking. Thirdly, we amended our passport
law in line with current challenges.
Fourthly, in October 2014 the Regional Ministerial
Conference on Human Trafficking and Smuggling in
the Horn of Africa was held in Khartoum in conjunction
with the African Union and the European Union, as
well as other international partners and neighbouring
countries, including Eritrea, Ethiopia, Egypt and South
Sudan. The outcome of the Conference is known as the
Khartoum process. That was followed by a conference
in Rome. In that regard, we urge the international
community to seriously honour its pledges and
commitments of the Khartoum process.
Fifthly, the Government of the Sudan has signed
a number of conventions and agreements with
neighbouring countries for border control. There is a
54/76

21/11/2017

tripartite agreement among the refugee commission,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
International Organization for Migration to combat
the crime of human trafficking, especially in eastern
Sudan where most of the victims of that crime reside.
Sixthly, the Government of the Sudan set up
shelters for the protection of victims and is currently
in the process of providing them with psychological
and healthcare services in order to integrate them
into society. In that vein, we are developing mechanisms
for documenting and verifying the identity of the victims
and for prosecuting the perpetrators this heinous crime.
In addition to and in recognition of the positive efforts
to control their borders, the countries of the region
agreed that Khartoum would host the regional centre
for anti-human trafficking processes.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation would like
to reiterate its determination to continue its cooperation
with the international community and the United
Nations and its agencies in order to address the human
trafficking phenomenon. In that regard, we urge the
international community to provide technical support
to the competent authorities in the Sudan. We also
call for this crime to be addressed in an integral and
comprehensive manner, encompassing the development
of measures to uproot it. In the same vein, we must raise
awareness about the victims and their human rights.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): At the outset, Austria
warmly welcomes today’s adoption of resolution 2388
(2017), which we gladly co-sponsored.
Austria aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.
Conflict and post-conflict settings often create
conditions where civilians are increasingly exposed
to the risk of becoming the victims of trafficking. We
would like to highlight three issues in that regard.
First, with regard to persons belonging to vulnerable
groups, in situations of conflict women and girls are
far too often sexually exploited, forced into marriage
and abused for domestic work. Terrorists capture
women and girls, sell them or offer them as rewards
to the fighters of terrorist organizations. Similarly,
children are particularly vulnerable to becoming
victims of trafficking in conflict settings. Thousands
of them have been recruited by armed groups and used
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8111

as child soldiers, human shields or suicide bombers.
Furthermore, unaccompanied children on the move are
particularly at risk. In armed conflict, trafficking in
persons is also used as a strategy to target ethnic and
religious minorities. Through its General Assembly
resolution presented again this year, Austria continues
to advocate for the protection of persons belonging to
minorities and for their rights.

and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). During our
OSCE chairmanship this year, Austria has made the
prevention of and fight against trafficking in human
beings a priority. We strive to strengthen the OSCE’s
commitments to combating trafficking in persons, also
in the context of crisis situations, and to build on the
momentum created by resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388
(2017).

Secondly, to combat trafficking in persons, Austria
follows a victim-centered approach based on rights and
the rule of law. Therefore, we put the focus on preventing
trafficking in persons, identifying and protecting
the victims of trafficking and other serious forms of
exploitation. Bringing the perpetrators to justice and
ending the climate of impunity is of utmost importance.
In post-conflict settings, accountability and transitional
justice mechanisms, including at the international level,
are key elements in sustaining peace.

Finally, we call on those States that have not yet
done so to ratify or accede to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Palermo Protocol. We encourage everyone to
contribute to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund
for Victims of Human Trafficking, Especially Women
and Children, and thank Italy for its leadership and
recent generous contribution in that regard.

In view of the transnational nature of the offence,
we would like to stress the need for the closest possible
cooperation among all relevant stakeholders, at national
and international level. While the work of international
organizations remains key in the fight against human
trafficking, we would also like to again highlight the
indispensable role of non-governmental organizations
and civil society, in particular with regard to providing
valuable assistance in enhancing the identification, care
and referral of victims. We must therefore continue to
pursue an inclusive, comprehensive approach and step
up cooperation with non-traditional partners.

Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening today’s open debate
on the issue of trafficking in persons in conflict
situations, which is an issue of priority concern for the
Philippine Government.

Thirdly, with its portfolio of technical assistance
programmes, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) continues to be a central
partner for assisting the States Members of the
United Nations in implementing practical measures
to combat trafficking in persons. We encourage
States to make use of UNODC’s expertise. Capacitybuilding programmes for criminal justice practitioners,
support in the development of legislation and national
referral mechanisms to identify and assist the victims
of trafficking, as well as the development of training
modules for law enforcement, are a few examples of the
kind of assistance provided. We also welcome the focus
of today’s debate on fostering cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations in order to
eradicate trafficking in persons.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the
important work done by the Organization for Security

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Philippines.

The Philippines shares the view that in times of
conflict, women and children are particularly vulnerable
to trafficking. There is therefore a greater imperative
for Governments to address the vulnerability of persons
caught or affected by conflict against the greater threats
to their life, dignity and security. Despite challenges
in monitoring incidents and the extent of this crime
in conflict areas, the Philippine Government remains
committed to protecting the welfare of persons who are
vulnerable to trafficking in conflict situations, through
preventive measures.
The Philippines has adopted a one-country-team
and multistakeholder approach to trafficking in persons,
which consolidates the mandates, efforts, resources
and interests of the duty-bearers and stakeholders to
develop a robust response. It has resulted in promoting
the awareness and mainstreaming of interventions,
down to the grassroots level. Realizing the increased
vulnerability of populations in conflict areas, the
Government has activated a structure called the
gender-based violence cluster, composed mainly
of law enforcers, social welfare service providers
who specialize in gender issues, and civil society
representatives. The cluster is tasked with addressing
the needs of women and children in conflict situations,

17-3921655/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

in particular in mitigating vulnerabilities to sexual
violence and trafficking. The cluster develops and
implements programmes for access to protected
information, psychosocial and trauma-informed care,
protective custody and access to education and economic
opportunities. That approach has been implemented
most recently in the Philippine Government’s
response to the crisis in Marawi, where, among other
notable initiatives, the Government deployed an allwomen contingent from police and military services,
representing a vital component of its post-conflict and
reconstruction activities.
To address the problem of human trafficking as
a means to finance the activities of terrorists, armed
groups and transnational organized crime networks, it
is important to examine trafficking corridors and the
business flow of trafficking. That approach has enabled
the Philippines to strategically locate victims and
traffickers in the entire process, especially at critical
points of intervention, where victims are the most visible
and can be rescued. It also allows for the identification
of critical points in the business flow in order to deal
the strongest blow to the operations of trafficking
syndicates, and to expose and develop strategies to
arrest new methods employed by traffickers.
With an estimated 4 million Filipino migrant workers
today, the Philippine Government has made it a priority
to provide them with protection from human trafficking
and exploitation, through national laws, international
arrangements, cooperation with destination countries
and initiatives in multilateral forums. An example of
international efforts is the migrants in countries in
crisis initiative, which the Philippines spearheaded
in cooperation with the United States and other
partners, and which has sought to improve responses
to assist migrants in countries experiencing conflict
or natural disaster. That comprehensive, rights-based
approach has resulted in the successful prosecutions of
perpetrators of human trafficking. The global compact
on safe, regular, and orderly migration also provides
us with an opportunity to strengthen international
cooperation to enable migrants to move across borders
safely and prevent them from falling prey to traffickers.
The response to human trafficking and all its aspects
should acknowledge and understand the political,
socioeconomic and even cultural push factors, and
bring together Government, civil society and the private
sector at both the domestic and international fronts.
The very nature of human trafficking requires cross56/76

21/11/2017

border cooperation. Member States need to strengthen
international cooperation on information sharing, law
enforcement, border control and judicial systems, and
learn important lessons to enhance their own national
action plans to more effectively combat that problem.
Criminal networks, armed groups and terrorists groups
must not be allowed to further thrive in situations of
instability and chaos, to prey on the fear, hardship, and
misery of others caught in conflict and post-conflict
situations and to profit from activities, such as forced
labour, slavery and other forms of exploitation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Kleé Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Italy on having assumed the presidency of the Security
Council and, above all, for having convened this open
debate on such an important issue, as well as the clear
concept note (S/2017/972, annex), which you circulated,
Sir. On behalf of my delegation, I also thank the
Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Fedotov, and
Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, United Nations
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, for their briefings.
Experience has shown beyond any doubt that
armed conflicts and humanitarian crises increase
and exacerbate the risk faced especially by women
and children — but also by men — of falling prey
to traffickers. This vulnerability also leads to the
victimization of refugees, migrants and displaced
persons. Trafficking in human beings is both a cause
and a consequence of instability resulting from
conflicts. The evidence of the link between trafficking
and the activities of terrorist groups and transnational
organized crime is of increasing concern.
More so than any other international body, the
Security Council has witnessed the high cost in human
lives and tragedies caused by conflicts with their
devastating effects. The work carried out by this body
can have an impact concerning the issue at hand. In
fact, a year ago there was a positive impact on the
theme, which has brought us together today, when
the Council adopted resolution 2331 (2016), which
condemns all acts of trafficking, particularly the sale or
trade in persons undertaken by Da’esh. Similarly, that
important resolution focuses on the critical aspect of
recognizing the importance of collecting and preserving
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

evidence relating to such acts so as to ensure that those
responsible be held accountable for them. Moreover, it
represents an important step towards the possibility of
imposing targeted sanctions for individuals and entities
involved in trafficking in persons in areas affected by
armed conflict and in sexual violence in conflict.
We deplore the fact that in conflicts and
humanitarian crises, the majority of victims have
been disproportionately children. Our outrage is
even greater when we consider that there were more
than 24 million new cases worldwide for 2016, as the
Special Rapporteur notes in her report (A/HRC/32/41).
My delegation strongly condemns the fact that at the
regional and national levels, migrant children and
women on the move are more vulnerable to falling victim
to trafficking and other forms of exploitation, including
at the hands of transnational criminal networks, as well
as being exposed to xenophobia, discrimination, abuse
and indiscriminate violence.
We regret that, owing to the absence of established
and safe migratory channels and of permanent
mechanisms aimed at enabling children and their
families to obtain formal migration status or residency
permits, children are forced to seek precarious
alternatives that increase their risk of being sold,
trafficked or exposed to other forms of exploitation,
which in turn entails the sometimes arbitrary detention
of women and children at borders.
Addressing such a complex problem in this
open debate encourages us to continue our work in
ceaselessly confronting the scourge of trafficking in
persons because it degrades humans, and the Council
cannot refrain from acting while knowing that such
abominable, inhumane and atrocious acts are taking
place. We therefore call on the Security Council to make
a concerted effort so that it not become indifferent to
the horrors of the various forms of slavery, which we
are witnessing today to the shame of the entire civilized
international community.
Lastly, my delegation believes that this issue must
continue to be included on the Council’s agenda for
further analysis, given the interdependent relationship
linking the pillars of peace and security, development
and human rights. Now is the time to consolidate
efforts and form synergies among the various
international instruments so as to establish concerted
mechanisms that will allow us to consolidate our work

S/PV. 8111

to abolish the detestable practices that trafficking and
slavery engender.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mrs. Martinic (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I thank Italy for its invitation to participate in
this open debate on trafficking in persons in situations
of conflict.
Argentina views trafficking in persons as a
complex and very serious form of exploitation and
abuse that violates its victims’ human rights. Similarly,
Argentina believes that combating trafficking must
be carried out in a holistic manner and involve the
many relevant stakeholders within the framework of
defending and promoting human rights. It is therefore
fitting that the issue be addressed as a priority matter in
the General Assembly.
Argentina recognizes that the crime of human
trafficking is a global problem, and, as such, the
international community must confront it in a
coordinated manner. In that context, it was important
for the issue to gain visibility in the Security Council
as the vulnerability of the victims is increasing
in conflict situations, in particular with regard to
women, children, people with disabilities, lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex persons, internally
displaced persons and refugees. We currently see how
terrorist groups are using trafficking in persons and
sexual violence as weapons of terror and as a means of
financing their activities. It is imperative to help and
protect victims and combat the financing of terrorism
through trafficking. In that regard, the United Nations,
in particular the General Assembly, plays a fundamental
role in supporting States in that endeavour.
At the multilateral level, Argentina maintains its
firm commitment to combating human trafficking, the
most extreme form of violence, through the adoption of
national policies aimed at eliminating that scourge in
our country. At the national level, combating trafficking
in persons is being addressed horizontally through
Argentina’s executive committee on combating the
trafficking and exploitation of persons and protecting
and assisting the victims, which coordinates the work
of various ministries through the federal council on
combating trafficking and exploiting persons and
protecting and assisting victims, which is aimed at
developing a federal strategy to combat trafficking
in persons.

17-3921657/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of
National Security have mainstreamed the promotion
of a gender perspective within the national security
and armed forces. They conduct training activities and
prevention exercises in the area of gender violence and
trafficking in people, including for the early detection
of human trafficking situations at border crossings.
The Argentinian Joint Peacekeeping Operations
Training Centre trains all national units deployed in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, guided by the
principle that conflicts can only be effectively addressed
when respect for international humanitarian law and
international human rights, including those of women
and children in conflict, is ensured. In particular, the
Centre’s annual International Women and Peace and
Security seminar includes a specific module on human
trafficking so as to provide tools to prevent, detect and
combat it in conflict situations.
Argentina reiterates its renewed commitment to
combatting human trafficking in all contexts, including
in the context of conflict situations, and reiterates
the need to continue discussing this issue within the
General Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
would like to thank the delegation of Italy for its
leadership in ensuring that the issue of trafficking in
persons in situations of conflict remains a focus of the
Security Council.
Canada is committed to collaborating with the
United Nations and all countries to prevent this crime,
bring those who commit it to justice and to help
survivors go on to lead healthy and productive lives.
(spoke in English)
Let me say at the outset that we were pleased to
co-sponsor resolution 2388 (2017), passed earlier today
under your leadership, Mr. President. The prevention
of all forms of violence against all people, especially
women and girls, is a particular priority for Canada.
We have been working to keep this issue at the top of
the global agenda, and to implement resolution 2331
(2016). Canada’s new Feminist International Assistance
Policy seeks to reduce poverty, inequality, violence and
conflict, all of which increase vulnerability — especially
for women, children and youth — to human trafficking,
and lead migrants towards smuggling.
58/76

21/11/2017

Canada is committed to ensuring that Da’esh
is held to account for its violations of international
humanitarian law, as demonstrated by our three-year
regional strategy to counter Da’esh and respond to
the Iraq and Syria crises. Our humanitarian and
stabilization assistance in Iraq also includes concrete
support to Yezidis and other vulnerable victims of
sexual and gender-based violence and trafficking.
By employing the tools developed to combat
financial crime, we can deprive human traffickers of
funding and access to the international financial system,
making it more difficult for them to accomplish their
destructive goals. For example, the Canadian Project
Protect, established in 2016, is a reporting entity-led
initiative, inspired by the story of a survivor of human
trafficking and victims advocate. The resulting unique
public-private endeavour includes Canada’s financial
intelligence unit, law enforcement and financial
institutions committed to making the tracking of money
laundering associated with this activity a priority of
their compliance regimes.
In addition, sexual and gender-based violence is
a serious barrier to the full and prompt recovery of
communities after armed conflict. Canada commends
the comprehensive approach taken by the former
Special Representative of the Secretary General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We must work to ensure that United Nations and
Member States’ policies and actions in tackling the
scourge of human trafficking are fully integrated
in the context of conflicts, humanitarian crises and
post-conflict situations. In that regard, we note
the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers, which were launched at the recent 2017 United
Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial and swiftly
endorsed by Canada and over 50 other Member States.
(spoke in French)
We invite other Member States to join us and
look forward to working with all to implement the
Vancouver Principles as a means of addressing the
terrible problem of child soldiers. Canada welcomes
the ongoing attention of the Council to this issue and
is supportive of keeping this issue at the top of the
international agenda.
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
thanks the Italian presidency for convening this open
ministerial debate. We appreciate the insights shared by
the Secretary-General and the other briefers.
Bangladesh welcomes the adoption of resolution
2388 (2017) this morning, and aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
We shared our priorities and recommendations
in that regard during the Council’s open debates in
December 2016 (see S/PV.7585) and March 2017 (see
S/PV.7898). The importance of enhancing United
Nations inter-agency coordination and strengthening
data collection and analysis cannot be over-emphasized.
Despite our collective commitments and efforts,
trafficking in persons continues to thrive, with horrific
consequences. It is evident that some international
terrorist groups are resorting to trafficking in persons
to bolster their power, recruitment base and finances.
Refugees and other conflict-related displaced persons
remain at the highest risk of trafficking and exploitation.
As the Council is well aware, since 25 August
Bangladesh has witnessed an unprecedented influx of
620,000 people, mostly Rohingya, from Myanmar’s
Rakhine state, in the wake of the widespread atrocity
crimes committed against them. We remain deeply
concerned over the possibility that many women and
children among them falling will fall prey to traffickers
and smugglers operating regionally. With the sea routes
becoming safer during the current season for operating
makeshift boats, it is most likely that these elements
would try to take advantage of the forcibly displaced
people from Rakhine state still entering Bangladesh
almost on a daily basis. Those who claim that the
situation on the ground in Rakhine state has stabilized
are either deliberately ignoring the evident reality or
have a vested agenda.
Our law-enforcement and border-management
authorities have mobilized enhanced resources in order
to remain vigilant against traffickers and other organized
criminal networks. It is, however, a possibility that
they might find themselves overstretched in the face of
changing tactics and potential incentives deployed by
traffickers, violent extremist groups and other organized

S/PV. 8111

criminal networks. It is crucial that the relevant
authorities receive meaningful cooperation through
information sharing, prevention and interception from
their relevant counterparts in countries of the region,
including Myanmar.
The case of the Rohingya rescued at sea off the
shores of other countries of the region during the 2015
Andaman Sea crisis is perhaps an indication of how the
victims are likely to be treated under such circumstances.
In the wake of the discovery of mass graves, harrowing
reports of torture, killing and exploitation of victims,
and loss of hundreds of lives on rickety boats adrift at
sea, our delegation urged the need for addressing the
root causes of the crisis in Myanmar’s Rakhine state.
Regrettably, the situation continued to deteriorate
further with the Rohingya being increasingly pushed to
the brink, owing to systematic human rights violations
leading to the commission of atrocity crimes against
them. That has only created a fertile ground for
traffickers and other organized criminal networks to
operate with near impunity.
The Secretary-General is expected to brief the
Council next month on the situation in Rahkhine
state, where we would urge him to make practical
recommendations for addressing the renewed threats of
trafficking in persons. It needs to be borne in mind that
every individual languishing in camps on a protracted
basis or left in the lurch in the name of national
verification by Myanmar would run the risk of falling
victim to traffickers and other criminal operatives.
The situation in Myanmar needs to be taken up by the
Council as the test case for attesting to the efficacy
of the resolution adopted today, and for addressing
trafficking in persons during conflicts as part of its
efforts to sustain peace.
In conclusion, we agree with the briefers that
trafficking in persons in conflict situations perhaps
constitutes the greatest human rights issue of our time.
We reaffirm our commitment to join hands with fellow
Member States in further strengthening the coordinated
response and action of the United Nations against
trafficking in persons, slavery and forced labour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation would like to thank Italy and you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s constructive

17-3921659/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

debate. We wish you every success at the helm of the
Security Council this month.
We associate ourselves with other Member States
that have reiterated the importance of Security Council
resolutions for dealing with human trafficking,
which undermines the rule of law, thereby fostering
continuing transnational organized crime that in turn
leads to further instability. This very serious issue
demands that we work to combat various different types
of crime. For that reason, Iraq has ratified a number
of related international and regional conventions,
including the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its supplementary
Protocols, which we ratified in 2009. In that regard,
in 2012 we enacted law No. 28 on anti-trafficking,
establishing the necessary mechanisms for delivering
the required assistance to victims of human trafficking
and for combating the crime and its consequences
generally, as well as for ensuring that perpetrators be
held accountable for such crimes, which undermine
human dignity.
We also have a number of constitutional sections
that criminalize forced labour and slavery as well as
trafficking in women and children. In the past three
years, serious crimes have been committed against
Yezidi women, and others, at the hands of the terrorists
of Da’esh. As a result, under our aforementioned law No.
28 of 2012, my Government set up a commission within
the Ministry of the Interior. The commission brings
together representatives from the various provinces and
governorates with the aim of formulating programmes
and plans for countering trafficking in persons and
ensuring that victims and witnesses are protected.
It also enables us to exchange information and share
experiences with various relevant bodies, neighbouring
States and international organizations. We have also
launched a number of awareness-raising campaigns to
spread a culture of fighting human trafficking, working
with civil-society organizations and academic and
religious groups.
Human trafficking and similar crimes perpetrated
by terrorists, including slavery, sexual exploitation,
terrorism and forced labour, enable them to finance
themselves. Iraq has suffered from such crimes, such
as the abduction by members of Da’esh of thousands
of Iraqi citizens, especially women and children and in
particular people from the Yezidi community, who have
become victims of trafficking and endured inhumane
and degrading treatment. In that regard, we urge these
60/76

21/11/2017

victims’ countries of destination not to treat them as
criminals or as illegal migrants. Rather than being
arrested or forcibly repatriated, they should be given
help. For our part, we are providing material reparations
for victims of human trafficking, including victims of
Da’esh, with a particular focus on women and girls.
In that regard, our judicial authorities are striving
to build the capacities of the relevant institutions in
order to prosecute the perpetrators of these crimes,
establish criminal justice and protect citizens against
such crimes.
Enforcing anti-trafficking laws is crucial, and
while we now have law no. 28 of 2012 and a number
of mechanisms for implementing it, what that really
requires is that we train our law-enforcement bodies in
tackling such transnational organized crime, bearing
in mind that such crimes may fall under several
jurisdictions at once. We must therefore emphasize the
importance of judicial cooperation in putting an end
to such crimes. In order to show our determination
to combat human trafficking, we have been working
to stop traffickers and terrorist groups abducting
people and forcing them to cross Iraq’s borders. In that
regard, we contributed to the drafting of the political
declaration on the implementation of the Global Action
Plan to Combat Trafficking in Persons, just adopted by
the General Assembly in September as resolution 72/1.
The responsibility for this issue is a collective
one, shared by every State. Iraq therefore calls on all
Member States to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2195 (2014),
2331 (2016) and 2379 (2017). We also call on Member
States to support us in dealing with these challenges.
My delegation appreciates Italy’s efforts during the
drafting of resolution 2388 (2017), which the Council
adopted unanimously today, and of which we were a
sponsor. The resolution enables us to better identify
the real and potential victims of human trafficking,
particularly unaccompanied minors, and to ensure
a coordinated response, and it will help the various
United Nations missions on the ground fight networks
involved in human trafficking. Furthermore, we now
have a great deal of experience in fighting human
trafficking, and an investigative team is being
established in that regard, in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 2379 (2017).
Lastly, Iraq calls on all States to abide by their
commitments and scale up their efforts to combat
human trafficking so that we can eradicate it. We need
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Council’s help in tackling these problems, and we
need to be able to work cooperatively with various
States on the political, economic and security fronts.
The fact is that human trafficking is a global issue, and
no State can confront it alone.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the International Organization for Migration.
Mr. Nour: I am pleased to be taking the floor on
behalf of the International Organization for Migration
(IOM). I would first like to thank Italy and the Security
Council for convening today’s important open debate.
The IOM welcomes the increased attention that
the international community is according to human
trafficking, and particularly the recent focus on the
phenomenon of human trafficking in conflict situations.
The IOM believes that the crime of human trafficking
has been largely overlooked in emergency situations,
despite growing evidence of the connections between
human trafficking and armed conflict.
We are mindful that this open debate is happening
at a time of unprecedented global human mobility,
record high numbers of displaced populations and
multiple simultaneous, complex and protracted crises
in different parts of the world that are putting more and
more vulnerable people at risk of human trafficking.
We are concerned about the fact that the rights of many
migrants continue to be violated during potentially
fatal journeys. We have seen and learned from firsthand experience that situations of armed conflict,
natural disasters and protracted humanitarian crises
can create conditions conducive to human trafficking.
With that in mind, I would like to highlight three areas
where, from the IOM’s perspective, a more concerted
effort and coordinated action are required.
First, while legal frameworks for victims of
trafficking have been strengthened in recent years,
less progress has been made in preventing human
trafficking from occurring in the first place. The
demand for cheap goods and sexual services is what
drives human trafficking. Recent studies by the IOM
and the International Labour Organization have shown
that the impact of armed conflict on trafficking, child
recruitment and forced labour is on the rise. Efforts
should therefore be made to reduce the demands for
goods and services that are met by trafficked persons
and exploited migrants. That requires concrete
measures that will encourage, help or oblige companies

S/PV. 8111

to establish decent working conditions for all employees
in their supply chains.
Secondly, despite the progress that has been
made in protecting people identified as victims of
human trafficking, the numbers of those who benefit
from protection schemes remain small. In order to
address this problem, we must increase the ability of
Governments and civil society to identify and assist
migrants in vulnerable situations, including victims
of trafficking, by targeting high-risk locations such as
border crossing points, as well as sectors in industries
where the risk of trafficking is high and where effective
responses are urgently required.
Thirdly, our experience from working in many
parts of the world has shown us that responding to
human trafficking requires appropriate and timely
data. We therefore emphasize the importance of
increasing efforts to provide good data, improve the
analysis of the information available and share that
information as widely as possible. We should find
ways to overcome obstacles to sharing trafficking
data, within a framework of strict confidentiality and
data privacy protection. That can be achieved through
multi-stakeholder open-data publishing platforms, such
as the IOM’s Counter-Trafficking Data Collaborative.
Finally, the IOM welcomed the statement that the
Secretary-General made on Monday about Libya. In a
press release today, the Director General of the IOM
called for a number of possible concrete actions to be
considered. The smugglers’ business model is at the
core of this human episode, and the IOM is working
with local authorities to disrupt smuggling networks
and provide assistance to victims. The IOM has been
voluntarily providing assistance with returns since
2015 to some 13,000 migrants who have left Libya to
return to more than 30 countries around the world.
In conclusion, the IOM strongly supports the
Council’s efforts to eliminate human trafficking in
conflict situations, and we call on the Council to take
into account the humanitarian aspects of crisis-induced
human trafficking.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I would like to join
other colleagues in thanking the Italian presidency
for convening this important debate. I also thank

17-3921661/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
contributions earlier today.
My country, Georgia, aligns itself with the
statement delivered previously by the observer of the
European Union, and I would like to add the following
remarks in my national capacity.
Trafficking, one of the most terrible violations of
human rights, is being used by criminals and terrorist
groups not only as a source of revenue but also as a
weapon of terror. The ever-growing numbers of refugees
and migrants, if left unaided, will only play into the
hands of criminals and enhance their recruitment base.
The Secretary-General’s report also states that
“the activities of terrorist groups... and other armed
groups engaging in human trafficking continue to
raise grave concerns” and that “more needs to be
done to address human trafficking in areas affected
by conflict” (S/2017/939, paras. 4 and 3).
In addressing human trafficking, therefore, we should
also address the root causes of migration, including the
issue of internal displacement. We must confront this
challenge at all levels, especially in conflict or postconflict settings. Just yesterday, we were all appalled
to see the disturbing footage of slave markets in Libya.
Crime thrives where the rule of law is weak. The
international community needs to do much more, and
urgently, to help the Government of Libya in asserting
its governing rights and laying the groundwork for
the country’s sustainable development, which can
stop modern-day slavery from recurring. Human
trafficking respects no borders. We must strengthen
cooperation on law enforcement, investigations and
intelligence-sharing.
Combating human trafficking has been a key
priority for Georgia for more than a decade. We have
seen increasingly positive assessments of our countertrafficking efforts in global reports. According to
the 2016 Global Slavery Index, Georgia is one of the
countries taking the most effective action to end human
trafficking. For instance, the second evaluation report
of the Council of Europe’s Group of Experts on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings ranked Georgia
top among countries in Eastern Europe taking most
action in terms of gross domestic product, and second
worldwide. It also ranked Georgia as the seventeenth
of 167 States taking the most effective action to end
human trafficking generally.
62/76

21/11/2017

To review the key factors and lessons on what has
worked in my country, we have shown a sustainable
political commitment and established a constantly
evolving legislative framework that explicitly
criminalizes trafficking. We have taken a multisectoral
and multi-stakeholder approach that in our case involves
an inter-agency coordination council, our various lawenforcement agencies, a State fund for protecting and
assisting victims, and civil society organizations. We
have focused on proactive investigations by mobile
inspection groups and special anti-trafficking units
and, lastly, we have worked to raise awareness of
trafficking, which is an essential preventive measure.
Georgia, as a signatory State to the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, reiterates its
commitment to sparing no effort to prevent trafficking,
punish perpetrators and protect their victims. However,
the illegal occupation of the Georgian regions of
Tskhinvali/South Ossetia and Abkhazia is still the main
obstacle to my Government’s full implementation of its
counter-trafficking measures. There are no mechanisms
to effectively identify, investigate or prosecute alleged
cases of trafficking in persons in occupied regions
while the occupying Power continues to place undue
restrictions on the local population, particularly ethnic
Georgians. Systematic human rights violations there
have included, among other things, the violation of
the right to life and security, torture and ill-treatment,
kidnapping and arbitrary detention.
In closing, I want reiterate our pledge to expand
international cooperation on effective cross-border
control measures and prevent and combat conflictrelated human trafficking. We also call for the
international community to pay more attention to the
issue of granting international human rights monitoring
mechanisms unhindered access to the occupied regions
of Georgia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): I would first like to
thank the Italian presidency for organizing today’s
open debate.
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union on behalf
of its member countries.
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Trafficking in persons is a grave human rights
violation and a highly lucrative form of transnational
organized crime, with huge human, social and
economic implications, and it requires a concerted
global response. The problem is further exacerbated by
conflicts and the resulting large movements of refugees
and migrants, who often become easy targets for
various forms of exploitation. Bulgaria emphasizes the
importance of accelerating international cooperation to
eliminate human trafficking through a comprehensive,
multidisciplinary and cross-border approach. Better
cooperation should be established among countries of
origin, transit and destination on information-sharing
and on victim identification, support and reintegration.
Bulgaria reaffirms its commitment to the
implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Protocols to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and
against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and
Air, which, along with resolution 2331 (2016), constitute
a solid foundation of international law in this area. We
would like to highlight the importance of resolution
2388 (2017), on the trafficking of persons in conflict
situations, adopted today by the Council. We welcome
the special emphasis that the new resolution puts
on the protection of children and its strong language
on children’s rights, which is a key priority for the
Government of Bulgaria. Bulgaria was a pioneer among
European countries in enacting specific anti-trafficking
legislation as long ago as 2003, and our legal and
institutional framework for combating trafficking in
persons is one of the most comprehensive in existence.
Bulgaria has criminalized trafficking in persons
and introduced more severe punishment for crimes
involving children. Our legislation includes provisions
to ensure that victims of trafficking are not penalized
for being forcibly involved in unlawful activities. We
have also established a national referral mechanism
for supporting trafficked persons, with the aim of
strengthening respect for the human rights of victims
of trafficking by providing them with unconditional
support and protection, based on the principle of
non-discrimination.
Bulgaria’s national anti-trafficking strategy for
the period from 2017 to 2021 follows a victim-centred,
human rights-based, gender-specific and child-focused
approach. Our national commission for combating
trafficking in human beings, which coordinates State

S/PV. 8111

policy in this priority area, provides assistance to
victims of trafficking in Government-funded shelters
across the country. We established a specialized shelter
for children earlier this year in order to improve the
protection of child victims of trafficking by providing
them with specially designed integrated services
that include psychological, social, medical and legal
support, assistance and social reintegration.
In the past few years, Bulgaria has increased its
capacity to ensure the rights of victims of trafficking,
with a special focus on children, and its participation
in international efforts to fight this crime. Special
measures are being taken to raise public awareness,
particularly among children, in partnership with local
authorities, civil society and youth volunteers.
Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): The Nigerian
delegation would like to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate and for the concept note
provided to guide our discussion (S/2017/972, annex).
We also thank the Secretary-General, the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons for sharing their perspectives on
this important subject.
Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Conflict situations expose civilians, especially
women and girls, to grave dangers such as human
trafficking, sexual violence and slavery. Terrorist
groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Boko Haram have introduced a new dimension
into the issues of trafficking in persons and the sexual
exploitation of women and girls. Their outrageous
acts of depravity have shocked the world and drawn
unprecedented attention to the plight of women and
girls in conflict situations.
The war crimes and crimes against humanity that
they commit must not go unpunished. We are pleased
to be able to say that Boko Haram has been militarily
defeated. However, while we have had some success in
liberating a good number of the women and girls they
have held hostage, we will not relent until all of their
hostages are freed and reunited with their loved ones.
We would like to acknowledge the important role that
our neighbours Cameroon, Chad and the Niger are
playing in the fight against Boko Haram.

17-3921663/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

My delegation recognizes the importance of
ensuring that persons who have been trafficked are
shown empathy, treated as victims of crime and, in
line with domestic legislation, are not penalized or
stigmatized for their involvement in any unlawful
activities that they have been compelled to engage in.
Similarly, it is imperative to break the cycle of impunity
that may exist and to hold accountable those responsible
for committing such crimes. Nigeria is outraged by
the operation of slave markets in Libya where people
are sold like merchandise, a despicable act that must
be condemned. We take note of the assurances of the
Libyan Government that these cases will be investigated.
The Libyan situation demonstrates the complexity of
trafficking networks and the dehumanizing treatment
that they subject their victims to. We would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate that at no point in migrants’
movements — whether in countries of origin, transit or
destination — should they be enslaved or dehumanized.
The entities of the United Nations system must
work in concert to fight human trafficking in conflict
situations and in the context of terrorism, while
delivering their respective mandates. We believe that
this could be facilitated by improving the coordination
between and among the relevant agencies. As different
agencies have different capacities in terms of expertise,
a coordinated approach would enhance the overall
effectiveness of the United Nations in the fight against
human trafficking and terrorism.
With regard to how Member States can improve
their implementation of legal obligations to combat
human trafficking, we see a need for greater
commitment to implementing the relevant international
instruments. The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children is a case in point. It not only provides the first
internationally agreed-on definition of trafficking in
persons but also establishes a framework of obligations
and standards for Member States to formulate national
responses to fight human trafficking. Applying such
international instruments and the relevant domestic laws
is crucial to ensuring that those who engage in human
trafficking in conflict situations are held accountable.
In terms of national contributions to the global
efforts against the scourge of trafficking in general,
Nigeria strengthened the effectiveness of its domestic
laws under its 2015 trafficking in persons act by
expanding the scope of crimes that fall under human
trafficking. In that regard, crimes such as exporting
64/76

21/11/2017

people for prostitution, procuring people for sexual
exploitation, recruiting people under 18 years of age
for prostitution, sexual exploitation or pornography,
and operating brothels or foreign travel that promote
prostitution and sexual exploitation are treated as
heinous crimes punishable under our laws.
Nigeria’s establishment in 2003 of a national agency
for the prohibition of trafficking in persons — creating
a permanent mechanism for rescuing, assisting,
supporting and catering to victims of human
trafficking, as well as for arresting, prosecuting and
jailing perpetrators of such trafficking — has helped
to refocus our fight against trafficking. Thanks to the
agency’s establishment, the issue of human trafficking
has been effectively mainstreamed into broader
Government policies and programmes on economic and
social development, human rights, the rule of law, good
governance, education, natural-disaster management
and post-conflict reconstruction. The agency has also
strengthened partnerships among the Government, civil
society, faith-based organizations and religious bodies
and the media, as well as various rights groups. The
essence of those partnerships is to facilitate synergy
among the various stakeholders with a view to coming
up with policies and measures that can permanently
eradicate this menace.
With regard to the issue of mitigating victims’
suffering, the establishment of the United Nations
voluntary trust fund for victims of trafficking in
persons, especially women and children, is a welcome
development, since it should help to provide a reliable
way of restoring livelihoods and ensuring victims’
reintegration and rehabilitation into society. We urge for
more funding and donations in order to ensure that the
objectives behind the creation of the voluntary trust fund
are fully realized and of genuine benefit to victims. We
would also like to underscore our appreciation for the
efforts of UNODC and the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons in their sustained
operations to end trafficking in persons.
In the final analysis, we must aim to enhance
coherence and build alliances to confront these issues
head-on. Legal pathways to migration are an essential
component in dealing with this problem. Equally critical
is the need for greater responsibility-sharing to provide
protection to those in need. To achieve that objective,
we must implement the strategy laid out in the Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. With
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

solid partnerships and a clear approach, we can ensure
that criminals are brought to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Sisa (Botswana): First of all, I would like to
congratulate Italy on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of November and
on convening an open debate on trafficking in persons
in conflict situations. My delegation welcomes the
debate on this topic, which is increasingly receiving
global attention due to the sharp rise in the numbers of
victims of human trafficking and kidnapping for ransom
committed by terrorist groups in conflict situations.
Reported cases of human trafficking have been
on the increase in areas affected by conflicts, such
as the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, countries of the Lake Chad
basin, Iraq, Libya, Myanmar, north-eastern Nigeria,
the Philippines, Somalia, the Sudan, Syria, Colombia
and Yemen. It is worth emphasizing that no country is
immune to human trafficking.
My delegation applauds the Security Council for
adopting resolution 2331 (2016), which condemned
trafficking of persons as a violation of the victims’
human rights.
Trafficking in persons is a serious crime that
threatens human security and dignity and is often
associated with severe atrocities, such as organ
harvesting, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Trafficking in persons often affects women, children,
refugees, migrants and internally displaced persons.
Accordingly, Botswana reaffirms its commitment to the
political declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons (General Assembly resolution 72/1), which the
General Assembly adopted on 27 September.
Botswana deplores trafficking in persons, which is
exploited by terrorist groups and trafficking networks
for the purposes of financing terrorist activities and
transnational organized crime. This type of crime
fosters instability, forced labour, prostitution, slavery,
sexual violence, exploitation and abuse, thereby
undermining human rights, the rule of law and
sustainable development. Similarly, my country also
condemns the recruitment and use of child soldiers in
armed conflict.

S/PV. 8111

It is pleasing to note that there are 189 States parties
to the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and 172 States parties to the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, which are the key
international instruments that guide global efforts to
counter trafficking in persons. In addition to being
a party to the Organized Crime Convention and the
Trafficking in Persons Protocol, Botswana passed the
Anti-Human Trafficking Act of 2014 and established
the Human Trafficking Prohibition Committee to
prohibit, prevent and combat human trafficking as well
as to protect and assist victims of trafficking in persons
and other matters incidental thereto.
Botswana has also developed an anti-human
trafficking national action plan for the years 2017 to
2020, whose full implementation is estimated to cost
$11,118,500. In this regard, we deeply appreciate the
continued support that we receive from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other United
Nations agencies to train prosecutors and lawenforcement and judicial officers on such emerging
crimes as human trafficking, terrorism and moneylaundering. Through such assistance, Botswana has
conducted public-education campaigns and capacitybuilding and training workshops for different actors
to raise awareness of the phenomenon of trafficking
in persons. To create public awareness of this heinous
crime, since 2015 Botswana has been commemorating
the World Day against Trafficking in Persons on 30 July.
At the regional level, the Southern African
Development Community has adopted a ten-year
strategic plan of action on combating trafficking
in persons, especially women and children, which
runs from 2009 to 2019, in order to ensure a
comprehensive and coordinated response to human
trafficking through research, information-sharing and
exchange of experiences, expertise, best practices and
capacity-building.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Botswana’s commitment
to the Transnational Organized Crime Convention and
the Trafficking in Persons Protocol. Botswana calls for
strengthened international cooperation, partnerships
and technical assistance so as to prevent and combat
trafficking in persons and to protect and assist victims
of human trafficking.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.

17-3921665/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank Italy,
President of the Security Council this month, for
holding today’s debate on trafficking in persons in
conflict situations. I also wish to extend my appreciation
to the Secretary-General for the updates provided on
this topic.
Trafficking in persons is the modern form of
slavery. It should be outlawed everywhere in the world.
The Maldives Parliament criminalized trafficking
in persons in 2013, and the Government of Maldives
continues to take strong measures against this shameful
crime. Trafficking in persons in conflict situations is
one of the most dreadful crimes. Conflict situations
place individuals in the most vulnerable position, and
yet the reality is that conflict zones have become the
breeding grounds for criminal activities. Millions of
people are falling prey to human traffickers as they
desperately try to escape violence.
The Maldives takes note of the increasing
importance of the role of the Security Council in
confronting human trafficking in conflict situations.
Resolution 2331 (2016) condemns all acts of human
trafficking in areas affected by armed conflicts, and
the two open debates held in the last year on this subject
(see S/PV.7847 and S/PV.7898) highlight the urgency of
addressing the issue.
The Maldives believes that the best strategy to
bring an end to the heinous crime of human trafficking
is to cultivate a culture of respect for human dignity,
the fundamental values of human rights and the
responsibility to respect and uphold those rights, in
particular the rights of women, children and those that
are in vulnerable situations. It is therefore absolutely
necessary for the United Nations and other actors
to work with national Governments to strengthen
the capacities of relevant institutions to implement
national and international laws and norms and to bring
perpetrators of such criminal activities to justice. Only
then would we be able to cultivate a culture in which
no individual would tolerate the subjugation of a fellow
human being.
The Maldives hosts a large number of migrant
workers in its workforce. The Government recognizes
the potential vulnerabilities of individual members
of the expatriate community to the predatory designs
of transnational human trafficking syndicates and
the importance of protecting their rights. The very
first legislation that President Abdulla Yameen
66/76

21/11/2017

Abdul Gayoom signed into law was the Anti-Human
Trafficking Act, in December 2013. To strengthen the
implementation of that Act, the Government adopted
a five-year national action plan to combat human
trafficking nationwide.
At the international level, the Maldives joined
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime in February 2013. And in 2016, the
Maldives acceded to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children.
But we recognize that the implementation of
international treaties requires more than the plans;
it requires the highest level of political will and a
range of measures. Above all, it requires stronger
global cooperation and coordination and the sharing
of information and best practices. The Maldives will
always remain an active partner in crafting shared
solutions for a world free of human trafficking, a
world free of every kind of slavery, and a world where
every nation and every society has a say in shaping our
shared destiny.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): I join previous speakers
in expressing our appreciation to Italy for convening
today’s timely meeting. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and other speakers for their respective briefings
and steadfast commitment to addressing the issue of
human trafficking.
Malaysia welcomes the adoption today of follow-up
resolution 2388 (2017), which will strengthen resolution
2331 (2016) in addressing heinous crimes of trafficking
in persons trapped in conflict situations.
Trafficking in persons is absolutely unacceptable
in any context. Human traffickers strip people of
their dignity and negate the respect inherent in all
humankind. My delegation wishes to briefly highlight
three aspects that we believe will make a real difference
in tackling this scourge.
First, it is imperative to strengthen cooperation and
coordination among Member States, as well as regional
and international organizations. Therefore, we call upon
Member States that have yet to ratify and implement
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its additional Protocols, which
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

provide the principal foundation for our concerted
actions, to do so as soon as possible.
Given the multifaceted dimensions of trafficking
in persons, which is associated with sexual violence
and funding terrorist activities, it is crucial that the
international community mobilizes complementary
legal means to investigate, disrupt and dismantle
trafficking networks. We fully support the efforts of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other
bodies, as well as bilateral partners, to provide technical
support to Member States to build and enhance their
law enforcement capacities.
As a country of destination and transit, we
have learned that cooperation and coordination
with neighbouring countries and the international
community are essential in our common efforts to
combat this ugly scourge. In that regard, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has taken a
unified commitment to combat and prevent trafficking
in persons through the implementation of the ASEAN
Convention Against Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, and its related plan of actions,
adopted in November 2015. We also appreciate the
strong support for such regional-level efforts by our
East Asia Summit partners, as reflected in the Summit
declarations adopted recently in September 2017.
Secondly, the Council must better utilize its
available tools to monitor trends in human trafficking
in armed conflict areas, identify perpetrators and hold
them accountable. Information on and evidence of
acts of trafficking in persons and sexual violence in
conflicts should be made available to the Council and
channelled to the relevant sanctions committees.We
support integrating into the work of the 1267 Monitoring
Team and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate a focus on addressing trafficking in persons
and the use of sexual violence in armed conflict where
there are clear linkages to terrorist activities.
At the same time, the crucial outreach and
advocacy roles of both the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict must be better leveraged.
We call for the Council’s continued engagement with
those envoys, including through the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict and the various
sanctions committees.

S/PV. 8111

Finally, I would like to emphasize the need for
support for victims and survivors of trafficking and
sexual violence to help them return to a secure and
stable life. Women and children subjected to any
violations and abuses, including trafficking and sexual
violence at the hands of Da’esh, Boko Haram and similar
groups, should be considered victims and given access
to funding and assistance. In that respect, the roles
of the local communities, civil society and religious
leaders are pivotal in ensuring the reintegration and
rehabilitation of survivors and in eliminating the
stigma that can be associated with the ordeal that they
have been through.
I wish to conclude by reaffirming Malaysia’s
enduring resolve to combat and eradicate trafficking
in persons, and our equally strong commitments to
continuing to work with the international community
until we bring an end to those crimes against humanity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belize.
Ms. Young (Belize): Belize welcomes this
opportunity afforded by the presidency of Italy to
reaffirm our full commitment to combating trafficking
in persons and to most emphatically condemn trafficking
in persons in areas affected by armed conflict.
Notwithstanding the adoption of resolution 2331
(2016), reports on the plight of migrants — especially
the latest news of human slavery emanating from
Libya — reveal that much more needs to be done at the
highest level to address the scourge of human trafficking.
Belize concurs with the Secretary-General’s
observation that at its core, our response must be based
on a common understanding of trafficking in persons
and the widely accepted legal framework for cooperation
found in the Protocol on Trafficking in Persons and
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. In addition, there are a number of
other human rights treaties, as well as the Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, global
instruments focused on women and children in armed
conflict, and the broader sustainable development
agenda that together can reinforce international efforts
to treat more comprehensively and in a coordinated
manner the factors that expose the most vulnerable to
trafficking and exploitation. Importantly, it is essential
to fully integrate those instruments into national
legislation, raise public awareness and provide targeted
approaches, especially for law enforcement.

17-3921667/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

In 2003, Belize enacted the Prohibition of
Trafficking in Persons Act and amended it in 2013
to make it far stronger. Also, in 2013, we enacted
the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children
Prohibition Act. Belize has also benefitted from
regional and international support and partnerships
with civil society to provide ongoing training to build
our preventive, protection and prosecutorial capacity to
address trafficking in persons.
We endeavour to further enhance our capacity to
combat trafficking through improving our victims’
assistance programmes; advancing training for
investigators; establishing specialized investigative
units, dedicated prosecutors and judges; and
implementing a fast-track system for human trafficking
cases. We provide for basic needs, counselling and
medical services. However, we still lack financial
and human resources to address long-term assistance
to facilitate re-integration into the work force and to
transition to self-housing from the protective system.
In our experience, we have found that language and low
levels of literacy are major barriers to victims being
retrained and accessing gainful employment.
Belize acknowledges the importance of the
analysis of financial flows and transactions relating
to trafficking in persons and the Secretary-General’s
call to States to increase their efforts to collect, analyse
and share such financial data. That is an area in which
further cooperation will be required to build capacity
as needed.
Right-thinking people in Belize, who form the
majority, and the Government of Belize are dedicated
to eliminating this scourge. This scourge is not limited
to any specific ethnicity or country. Every country
must therefore do its part to stem the trafficking of
human beings. It is a matter of utmost urgency and a
moral necessity.
Today’s open debate, against the backdrop of
the recent graphic pictures of human slavery, is an
opportunity to galvanize international action to
specifically address the plight of persons in armed
conflict in the context of the wider global efforts to
combat trafficking in persons. Belize co-sponsored
today’s resolution 2388 (2017) and is committed to
doing its part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
68/76

21/11/2017

Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I would like to thank
the Italian presidency of the Council for convening this
open debate and to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the adoption of today’s resolution 2388 (2017), which
my country co-sponsored and which builds upon the
momentum created by resolution 2331 (2016).
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons and the African Union’s Commissioner
for Peace and Security for their comprehensive
presentations this morning.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement already
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Trafficking in human beings is one of the most
serious violations of human rights and constitutes an
offence to the dignity and integrity of the human being.
Every year, millions of men, women and children are
victims of human trafficking for exploitation, including
slavery, forced labour, the removal of organs and
prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation.
It is a complex reality, transnational in most cases.
Trafficking in human beings is often exacerbated
in situations of conflict and in humanitarian crises
and is aggravated by poverty, gender inequality,
unemployment, weak rule of law and poor governance.
In recent years, and very acutely also some days ago,
there have been disturbing reports about realities like
slave markets that we would prefer to situate in the
darkest corners of human history. We also note with
concern that trafficking in persons, particularly women
and girls, in situations of conflict has become an
increasing trend and is often used as a war tactic.
In our world today, individuals are turned into
commodities and their inherent human dignity is wiped
out. Any intervention deemed effective must be based
on common and coordinated efforts in the fields of
prevention, awareness-raising, support and repression
at the international, regional and national levels. It is a
critical global issue that demands effective collective
action. and those responsible must be submitted
to justice.
Portugal urges all delegations that have not yet
done so to accede to and ratify the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime. The
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Protocol provides a broad basis for action against traffickers,
as well as protection and assistance to victims.
Portugal developed its first national plan against
trafficking in human beings in 2007, with the
involvement of the public sector and civil society. The
third national plan against trafficking is currently
being implemented and entails policy measures focused
on prevention, awareness and research, education and
training, criminal investigation and cooperation.
Trafficking in human beings is one of the most
abominable crimes against human dignity. Preventing
and punishing trafficking in human beings is crucial
to achieving a future of dignity and freedom for all our
countries and all our peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the fraternal
country of Italy on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
important open debate.
We endorse the statement made by the representative
of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We wish to thank Mr. António Guterres, SecretaryGeneral; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children;
and Ambassador Smaїl Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, for their
presentations this morning.
In resolution 2331 (2016), the Security Council
unanimously condemns all instances of human
trafficking in areas affected by armed conflict, since
such trafficking is a human rights violation and a
criminal activity that helps the financing of and
recruitment for terrorist groups. In that connection,
we welcome the adoption of resolution 2388 (2017)
this morning.
The report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2017/939) highlights the frightening statistics with
regard to the proliferation in human trafficking. It also
notes the link between armed conflict and trafficking
in persons and describes conflicts throughout the world
and their serious repercussions. In that connection, we

S/PV. 8111

note that forced migration results from those conflicts,
which have compelled millions of people to leave their
countries in pursuit of a life of dignity elsewhere. We
are horrified by the thousands of victims who have lost
their lives as a result.
We reaffirm that, as the Secretary-General said,
there is no place for slavery in today’s world. It is one
of the most serious human rights violations and may
constitute a crime against humanity. In that regard,
we wish to recall the importance of dealing with the
migratory flows and to do so in a comprehensive
and humane way, and of strengthening development
cooperation so that we can understand the underlying
causes of that trafficking.
Recent reports establish the link between armed
conflict and trafficking in persons. They include
the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
trafficking in persons in armed conflict pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2331 (2016), the December
2016 Global Report on Trafficking in Persons from
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
the reports of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children (see
A/HRC/32/41 and A/71/303). They all highlight the fact
that human trafficking in areas affected by humanitarian
crises and by armed conflict takes different forms,
including exploitation, sexual abuse, slavery and similar
practices. Slavery is also used as a tactic of terror,
including by groups such as Da’esh, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab. Women and girls continue to be victims of
such trafficking, forced into marriage and offered as a
reward to terrorist fighters. Those are serious human
rights violations and a source of financing for terrorist
groups and transnational crime networks.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is
an essential tool in the fight against the proliferation
of the scourge of human trafficking and in tackling the
root causes that subject people to such trafficking. The
fight against human trafficking and the achievement
of sustainable development go hand in hand, and it
is very encouraging that 3 of the 169 targets of the
2030 Agenda focus on combating the various forms of
human trafficking.
The State of Kuwait believes that it is important
to analyse the root causes of the increased human
trafficking, in particular in cases of armed conflict. We
reaffirm our commitment to safeguarding human rights
and to continuing our efforts to combat trafficking in

17-3921669/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

persons. To that end, we adopted Law No. 91 of 2013 ,on
Trafficking in Persons and Smuggling of Migrants. We
have also acceded to various international agreements
on combating trafficking in persons.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Council therefore has the accompanying
responsibility to combat human trafficking in
situations of armed conflict. We must all strengthen
the international legal framework of the Council in that
regard. Clearly, we must focus not only on combating
human trafficking and the link with armed conflict but
also on strengthening international cooperation in order
to make full use of the existing mechanisms, including
by strengthening effective cooperation among the
various United Nations agencies.
In conclusion, I wish to pay particular tribute to the
role of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the International Labour Organization
and the International Organization for Migration and
to the tireless efforts of all United Nations specialized
agencies that have played a leading role in combating
all forms of human trafficking. Kuwait reiterates its
commitment to continuing its efforts and to supporting
international efforts to combat this crime by adopting
laws to deter it and by strengthening the international
framework in order to put an end once and for all to the
crime of trafficking in persons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Mikayilli (Azerbaijan): We thank the Italian
presidency for convening this open debate on trafficking in
persons in conflict situations. We are grateful to the SecretaryGeneral and to the other briefers for their statements.
As highlighted during the deliberations, trafficking
in persons is both a cause and a consequence of conflict
and instability. In that regard, we note with concern the
nexus between trafficking in persons, terrorism and
transnational organized crime. The recruitment and
use of children for combat, the growing link between
human trafficking and the financing of terrorism also
cause deep concern. The large influx of refugees and
migrants further exacerbates the situation and exposes
civilians, especially women and children, to a greater
risk of being subjected to human trafficking. We also
express our concern that civilian populations are often
viewed by armed groups as objects to be trafficked.
70/76

21/11/2017

Resolution 2388 (2017), adopted today, underscores
that certain acts or offences associated with trafficking
in persons in the context of armed conflict may constitute
war crimes. We fully agree with the provision in the
resolution that human trafficking, especially women
and girls, in the context of armed conflict, should not
be associated with any religion or civilization.
Azerbaijan strongly condemns all acts of trafficking in
persons, including in conflict situations. First and foremost,
every effort should be made to identify and to eliminate the
root causes and drivers that create a fertile ground for human
trafficking, to hold perpetrators accountable and to provide
the necessary legal, psychological, material and other
assistance to victims. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/939) clearly indicates that human trafficking
in conflict situations is facilitated by a weakness or
collapse of the rule of law. Therefore, strengthening
State authority and the rule of law is crucial to
effectively fighting, disrupting and dismantling the
networks involved in carrying out this evil.
Azerbaijan welcomes the increased attention to
combating trafficking in persons at the global level.
The specific reference to ending modern slavery and
human trafficking in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the New York Declaration for Refugees
and Migrants and the political declaration on the
implementation of the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons (General
Assembly resolution 72/1), as well as the three open
debates of the Security Council on this theme in the past
year, testify to the growing international recognition of
the threat that human trafficking represents. We believe
that the issue will also be adequately addressed in the
global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration.
In his report, the Secretary-General encourages
Member States to take a number of steps to combat
the scourge of human trafficking that range from
acceding to relevant international instruments to
strengthening international cooperation to enhancing
cross-governmental coordination. Azerbaijan ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children in 2003. In the intervening 14 years, we have
adopted three national action plans and inserted four
articles that define liability for human trafficking into
our criminal code. A special policy unit has been set
up through the Ministry of Internal Affairs. A national
coordinating mechanism was established to coordinate
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

activities of line ministries, civil-society organizations
and foreign partners involved in combating human
trafficking. The exchange of information on combating
human trafficking is being carried out through
90 bilateral and multilateral agreements. Memorandums
and protocols have been signed with 40 countries.
Azerbaijan also continues with its consistent efforts
to raise awareness of the plight of thousands of women
and children taken hostage around the globe through
its co-sponsoring of the biennial draft resolution of the
Commission on the Status of Women on the release
of women and children who have been taken hostage
in armed conflict, including those who have been
subsequently imprisoned.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my
Government’s unwavering determination to combat
trafficking in persons and other similar practices.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): On behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I
congratulate Italy on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and applaud its convening of today’s
open debate on human trafficking in conflict situations.
1 would like to thank the Secretary-General and all of
the other briefers that we have heard from today.
The crime of human trafficking extends to all
corners of the globe. No country is immune to its impact.
We hope that today’s debate will help all countries
better confront the role of conflict and instability in
exacerbating the problem of human trafficking.
Trafficking in persons is a source of concern,
especially in our region, the Middle East, where war
and displacement have torn apart communities and
destroyed social protections. In such fragile contexts,
Da’esh and other extremist and terrorist groups have
horrifically exploited innocent people by making
them combatants and forced labourers. These acts of
terror are fundamentally tied to extremist ideologies.
In exploiting the vulnerable, women and girls are
disproportionately affected. As a global champion
of gender equality and women’s empowerment, the
United Arab Emirates believes that this situation is a
cause for grave concern. Women are the cornerstones
of their families and communities. Therefore, crimes
committed against them have ramifications for all
of society.

S/PV. 8111

The United Arab Emirates takes human trafficking
very seriously, both at home and around the world. Since
2007, the United Arab Emirates has developed legal
frameworks, policies and social infrastructure to help
fight human trafficking. Through its comprehensive
strategy, our National Committee to Combat Human
Trafficking tracks rates of incidence and prosecution
so as to hold perpetrators accountable, works with
agencies to aid survivors of human trafficking with
counselling, shelter and residency or resettlement,
trains law enforcement entities on anti-trafficking,
and spreads public awareness of the crime throughout
the Emirates.
In order to truly eradicate the problem, we know
that while we must stop trafficking within our own
borders, we must also cooperate with countries where
trafficking originates. The United Arab Emirates
is working with national Governments to ensure
legitimate migration channels by promoting the rule
of law to protect citizens and by offering economic
opportunities to prevent the circumstances that open the
door for traffickers to exploit individuals. To that end,
the United Arab Emirates has created memorandums
of understanding with five countries — most recently
India — to help address the conditions in countries
of origin.
The United Arab Emirates calls for two actions to
combat human trafficking at the international level and
especially for dealing with the crisis in our region. The
first is integration. Combating human trafficking poses
challenges that are as numerous as they are complex. As
such, addressing human trafficking must be holistically
integrated into any responses to conflicts and crises
around the world, particularly in our region. Integrated
responses can be achieved by advancing cooperation
between the public and private sectors, which should be
facilitated by the United Nations.
Secondly, human trafficking is inherently linked
to the current state of global migration. As such, the
agreement on and adoption of the forthcoming global
compact for safe, regular, and orderly migration must
include provisions that address human trafficking. We
call on Member States to engage in this process in order
to ensure a positive outcome. These actions are aimed
at addressing the problem of human trafficking, but we
must also address its root causes, which is done through
a strategy of prevention that includes sustainable and
inclusive development for all.

17-3921671/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): My delegation commends
Italy for convening today’s important open debate
on trafficking of persons in conflict situations and
welcomes the informative briefings. We also take note
of the report of the Secretary-General on trafficking in
persons in conflict, pursuant to resolution 2331 (2016)
(S/2017/939). We also take note of the briefings by the
representatives of the African Union and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and welcome and
appreciate their strong messages.
Kenya also pays special homage to Italy. Its
response to the migration crisis has been exemplary,
humane and civilized. The Government and the people
of Italy should be recognized for their humanity and
determination to project a human face to the crisis that
we are confronting.
Kenya condemns any form of human trafficking
and views it as an unacceptable affront to humankind.
Persons in areas affected by crises are especially
vulnerable to trafficking and other forms of exploitation,
including sexual exploitation, forced labour, removal
of organs and slavery. We recall the kidnapping of
schoolgirls in Chibok by Boko Haram, which was a
chilling reminder of how trafficking has evolved into
a weapon of terror that has been adopted by criminals.
No country or region is safe from these contemporary
forms of transnational organized crime.
Kenya is a signatory to the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, and has enacted laws and initiated policies to
implement Security Council resolutions. The Kenya
Counter-trafficking in Persons Act has established the
necessary institutional mechanisms for the protection
and support of trafficked persons, which include
rehabilitation centres for victims of trafficking. We also
pay particular attention to issues of illegal adoption of
children, economic and sexual exploitation, slavery and
forced labour.
The Victims Protection Act was enacted primarily
to protect vulnerable victims rescued from traffickers.
Our national plan of action offers a coherent and
realizable road map to address and combat human
trafficking, including through raising awareness and, at
the same time, prominently profiling human trafficking
72/76

21/11/2017

issues in public as well as in media circles. Kenya calls
for enhanced international cooperation to enable all
Member States to hold accountable those responsible
for the atrocities committed in the form of trafficking
and other related crimes.
Like others, my delegation wishes to draw the
attention of the Security Council to the abhorrent
situation in Libya, where Africans are being auctioned
like chattel in open slave markets. Nothing can be more
distressing and abhorrent than slavery that is being
practiced overtly, in broad daylight and in front of
news cameras.
The International Court of Justice identified
protection from slavery as an obligation towards
all persons, one that is owed by every State to the
international community as a whole. The practice of
slavery has been universally recognized as a crime
against humanity, and the right to be free from
enslavement is considered so fundamental that all
nations with standing in the context of this particular
issue are expected to be able to bring the matter to the
International Court of Justice of their own free will.
I wish to remind the Council that the adoption of
resolution 1973 (2011) significantly contributed to the
breakdown of law and order in Libya. This resolution,
which was adopted against the will of the African
Union, will always remain a stigma for and indictment
of the Security Council. It was indeed short-sighted
and a sign of hubris, and it has caused more suffering
and distress than it sought to address. It is the Security
Council’s action that has led to Libya’s 1,100-mile
coastline becoming an open border for traffickers and
smugglers who have become merchants of death and
untold human suffering. The Security Council therefore
has a special obligation to address the situation in Libya
and to do so with the same determination that it sought
to adopt resolution 1973 (2011).
Tragically, the plight of migrants crossing through
Libya has been exacerbated by the European Union
policy of financing, training and equipping undefined
groups in Libya to intercept and contain migrants
trying to cross the Mediterranean Sea and put them
in detention camps. This policy is inhumane and
should compel the international community to rise in
righteous indignation and condemnation and to demand
an immediate end to these discriminatory, if not racist,
policies of the European Union, which offend the human
conscience and abet the horrific violation of human
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

rights. Although resolution 1973 (2011) is the original
sin that paved the way to the opening of slave markets
in Libya, this dire situation is now being reinforced by
the European Union’s sad and discriminatory responses
towards migrants.
The European Union must lead in seeking humane
and sustainable solutions for the migrants in detention
camps in Libya, including how to deal with those who
have already been sold into slavery. The solutions
must include creating legal pathways for the migrants,
seeking their resettlement in third countries and
voluntary repatriation in dignity for those willing to
return to their countries of origin and ensuring their
human rights are not further violated.
Kenya calls for swift action to stop the slave
auctions, requesting that the Security Council ensures
their immediate cessation and that those being held in
prisons or in other deplorable conditions are rescued.
Kenya also calls on the Security Council to work in close
consultation with the African Union to appoint a joint
commission of inquiry to comprehensively investigate
and inquire into the matter. We are convinced that these
are the issues most worthy of our urgent action as they
are the most blatant violations of human rights that we
have seen in our time.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation thanks
the Italian presidency of the Council for convening
this important open debate and for its concept note
(S/2017/972, annex), which paves the way for the effective
deliberation on the subject before us. Myanmar aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The menace of trafficking in persons, or modernday slavery, has become an increasingly global threat
affecting all countries around the world. We share the
deep concern of the Secretary-General on the news
reports of African migrants allegedly being sold as
slaves today. As the issue of trafficking in persons is
increasingly transnational in nature, we all must work
together bilaterally, regionally and internationally to
address this global menace.
We welcome the adoption of the political
declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons (General Assembly resolution 72/1). Myanmar

S/PV. 8111

also welcomes the United Nations Office for Drugs and
Crime’s (UNODC) technical assistance programmes
for trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants to
support the Member States in the implementation of the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, especially Women and Children, in close
cooperation with the United Nations country offices
and other partners.
For our part, Myanmar has been stepping up its
efforts of combating issues of trafficking in persons
as a national cause over the past 20 years. We are
focusing our actions on the areas of prevention,
protection, prosecution and policy coordination. In
2005, we enacted our anti-trafficking in persons law.
The anti-trafficking law-enforcement unit has been
strengthened, and awareness-raising activities have
been conducted across the country.
Myanmar is closely cooperating with the countries
in the region through the signing of bilateral agreements
and establishing appropriate mechanisms. In the
regional context, early this year, Myanmar ratified the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Convention on
Trafficking in Persons. As a State party to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Trafficking in Persons Protocol, we are
working closely with countries of the region and with
United Nations agencies, particularly the UNODC,
to fight against trafficking. Myanmar believes that
cooperation among countries should be strengthened
through accepted legal frameworks.
Humanitarian crises caused by natural disasters
or conflicts create situations where people living in
the affected areas become vulnerable to the threat of
trafficking. This phenomenon cannot be eliminated by
actions of the Governments alone. We need to engage
constructively with the private sector. Therefore, I
thank the Governments of Australia and Indonesia
for their initiative in organizing the Bali Process
Government and Business Forum in August 2017 to
discuss and make recommendations on supply-chain
transparency, preventing trafficking in persons and
modern-day slavery.
Preventive measures are crucial in addressing the
issue of trafficking in persons. Apart from the extreme
circumstances of conflict and natural disaster, poverty,
overpopulation and the lack of job opportunities in
many less-developed countries also constitute root
causes of trafficking. Therefore, we encourage all

17-3921673/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

stakeholders to make effective use of the relevant goals
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in the
global efforts to combat trafficking in persons.
The fight against such trafficking needs to be based
on cooperation among countries of origin, transit and
destination. Politicizing the fight against trafficking in
persons should be avoided as that would not serve as a
solution to the problem.
The 25 August terrorist attacks against 30 Myanmar
police stations and one military base and subsequent
acts of terrorism have triggered an extremely tragic
humanitarian situation in the Rakhine state of Myanmar.
We also share the concern that the people who have
fled across the border to Bangladesh may fall into the
hands of traffickers. With the aim of taking measures to
prevent such situation, Myanmar participated in the ad
hoc meeting convened by the Governments of Australia
and Indonesia last month in Jakarta.
In a good-neighbourly spirit, we are actively
working with Bangladesh on the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of the people who are taking refuge
on the Bangladesh side. The repatriation process will
start in three weeks after signing a bilateral agreement
for the arrangement of their repatriation. A joint
working group will be set up to coordinate the process
of repatriation. We strongly hope to sign the bilateral
agreement on repatriation arrangements very soon
so that the repatriation process may begin as soon
as possible.
While the humanitarian situation is in the focus
of the international community, we must not lose sight
of the other important facts about the situation in the
area, where there is credible evidence of the continuing
activities of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
terrorist group and its affiliates. The terrorists are now
taking refuge in hideouts in the mountains and among
the innocent people of the region. Reportedly, they have
been funded by people abroad. We must all be vigilant
to deter any traffickers or criminal networks seeking to
exploit this situation for malicious purposes.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Myanmar’s
commitment to making its utmost efforts to prevent
people from falling into the hands of traffickers.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of The Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I should like to
express my thanks to you personally, Sir, for being here
74/76

21/11/2017

at this late hour. Your presence is most appreciated.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks you for having
convened this open debate and congratulates you on the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2388 (2017). We also
wish to thank today’s briefers and Secretary-General
Guterres for his leadership in addressing human
trafficking. We support the statement you delivered
earlier, Sir, in the context of our split term with Italy in
the Security Council. I should also like to reiterate and
underscore the words of my counterpart from Kenya in
appreciation of Italy’s policies.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union.
I should also like to highlight the presence in my
delegation, sitting behind me, of the Acting Prime
Minister of Saint Maarten, Mr. Rafael Boasman,
who is in New York for the Caribbean Conference on
Comprehensive Disaster Management. As the members
of the Council know, Saint Maarten was heavily
damaged by Hurricane Irma.
The recent appalling reports on human trafficking
in Libya further underscore the importance of today’s
open debate. We fully support yesterday’s statement by
the African Union and welcome the Secretary-General’s
call for the situation to be investigated. Stopping human
trafficking in conflict situations, such as those in Libya
and the Sahel, is a shared responsibility that requires a
common effort.
In that context, I should like to focus on
three important aspects: prevention, protection
and prosecution.
First, on prevention, ideally we would eradicate the
root causes of human trafficking and prevent it from
occurring in the first place. The first step towards doing
so is to enhance information position. United Nations
entities operating in conflict and post-conflict situations
play an important role in that regard. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
this role be strengthened by including the issue of human
trafficking in country assessments and predeployment
trainings. We must also enhance our understanding of
the relationship between human trafficking and the
financing of terrorism so as to destroy this gruesome
business model. The Netherlands will support the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in
identifying this relationship and gather good practices
to address it.
17-39216

21/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, on protection, trafficking in human beings
is an act that constitutes a gross violation of human
rights. It is therefore crucial for the United Nations
and its Member States to prioritize the protection of
victims. The Kingdom of the Netherlands does its share
by supporting migrant-rescue operations in the Sahel
and the reintegration of victims of human trafficking.
Thirdly, on prosecution, the perpetrators of human
trafficking thrive in a climate of impunity. They must
be arrested, detained and prosecuted. And if, for
whatever reason, we are not able to do so immediately,
we should look for other ways to sanction their behavior
in the meantime.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands commends the
Secretary-General for referring in his report (S/2017/939)
to the European Multidisciplinary Platform against
Crime Threats on trafficking in human beings. This
partnership, coordinated by the United Kingdom and the
Netherlands, brings together European Union member
States, INTERPOL and others to share knowledge and
jointly investigate human trafficking cases.
In conclusion, partnerships are at the heart of our
shared responsibility and shared efforts to stop human
trafficking. We welcome the steps taken by the United
Nations to enhance coordination. We encourage all
Member States to ratify and implement the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children.
We also encourage the Security Council to address
irregular migration, including human trafficking, in a
more structured way in mission mandates and reporting.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands stands ready to
take up its responsibility on these issues during our
term on the Security Council next year in the context of
our split term with Italy.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We thank the Italian
presidency for having organized today’s open debate
and initiating the adoption earlier today of resolution
2388 (2017), aimed at facilitating the global fight
against human trafficking. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2017/939) and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons for their briefings.

S/PV. 8111

Trafficking in human beings is a global challenge
and should be addressed collectively and holistically
at all levels. The Government of Armenia declared
the fight against human trafficking a priority and has
initiated numerous reforms at the national level and
cooperated closely with all international organizations
active in the field. Activities aimed at fighting
human trafficking in Armenia are coordinated by an
interministerial council on the fight against trafficking
in human beings and exploitation.
With a view to structuring the fight against
trafficking in persons and to fully aligning Armenia’s
efforts with international best practices in the area of
combatting this scourge, consecutive national action
plans on fighting exploitation and trafficking in human
beings in the Republic of Armenia have been adopted
and implemented. Over the past decade, Armenia
has successfully implemented four national action
plans. While the main objective of the initial action
plans was to create a sound legislative framework
and to carry out assistance and protection projects
for the victims of trafficking, the focus has now
shifted towards prevention-related activities through
relevant structural, sub-legislative and financial
frameworks, along with strengthening the professional
and institutional capacities of the main stakeholders
involved. Armenia’s efforts in combatting trafficking
have been widely recognized in reputable reports on
trafficking in persons.
The prevention of trafficking is a crucial
component of the global fight against this scourge.
The identification of situations involving trafficking
or risks of trafficking, and assistance to and the
protection of victims and potential victims, through
strong partnership between national authorities and
civil society organizations, are especially important.
Armenia is committed to the global fight against
trafficking in persons in all circumstances and
remains ready to continue its active engagement
and cooperation with international partners. We
also highlight the need for adequate training for all
stakeholders, including peacekeepers and humanitarian
personnel, in identifying and tackling the risks of
trafficking, especially as regards women and children,
in cooperation with United Nations agencies and
programmes, international organizations and civil
society institutions.

17-3921675/76

S/PV.8111

Maintenance of international peace and security

The activities of terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other armed
groups engaged in human trafficking continue to be of
grave concern. We fully agree with the assertion in the
Secretary-General’s report that as the ISIL stronghold

76/76

21/11/2017

in Iraq and the Syrian Arabic Republic rapidly recedes,
it is imperative that the perpetrators of these heinous
crimes be brought to justice and held accountable.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

17-39216
