UNITEDNATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR

2068

MEETING: 15 MARCH 1978

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2068)

...,. .. ..... ..........,.. .....

Pwf

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 9 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12589) . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SjPV.2068

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions’and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2068th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 15 March 1978, at 3.30 p,m.
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

3. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the question on its agenda in response
to the request by the Government of Zambia [S/12589]. I
should like also to draw the attention of members of the
Council to documents S/12593, S/12594 and S/12595.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

4. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zambia. I welcome him and invite him to make his
statement.
5. Mr. MWALE (Zambia): Mr. President, on behalf of my
delegation, I wish to convey our gratitude to you and all
the members of the Council for having acceded to our
request for this meeting, to consider the latest in a series of
acts of aggression perpetrated against my country by the
racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia. I take this
opportunity. also to add my own words of congratulations
to you upon your assumption of the office of President of
the Council for the month of March. It is fitting that this
question of aggression against my country by the rebels in
your colony should be taken up by the Council under the
presidency of the colonial Power, represented in the person
of none other than you, who are intimately familiar with
the Rhodesian question. My delegation in particular recalls
your chairmanship of the abortive Geneva conference on
Southern Rhodesia. My country has also received you and
other members of the Anglo-American team in the course
of your shuttle missions in southern Africa.

Provisional agenda (S/Ageuda/ZOiS)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 9 March 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Zambia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12589)
The meeting ws called to order at 4.20 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

Xke agenda K.USadopted.
Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 9 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12589)

6. Permit me to record the sincere gratitude of the Party,
Government and people of the Republic of Zambia for the
deep commitment and untiring efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Waldheim, towards the search for a lasting
solution to the problems of southern Africa.

1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representativ,es of Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, Mozambique, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia
In which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion.

7. The Security Council has just concluded its consideration of the question of Southern Rhodesia, pursuant to a
request by the African Group. Zambia, together with other
freedom-loving and peace-loving States, firmly maintains
that the prevailing situation in the rebel British colony of
Southern Rhodesia constitutes a grave threat not only to
the peace and security of our region but also to jnternational peace and security.

2. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
conformity
with rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

8. The continued existence of the illegal racist regime in
Southern Rhodesia, a regime religiously committed to the
maintenance of an irrational and unjust system, constitutes
the root cause of the Rhodesian problem. As my President,
Mr. Kenneth Kaunda, has consistently warned, unless this
root cause of the problem is expeditiously eliminated,
prospects of averting a generalized conflict engulfing the
entire region are bound to recede irreversibly. The recent

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mwale (Zambia)
took a place at the Council table and Mr. Tlou (Botswana),
Mr. Alarcbn (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Lob0
(Mozambique), Mr0 Wina (United Republic of Tanzania)
and Mr. Bar&a (Upper Volta) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
I

15. It is quite evident from the marking identified on the
rebel military aircraft shot down by our security forces, as
well as from other captured Rhodesianweaponry, that the
latest attack was carried out with external assistance.
For
instance, my Government has evidence of ‘Sduth African
military involvement in the invasion. In the light of ,this
evidence, my Government has already requested certain
Governments having embassies
at Lusaka to provide information as to how someof their weaponry found itself in
the hands of the rebel Rhodesianforces. The Government
of the Republic of Zambia, and no doubt other membersof
the international community, would welcome such information as it would have a direct bearing on the United
Nations mandatory sanctions policy against the rebel
colony of Southern Rhodesia. Such information would
further assistin determiningthe extent to which the illegal
r&&me would enjoy external military assistance
in the event
of a generalizedconflagrationin our region, a conflagration
in regard to which my country has repeatedly voiced its
concern.

retrogressive developments, such as the so-called internal
settlement agreement, and the continued wanton acts of
aggression perpetrated by the illegal rdgime against Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia serve not to delay but to
advance the advent of such a holocaust. It is this basic and
constant concern-together with its implications, too ghastly to speculate upon-which has once again prompted my
Government to requestanurgent meeting of the Councilto
consider the recent premeditated and unprovoked acts of
aggressioncommitted againstmy country by forcesof the
illegal racist r&me of SouthernRhodesia.
9. Let me now turn to the specific barbaric act of
aggressionperpetrated against-my country by the rebel
forcesof Ian Smith from 6 to 8 Marchlast.
10. It is now known that the enemy crossedthe border
into Zambia with 200 commandosusing some10 fighter
aircraft and seven helicopters of the United StatesmanufacturedChinook type and size,which carry up to 60
fully armedparatrooperseach.

16. The attack of 6 March was but the latest in a seriesof
offensive operations against Zambia carried out by the
Rhodesian rebels. For instance, late last year Rhodesian
jet-fighters droppednapalmbombson Luangwa,the are,aof
the recent invasion, causinga number of casualtiesamong
our defence force personnel.

11. On the day of the attack, 6 March, at 0945hours,two
bombs were dropped in Luangwa(Feira) District by two
jets flying at low altitude. We believethat by that attack it
was intended to blow up the two water tanks, which the
enemy erroneously suspectedto contain fuel, as a diversionary measureto draw the attention of our troops and
Air Defence Unit away from the Kavalamanjaarea,which
was the main target. Simultaneouslya group of fighter
aircraft was heard circulating over the district to intercept
the movement of peoplealong the roadslikely to be used
for reinforcement.

17. Rebel Rhodesian forces and their allies have repeatedly launched premeditated flagrant attacks against
Zambia along its entire border with Southern Rhodesia.
They have constantly violated Zambian airspace and
Zambia’s territorial integrity, persistentlyharassedinnocent
villagers and incessantlyprovoked our troops in the area,
They have mounted widespreadair reconnaissance
missions
over Zambia aimed at identifying targets for subsequent
raids. On numerous occasions, forces of the minority
rdgimeshave landed troops on Zambian soil, leaving them
there to scan Zambian territory and lay ambushesand
land-mines. Mine warfare and the harassmentof villagers in
border areasare common occurrences.Rebel troops have
crossedover and attacked and destroyed villagesalong the
border suspected of being basesfor freedom fighters.
Sporadic firing on Zambian positions along the border
occurs almost daily.

12. At 1000hours,the enemyattacked Kavalamanjausing
10 aircraft to bomb the area and also to provide cover to
the helicopter-borne paratrooperswhe were jumping from
the helicopters. The jets were alsousedto disorganizeany
resistancefrom our ground troops who were intercepting
rebel Rhodesianparatroopersas they descendedfrom the
helicopters. A combination of action by the Air Defence
Unit and our ground forces resultedin the shootingdown
of four jets, one Beaveraircraft and three helicopters.It is
known that a total of eight enemy aircratt were destroyed
by our gallant forces. Some of them fell inside our
territory, on land and in the river. The three Chinook
helicoptersthat were destroyedbore Hebrewmarkings.

18. The Rhodesian rebels have also intensified their
agents’ infiltration of Zambia and the liberation movements. Theseenemy agentsare usedin collecting information on the activities of the freedom fighters and Zambia's
defence forces.

13. In this battle, which lasted72 hours, 22 Zambianslost
their lives and 19 were injured, Two are still missingin
action. It must be pointed out, moreover, that, asa result
of the wanton aggression,
most of the peopleof the area
concerned have fled the villages and are without food,
shelterand clothes,

19. All these acts of subversion,provocation and aggression directed against my country and other front-line
countries are calculated ultimately to undermine us economically and politically and thus are attempts to coerce
our respective Governments into abandoning our firtn
support for the just andlegitimate liberation struggle.

14. The rebel Rhodesianoffensive ground and air attacks
covered a wide area spreadingfrom the Luangwabridge
towards Chiavanear the Chirundu border post. Our gallant
security forces contained the situation and repulsedthe
attacks mounted by rebel forces, which sustainedheavy
casualties.It is quite clear that, in this attack, Smithmade
one of his bloodiestblundersand sufferedhisbiggestlossin
troops and aircraft. Weknow that the rebelsandtheir allies
would be the last to admit that, ashasbeendiscernedin the
recent Westernpressreports.

20. The latest act of aggression
by Smith, comingas it did
m the midst of the Security Council meetingson Southern
Rhodesia, servesas a timely warning that the situation in
that country is deteriorating rather than improving. lf aI1
were well inside Rhodesia, Smith would not look for
scapegoatsfor the problemshe hashimself created.
2

he
as
the
br
:an
his
ain
01.

‘in
:nt
of
ix.
ted
bel
uld
gal
snt
ion
its
1of
the
ian
Iof
14
renst
sia,
md
ent
‘ea,
3ns
ent
*ity
em
md
sin
ave
the
:rs.
der

21. The massive attack against Zambia came within hours
cf the signing of the so-called agreement at Salisbury. It is
indeed paradoxical that, instead of celebrating the signing
cf that sham agreement, the racist regime of Ian Smith and
his cohorts elected to attack innocent Zambia while
ifltensifymg their repressive measures against the suffering
people of Zimbabwe inside the country. These despicable
manoeuvres demonstrate that the illegal minority regime
has no intention whatsoever of relinquishing effective
power and control over Zimbabwe. It is plainly evident that
the recent sell-out internal agreement is intended to
hoodwmk the international COm.m.IInity and to sugarcoat
the instruments of black oppression with the connivance of
a few misguided black Zimbabweans. The so-called internal
settlement is neither internal nor a settlement at all.

his chief ally, racist South Africa; and some Western
coUntrieS are, unfortunately, on his side. He would invoke
racial and ideological arguments to justify his reckless
moves.
28. Fourthly, the white racist regimes in southern Africa
believe that, if their systems cannot be maintained, then we
would want to plunge Africa into a ghastly holocaust.
Zambia has time and again echoed the words of Zimbabwean patriots that the war inside Rhodesia is basically
against Smith’s war machinery, Armed struggle is being
waged to overthrow .the abhorrent system of oppression
and domination,
29. Fifthly, Smith has attacked Zambia, Mozambique and
Botswana because he has been eager to appease the
co-signatories of the so-called internal settlement by falsely
masquerading as their protector. Smith did so to win the
faint hearts of those frightened men who cannot even trust
their compatriots. Is that really a rational approach to
resolving the Zimbabwean problem?

22. My Government is pleased that the Council, under
vour presidency, Sir, yesterday firmly rejected the internal
settlement. The international community should be aware
that there is an organic link between the so-called settlement and acts of aggression by Smith against neighbouring
front&ne African States. Was it by coincidence that Smith’s
forces unleashed a massive attack on refugee camps in
Mozambique on the eve of the commencing of the so-called
internal settlement talks? Is it coincidental that Rhodesian
forces in cowardly fashion attacked Botswana on the eve of
fie convening of the Security Council meeting on Southern
Rhodesia? Why did Smith attack Zambia hours after his
so-called internal settlement was concocted? It is, therefore, our firm conclusion that an organic linkage exists
between Ian Smith’s manoeuvres to concoct an internal
settlement and the wanton acts of aggression perpetrated
by his illegal regime against front-line States.

30. Sixtbly, the illegal r&me wants to demonstrate to its
patrons that its instruments of oppression are potent. And
yet we know only too well that the illegal r6gime will not
last too long. After all, if Smith were on his own, he would
be nothing to us militarily.
31. Seventhly, the racist n?gime attacked Zambia to
intimidate us and other front-line States which continue to
support the just struggle for the genuine transformation of
Rhodesia into Zimbabwe, But the Salisbury clique is
deluding itself. If it cannot cow the Zimbabweans inside
and outside Southern Rhodesia, how does it expect to COW
Zambians and other freedom-loving peoples all over the
world?

23. Let me reiterate that Zambia has brought this case
before the Security Council not to solicit sympathy or
merely to complain, but to seek effective action to remove
the root cause of the problem, We are here not to ask the
Council to repel aggression. We are here not because we are
afraid of the forces of Smith: the Zambian armed forces
have already demonstrated their ability to repulse aggression. What we are really afraid of are the ominous
consequences of unbridled acts of aggression against the
peaceand security of that region and the world.

32. Zambia has come before the Security Council because
it believes that the Council is entitled to know the facts
when aggression against Member States constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. It is our responsibility
to alert the international community to the growing
dangers of widespread conflict arising from the aggressive
acts of racist minority regimes in southern Africa. If the
world community does not act effectively to arrest the
rapidly
deteriorating situation in our area, the conflict will
definitely escalate and proliferate. Moreover, we believe
that it is within the power of the United Nations to help in
the attainment of meaningful solutions to the problems of
Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and South Africa. For the
world body, and the Council in particular, to do otherwise
would be tantamount to abdicating their sacred
responsibilities.

24. The intention of the Smith regime is to internationalize the conflict in southern Africa. The illegal regime
is intent on provoking situations which would draw the
front-line States and our friends into direct fighting with
Southern Rhodesia. How did we reach that conclusion, you
may ask. ‘The answers are self-evident to us.
,resm
line
x0.
:rce
‘irm
did
lem
n in
fall
for

25. First, we have first-hand information and knowledge
of the white racist regimes in southern Africa because they
are our neighbours-not because we wish them to be, but
becausethey are there by the accident of geography.

33. Contrary to the false impression created through
malicious reports circulated by certain Western news media,
including some British and American papers, it is evident
from the aforesaid that the recent wanton invasion of my
country by the rebel Rhodesian forces was not directed at
the so-called guerrilla bases in Zambia; nor was it a question
of so-called hot pursuit. Let me state in no uncertain terms
that, as in previous cases, the recent attack was a
premeditated act of aggression in violation of Zambia’s
airspace, territorial integrity and sovereignty. The attack
was against Zambia-period.

26. Secondly, Smith knows full well that, should the
from-line States retaliate against Rhodesian aggression, it
would be the black Zimbabweans who would bear the
brunt of such action. That is why he is now recruiting more
Africans to fight for his illegal regime and its collaborators.
27. Thirdly, rebcI leader Ian Smith wants to create
conditions which would justify more direct involvement of
3

have a moral responsibility
reckless acts or behaviour.

34. Zimbabwean freedom fighters are fighting the illegal
regime from within Southern Rhodesia. With customary
shortsightedness, Smith does not acknowledge the presence
within Zimbabwe of the gaIlant freedom fighters. Zambia’s
role in the armed struggle in Southern Rhodesia is primarily
supportive and it provides a reliable rear base to the
Patriotic Front in accordance with the position of the
Organization of African Unity. The people of Zimbabwe,
like those of Namibia and South Africa, are their own
liberators.

39. We call upon the United States and the United
Kingdom, the two Powers currently engaged in the search
for a negotiated settlement in Southern Rhodesia, to prevail
on Smith and his illegal regime, so as to avert the
consequences of possible retaliation. We wish to reiterate
our call upon the United Kingdom to remove Smith and his
illegal regime forthwith. This to us still remains the crux of
the problem of achieving genuine majority rule in Rhodesia.
After all, the American and British plan envisaged the
removal of Smith or, as they put it very nicely, that at some
stage Smith would step aside.

35. If Smith cannot contain the situation inside phodesia,
and if he can no longer withstand the onslaught by the
increasingly determined nationalist forces, let him courageously step down and surrender. If not, we strongly urge
his mentors, in particular the United Kingdom as the
colonial administering Power, to dislodge him or to
dissuade him from carrying out flagrant acts of aggression
against countries such as my own.

40. You are all aware of how much Zambia has suffered
and sacrificed in its earnest efforts to implement United
Nations measures against Southern Rhodesia since the
unilateral declaration of independence in 1965. I do not
propose to delve into history, but only to examine the
extent to which historical facts may illuminate attempts to
comprehend present and future trends, As one shrewd
observer remarked, “those who do not learn from history
fail to do so at their own peril”.

36. In the foregoing remarks I have outlined the scope and
character of the monstrous acts committed against my
country by the Rhodesian rebels. In the face of those
persistent ignominious attacks, Zambia has remained undaunted and firm. In this regard, we would do well to recall
the noble words of His Excellency President Kaunda, who,
in a letter to the Secretary-General dated 29 January 1973
[S/10877], said the following:

41. It is rather unfortunate that, over the years, the illegal
racist regime in Southern Rhodesia has been able to survive
and persist in its acts of aggression, as a result of the
support-overt
or covert-which
certain Member States
continue to afford it in flagrant violation of United Nations
mandatory sanctions. The illegal rebel regime would be
nothing without the support it gets from South Africa. and
certain Western countries with vested interests in southern
Africa.

“The Zambian Government has done all in its power to
maintain the highest degree of calm in order to prevent
escalation of tension, but the people of Zambia cannot
continue in this manner while Rhodesian and South
African forces violate our territory, kill and maim our
innocent people and destroy our property.”

42. If the United Kingdom had acted swiftly and declsively to quell the rebellion against its own Crown 13 years
ago, Smith would not have committed all these atrocities.
Instead of acting decisively all along, successive British
Governments-labour
and Conservative alike-have prevaricated and procrastinated over Rhodesia. Yes indeed,
governing parties have changed over the years, as have
prime ministers and foreign ministers; yet the approach has
been the same, and the problem of Rhodesia continues to
confuse the colonial Power. Is the United Kingdom’s failure
so far attributable to powerlessness or to unwillingness to
act decisively?

37. Two days ago, on 13 March, in a specific reference to
the recent armed invasion of my country by the rebel
Rhodesian forces, President Kaunda had this to say:
‘&AS President, I have withstood pressures from the
nation, in the light of continued aggression by the rebels,
to strike back because of the international consequences
that would follow between East and West in the event of
a full-scale war between Zambia and Rhodesia. The
question is: How long can I continue to resist Iegitimate
pressures from my people, as a democratically elected
President under such provocation, for the Zambia Air
Force to strike? Zambia has the capacity and the ability
to strike the enemy even deeper.”

,

I

and an obligation to eschew

43. Zambia knows that the United Kingdom could change
the situation in Southern Rhodesia if it so desired. All of us
know that the United Kingdom still ranks as a Powlsr of
some sort among its contemporaries-powerful
enough to
remove Smith, anyway. Hence, it is not a question of
military might. Indeed, in recent times, the United Kingdom has acted swiftly to quell so-called rebellions on the
island of Anguilla in the Caribbean, and in Bermuda only
last year. But in the case of Southern Rhodesia, :racist
considerations of kith and kin appear to have been
overriding. The United Kingdom failed to act, in spite of
the Zambian offer in 1965 that it should use our territory
for the logistic purpose of removing the rebels. Instead, the
then Labour Government promised Smith that it woul’d not
use force to end the rebellion.

38. Our position remains the same, but for how long can
we restrain ourselves? We have a right to retaliate in
self-defence when the very fabric of our territorial integrity
is violated. Smith had no justification whatsoever for
attacking us even if, as is often alleged in the propaganda
media, his attack was preemptive. Zambia could also
reserve the right to launch pre-emptive attacks against the
rebel British colony of Southern Rhodesia in the event of
an imminent attack. Likewise, even if Smith attacked
certain targets under the so-called hot pursuit doctrine,
President Kaunda has reminded the rebeIs that they do not
have the monopoly on such pursuit. But Zambians are more
rational and calculating. While Smith has no scruples, we
4

44. The United Kingdom has lacked the will. Paradoxically, even recent American attempts to complement
British power have not yielded the desired results. The
colonial Power continues to shun its full responsibilities
over Rhodesia. The British must remember that it is they
who colonized Southern Rhodesia in their zest for imperial
grandeur, their action spearheaded by that arch-imperialistcapitalist Cecil John Rhodes. Surely, the British were never
invited by Africans to colonize the country now called
Southern Rhodesia. After exploiting Zimbabwe, today the
British have a duty to the people of Zimbabwe and the
world to decolonize Rhodesia in the interests of the
majority.

the same about earlier complaints of Rhodesian acts of
aggression against front-line States, including my own
country, that have been brought before this body. Yet the
conflict continues to escalate unabatedly and to assume
dangerous proportions. Is the time not ripe for the United
Nations to consider invoking or enforcing measures of a
more forceful nature? In this regard, Zambia has strongly
advocated that oil sanctions against rebel Rhodesia should
be tightened. Since rebel Rhodesia receives its oil through
racist South Africa, Zambia has equally advocated the
imposition and enforcement of oil sanctions against South
Africa itself under Chapter VII of the Charter as a matter of
extreme urgency, for we sincerely believe that if such
sanctions were imposed the military machinery of the rebel
r&irne would grind to a halt. Hence, the direct relevance
and vital significance of oil sanctions with regard to the
effective removal of the root cause underlying the
Rhodesian problem.

45. As we said in our earlier statement, the United
Kingdom must not be allowed to abdicate its responsibilities over Rhodesia as it abdicated its responsibility in
Palestine and South Africa. The Security Council, the entire
United Nations membership and the United Kingdom’s
allies must see to it that the United Kingdom does not
dump Rhodesia. Since the colonial Power has refused to
coerce the rebels into submission, it must use all other
avenues left to it. We wish to remind Whitehall that the
Smith regime is still illegal by international definition and
must be treated as such.
I

50. In addition, the Security Council must, as a matter of
course, censure any Member State for uttering statements
that imply or accord legitimacy or recognition to the acts
of the illegal rdgime, contrary to the position of the United
Nations. No Member State ‘should get away with statements
that indicate approval of Smith’s acts of aggression against
any neighbouring State on the pretext that the attack was
“preemptive”.
Any attack on the territory of another
State, for whatever reason, is an act of aggression, and this
must be obvious to all sane minds,

46. We in Zambia and Africa have always been ready to
co-operate with the United Kingdom in search of a peaceful
solution of the Rhodesian problem. This we have done
since the unilateral declaration of independence. Only last
year we were hosts to numerous Anglo-American delegations which prepared what are now called the AngloAmerican proposals on Rhodesia. Zambia will continue to
work with all the parties concerned towards resolving the
Rhodesian problem,

51. We also wish to suggest that Member States, in their
expressions of solidarity, should condemn attacks by Smith
on front-line States unequivocally. To do otherwise would
be tantamount to encouraging Smith in his reckless acts,
which might lead to a conflagration engulfing our entire
southern African region and causing grave potential international repercussions.

47. You will recall that Zambia has spared no effort in
seeking a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia. Our approach
has included talking to the devil himself-if I may use that
word. We have discussed the problems with Vorster and
Smith directly, but to no avail, In the process, a few
detractors have chosen to misinterpret and misunderstand
our actions. Zambia, in good faith, believed that if talking
to Smith and Vorster would yield the desired results, then
it was worth the gamble. But in all these futile efforts,
Zambia has remained faithful to armed struggle as a last
resort.

52. There is now an urgent need to increase material
assistance to the front-line States that have been hit hard by
the unstable situation in southern Africa brought about by
the reckless actions of the minority racist regimes in the
region.

48. As we have had occasion to state, there can be no
peace in southern Africa until the oppressed majority
peoples in Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa achieve
their inalienable right to self-determination and genuine
independence. Whilst the primary responsibility for the
noble task of achieving this remains with the people of
Zimbabwe themselves and with their colonial Power, it is
imperative that the international community should assist
in the speedy attainment of the cherished goal.

53. I would therefore submit that these meetings of the
Security Council are most significant and opportune. The
action that may be taken at the cIose of the consideration
of our case may well prove decisive in averting or advancing
the advent of a holocaust, in regard to which my country
has consistently voiced grave concern. There are memorable
cases in history of major human catastrophes that were
triggered by the actions of desperate men like Hitler and
Mussolini and their contemporaries, who include the rebel
Ian Smith and the racist Balthazar Vorster. We owe it to
ourselves to take action to prevent the recurrence of such
calamities, the elimination of which formed the basic
premise in the founding of the United Nations.

49. The Security Council has so far adopted several
resolutions against Southern Rhodesia. Mandatory economic sanctions were imposed in 1966, and further
strengthened in 1968. On all occasions, the Council has
reaffirmed that the situation in Southern Rhodesia constitutes a threat to international peace and security. It has said

54. Finally, this is a propitious moment for me to express
the sincere gratitude of my Government to all the States
that have condemned Smith for his sustained acts of
aggression against Zambia. I am equally indebted to those
Governments and to the Co-ordinating Bureau of NonAligned Countries, the Commonwealth Secretariat and the
5

other organizations which sent messages of solidarity with
and support for Zambia following the recent invasion of
our country by rebel Rhodesia, Zambians always remember
that a friend in need is a friend indeed.

philosophy which spawned the Smith regime are capable of
generating the worst kinds of mentality.
60. Ian Smith and his apparatus of oppression are in the
grip of a madness which grows every day more frenzied,
and they need shock treatment. The Security Council
should not merely condemn the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia which has ravaged entire villages in Zambia and
massacred innocent civilians; it is not enough to expressthe
solidarity of the world community with the people of
Zambia; it is necessary above all to take appropriate
measures to put an end to Cheexistence of that rt?gimein
the shortest possible time. This is dictated by the imperative need to preserve and maintain international peace and
security. It is in particular urgent for the Council to take
effective measures to set limits to the overweening arrogance of Ian Smith until such time as action can be taken,
in accordance with the spirit of resolution 423 (1978)
adopted yesterday, to eliminate the minority and racist
r&me and its apparatus of oppression.

55. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Upper Volta, the Chairman of the African
Group for the month of March. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
56. Mr. BAMBA (Upper Volta) (interpretation
from
FLench): The aggression committed against Zambia on
6 March and for two days thereafter, of which the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia has just so exhaustively
informed us and which he has placed in its context, like
previous attacks committed against the same country and
other front-line States, particularly Mozambique and Botswana, is the direct consequence of the current situation
that prevails in southern Africa by reason of the very
existence of tile illegal minority and racist regime which
rules by terror in Southern Rhodesia. That situation is the
same one that, less than 24 hours ago, was being debated in
the Council.

61. I am sure that there have been few chairmen of the
African Group as unfortunate as I, for twice in the spaceof
10 days I have had to addressthe Council because peacehas
been threatened in the subcontinent of southern Africa.
But, as I have already said, I am consoled in my misfortune
by the knowledge that I could not have a more qualified or
attentive audience for my words than you, Mr, President. I
hope I am not being nafve if I express my confidence that
the Co& method to which the representative of the United
Kingdom has been exposed in the past few days will soon
yield positive results. In any case, I wish him better luck
than that of the Chairman of the African Group.

57. The African Group on whose behalf I am addressing
this august body, while expressing solidarity with the
people of Zambia, deplores, as it has done in the past, the
-violation of the territorial integrity of the sister Republic of
Zambia and the vast material losses and casualties that it
has sustained and that represent great sacrifices on the part
of the Zambian people as well as constituting an additional
hindrance to that country’s development. The African
Group remains convinced that the only way to preserve the
security and peace of States in southern Africa is to put an
end to the existence of the Smith and Vorster rggimes.

62. In concluding my brief statement, I should like to take
this opportunity of expressing my heartfelt gratitude to the
members of the Council for adopting resolution 423 (1978)
at the outcome of the debate on Southern Rhodesia.
Although the African Group would have liked a more
severe and precise text and a more straightforward positive
vote on the part of all the members of the Council, it
recognizes that the resolution constitutes a positive step in
the right direction this time.

58. There can no longer be any doubt in the minds of any
of the members of the Council that the freedom fighters are
determined to fi&t until victory is finally won, and that
the African States in general-the front-line States in
particular-are determined to remain by their side in this
struggle. It is therefore clear that the national liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity will find in any, African country the assistance and
support required for their struggle.

63. I thank the members of the Council for permitting me
to address them once again.

59. However, this cannot justify the barbarous attacks of
the racist and rebel minority of Southern Rhodesia against
the innocent civilian populations of those States. In this
particular case, the oppressive forces of the rebellious Smith
rdgime cannot even resort to the trumped-up pretext of the
right of hot pursuit. This was a case of premeditated
aggression and formed an integral part of the sinister, plan
hatched by Ian Smith and his wretched ally, Vorster, in
their attempt to destabilize southern Africa even further
and to internationalize the conflict which they themselves
have created by exacerbating the situation, This act of
aggression is only the first stage in Smith’s achievement of
his dark designs. Indeed, one would not go far wrong if one
were to suppose that tomorrow acts of aggression will
proliferate against other States and attain even more
catastrophic dimensions, resulting perhaps not Only in
violation of the sovereignty of those States but even in the
occupation of their territory, because the doctrine and the

64. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
(United Republic of Tanzania):
65. Mr. SALIM
Mr, President, I wish, on behalf of my delegation, to thank
you and the other members of the Council for allowing me
to address this august body.
66. The fact that the Council has had to deal consecutively with two agenda items involving the question of
Southern Rhodesia indicates the gravity and explosiveness
of the situation in the area, for, while the Council was
seized of the question of the so-called internal settlement,
rebel Ian Smith, in keeping with his well-known contempt
for international
opinion, was wantonly attacking the
sovereign Republic of Zambia.
6

67, When I addressed the Council on 6 March last/2061st
meting] on the dangers inherent in the so-called internal
settlement, 1 had occasion to point out that it wasa fitting
coincidence that that debate was taking place under the
presidency of the United Kingdom, the colonial Power in
Rhodesia. Allow me now, even at the risk of repeating
myself, to say that it is yet another appropriate coincidence
that the Council is deliberating on the latest act of
aggression by the illegal racist minority regime under your
presidency, Sir. For there is no denying the fact that this
latest aggression against the sister Republic of Zambia is but
a manifestation of the real problem, which is the continued
existence of the illegal racist minority regime, and that the
only way to put an end to such cowardly and unprovoked
attacks, with their concomitant consequences of further
bloodshed and escalating confrontation, is to remove the
seeds of conflict in the area, namely, to eliminate the rebel
illegal minority regime and achieve a genuine transfer of
power to the people of Zimbabwe.

Africa against neighbouring independent African States.
Whether it is in Sialola, Nyazonia or Luangwa, the intention
of the racists is clear: they aim at intemationalizing the
conflict by attacking the front-line States of Zambia,
Mozambique and Botswana. As we have pointed out
repeatedly on previous occasions, the attacks are part of the
nefarious grand designs of the Pretoria-Salisbury axis to
maintain their anachronistic regimes and provoke international conflagrations.
71, The dastardly attack on the Lusngwa district of
Zambia clearly proves the diabolical plans of Smith, Indeed,
before the ink could dry on the so-called internal settlement, Smith was embarking on his age-old adventurism.
Faced with a deteriorating economic situation and the
ever-increasing emigration of whites, Smith is now acting
like a drowning man. All these manoeuvres not only show
the intransigent and capricious nature of the illegal minority regime but clearly prove that a racist minority cannot
heed reason.

68. Therefore, as the Security Council considers the
present complaint by the Republic of Zambia, which is in
effect the complaint of free and indignant Africa, I should
like to express my confidence that you, Sir, will make use
of your brilliant skills as politician, diplomatist and lawyer,
while discharging your responsibilities as the representative
of the administering Power, to ensure that the Council will
act decisively so that freedom, justice and peace may
prevail in the area. This confidence is further reinforced,
perhaps, by the knowledge that it was during your able
stewardship that the Council yesterday adopted resolution
423 (1978) which, infer alia, clearly declared as unacceptable and illegal Smith’s latest manoeuvre, euphemistically termed an internal settlement. Needless to say it
was to the profound regret of my delegation that the
Western members of the Council did not find it possible to
support that resolution.

72. Smith’s aggressive acts of desperation also serve to
underscore one other fundamental point: it would be
utterly illusory to believe that the privileged racist rninority will of its own volition surrender power. Only the
combined pressure of the national resistance currently
waged by the freedom fighters under the leadership of the
Patriotic Front and unrelenting concerted international
action can bring about the desired objectives in Zimbabwe.
73. The Government and the people of Zambia, being in
the very forefront of the struggle, clearly recognize this.
They have in the past made tremendous sacrifices, as they
are doing now and will continue to do in the future, by
acting as a strategic rear base for the forces of freedom. In
so doing, they are acting on behalf of the international
community, which, through the United Nations, has committed itself to seeing the end of racial and colonial tyranny
in Southern Rhodesia.

69. In dealing with the complaint by Zambia, therefore,
the Council should be aware of this challenge to its
authority by the racist minority regime at Salisbury.
Zambia and indeed the whole of Africa are anticipating a
very clear message to the Smith regime from the Council
that it cannot get away with what has now become habitual
and systematic defiance of this body and the international
community. The letters from the representative of Zambia
[S/12589/, from the Commonwealth Secretary-General
[S/12593], from the Chairman of the African Group
/S/12594] and from the Chairman of the Coordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries /S/12595] all condemn
the Smith regime for the atrocities committed against
Zambia between 6 and 8 March last. We have, furthermore,
already listened to a very eloquent and extremely serious
statement by the Foreign Minister of Zambia, our brother
and colleague Mr. Siteke Mwale. Since my Government
fully supports that statement, I shall refrain from a lengthy
expose. Instead, I shall confine my remarks to the bare
essentials.

74. In mounting its latest acts of aggression against the
Republic of Zambia, the Smith regime has two objectives.
First, it desires to internationalize the conflict. Secondly,
the Luangwa incident was meant to threaten and demoralize Zambia in its support of the freedom fighters in
their just struggle. But the Smith rdgime will fail miserably
on both counts. It will fail because the international
community is ever vigilant and will continue to expose that
rdgime’s diabolical machinations, Such coercive manipulations are also doomed to failure becausethe people and the
Government of Zambia, under the steadfast and dynamic
leadership of the United National Independence Party,
headed by His Excellency President Kenneth Kaunda and
supported by the rest of free Africa, are determined to
support the liberation of Zimbabwe until final victory.
75. The questions that must be asked are how Smith
manages to continue committing aggressiveacts against his
neighbours. Who supplies him with war planes and the
other weaponry of destruction with which he not only
represses Zimbabweans but also attacks independent
African States? Who has sustained Smith in power all these
years, despite the mandatory sanctions which were imposed
by the Security Council? It cannot be South Africa alone,

70. This latest attack on Zambia should not come as a
surprise to those who are familiar with the situation in
southern Africa, It is not the first nor will it be the last. It is
part and parcel of the systematic pattern of aggression
being carried out by the white minority regimes in southern
7

an unashamed fellow-traveller of the Smith clique. Unfortunately, other Powers have covertly aided and abetted the
white minority r@ime’s rebellion against Her Majesty’s
Government by breaking the sanctions. It is incumbent on
the Council, therefore, to plug all the loopholes by
tightening the sanctions through the application of the
entire Article 41 of the Charter.

place, we wish to reaffirm in no uncertain terms our
unequivocal support for and solidarity with the Govern.
ment and the people of Zambia in their noble struggle to
act justly and wisely in defence of freedom and human
dignity, now trampled underfoot in Southern Rhodesia. In
so doing, we also call upon all the members of the
international community either bilaterally or multilaterally
to provide the Republic of Zambia with all effective means
of defending its sovereignty and territorial integrity while
continuing to promote the cause of freedom and justice in
Zimbabwe, which is the declared common cause of enlightened humanity. Our second objective is to reiterate the
message which we, the delegation of Tanzania, togethe!
with all the other spokesmen of the African States who
have participated in the just concluded series of meetings of
the Council on the so-called internal settlement, have
conveyed to the Council. Our message is that the settlement
engineered by the rebel Smith rigime is nothing more than
an invitation to further bloodshed and the broadening of
the confrontation, When we warned of these dangers, there
may have been some, either in the Council or outside, who
felt that we were being unduly alarmist and that maybejust maybe-Smith wasnow willing to change in a meaningful way. I believe that the cowardly and premeditated
aggression against Zambia carried out by the Sniith regime
when the Council was actually deliberating on the so-called
internal settlement should put to rest any lingering doubts
about the determination of the regime to maintain minority
domination in Rhodesia at whatever cost.

76. In the light of the challenge posed by the rebel Ian
Smith regime, what should the Security Council do? It is
not enough merely to adopt condemnatory resolutions
without following them up with concrete action, As the
body with the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Council must
categorically impress upon Smith that he cannot get away
with his brutal raids against front-line States. The ghastly
killings of mnocent civilians by the rebel troops have
reached staggering proportions. As if the internal massacres
were not enough, Smith is resorting to the Nazi scorchedearth policy by destroying civilian villages in Zambia,
Mozambique and Botswana.
77. Indeed, just before it embarked on its most recent
aggression against Zambia, the Smith regime had, on 27
February, mounted unprovoked and cowardly acts of
aggression against the Republic of Botswana. There is a
message here which comes over very clearly from Mr. Smith
to all who wish to hear it. Almost three or four days before
the achievement of the so-called internal settlement,
Smith’s forces committed an act of aggression against
Botswana. Barely three days after the signing of the
so-called agreement, the Smith r&ime mounted another act
of aggression against Zambia. What does this mean? It
simply means that, as far as the Smith r&me is concerned,
the so-called intern4 settlement has changed nothing. It
simply demonstrates that the @ime is determined to
continue its acts of aggression internally and externally. We
hope and we are confident that incidents of the nature of
those the Security Council is now considering will demonstrate once and for all for those who still entertain any
doubts that the Smith rc?gime intends to maintain jtself in
power.

81. All this imposes on the Security Council an even
heavier responsibility. We ask and demand no more of the
Council than meausres which would bring an end to the
threat to peace and security in southern Africa.
82. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
83. Mr. TLOU (Botswana): Mr. President, let me thank
you and the other members of the Council for permitting
me to participate in this very crucial dkbate which is, in
fact, inextricably linked with the one just concluded on the
question of Southern Rhodesia.

78. In these circumstances the Security Council, in addition to condemning these naked acts of aggression, has to
call on the United Kingdom as the administering Power to
take immediate action to bring to an end the illegal r6gime
in Southern Rhodesia, for it is by removing the cause of the
rebellion, the source of aggression, that genuine majority
rule can be brought about and peace and tranquillity
hereby ushered in in Southern Rhodesia.

84. The question the Council is seized of today, that of
the flagrant. acts of aggression by the illegal racist minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia against the sister Republic of
Zambia-acts of aggression which have further exacerbated
the situation of tension and insecurity existing in our
unhappy region-is a very grave one indeed. After hearing
the lucid and solid statement by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Zambia, no one can be in doubt
about the urgency, the precariousness and the gravity of the
tituation, nor can anyone fail to be deeply moved and
acutely concerned, We are confident, therefore, that the
Council will treat this matter with the seriousness and
urgency it deserves.

79. But as long as Smith and his racist minority group
remain in power a threat to international peace and security
will always exist in Rhodesia. Tanzania, for its part, will do
all in its power to bring to an end the existence of the
threat to peace by continuing to support the freedom
fighters and working in concert with the rest of the
international community for the termination of the illegal
raciit minority r&me and for the emergence of an
independent Zimbabwe through a genuine and effective
transfer.of power from the minority to the majority.

85. I wish at this point to pay a tribute to the Government
and people of Zambia, and especially to the Zambjan armed
forces, for standing firm in the face of naked aggression and
for repulsing the invading rebel forces. Our condolences go
to the bereaved families who lost their loved ones in this
conflict.

80. Our participation in the current proceedings of the
Council is intended to convey two messages. In the first
8

86. To my brother the Foreign Minister of Zambia I
would say this: I need not reassure you here of Botswana’s
total support for the Republic of Zambia at this critical
time. We have always stood solidly together during such
crises, which have become almost a daily occurrence in our
part of the world. Our unconditional support should be
taken for granted, for your struggle is ours, Botswana has
profound admiration for your country’s uncompromising
commitment to the liberation of southern Africa. We are
keenly aware of the high cost Zambia has had to pay over
the years for unflinchingly adhering to its strongly held
principles.

92. When I spoke in the debate on the question of
Southern Rhodesia a few days ago [,206&h meeting/, I
touched on the recent attacks by the rebel forces on
Zambia and on my own country. I do not want to repeat
what 1 said then, but I must briefly lay some emphasis on
certain aspectsof these attacks, as I seethem,
93. It is clear that the attack on Zambia is only an
aspect-albeit a very serious one indeed-of the over-all
strategy of the illegal rkgime in that region, Within
Zimbabwe itself, repression of the innocent people has
reached alarming proportions, as evidenced by the frequent
executions of opponents-act& or imagined-of the racist
r&&me, the proliferation of the so-called protected villages,
which are, in fact, a version of concentration camps into
which the rural population is herded in the vain hope of
isolating the freedom fighters, the continuing influx of
Zimbabwean refugees into neighbouring States, and the
promulgation of laws, such as a recent law on censorship of
all news about the war, and the one prohibiting publication
of any statement made by or about the so-called terrorist
organizations-all aimed at denying the people 6f Zim-’
babwe information about the war situation in their coun:’
try, The list of such drastic measures is inexhaustible.
Outside the borders of Zimbabwe itself, the r&$me’s
belligerency continues uaabated against Zambia,
Mozambique and Botswana. All three countries have now
been before this august body to Iodge essentially the same
complaint against the illegal regime : aggression.

87. It will not be necessary for me to narrate here the
details of the attack perpetrated on 6 March by the illegal
n&me against Zambia. This has already been amply done
by the Foreign Minister of Zambia. It will suffice for me to
say that quite clearly the attack was of a large scale and
very serious indeed. We are talking here about an invasion
by some 16 jet aircraft which bombed and strafed the
Kavalamanja area of the Luangwa District of Lusaka,
followed by a force of about 200 paratroopers dropped
from army helicopters to massacre innocent, defenceless
civilians, mine accessroads to the area and destroy a lot of
property.
88. Quite clearly, the way this latest incursion wascarried
out demonstrates beyond doubt that the attack was
premeditated
and systematic. This, together with the
serious attacks against Mozambique and Botswana, shows
that the r&me is now bent on carrying out a “scorchedearth policy”, as it has always threatened to do.

94. The attacks have increased in frequency and lethalness, for the r&me now employs larger numbers of
invading troops and heavy war machinery, including war
planes, asin the recent attack against Zambia. These attacks
are said to be “hot pursuits” against freedom fighters-in
fact, a euphemism for premeditated armed aggression
against neighbouring independent African States.

89. It should be realized that this is not the first attack
against Zambia. The Council was once seized of the matter
of South African aggression against Zambia, and there have
been a series of attacks by the illegal regime before this
latest one. These attacks have included sporadic firing upon
and bombing of Zambian troop positions and bombing of
main population centres along the border with the rebel
colony, But this is the first time such a large number of
rebel soldiers have actually invaded and fought inside
Zambia, causing such damage. This represents an escalation
of the situation to a very dangerous level, with serious
implications not only for Zambia, the southern African
region and Africa, but for the international peace and
security as well.

95. On the one hand, then, we see a whole array of
repressive measures designed to cow the Zimbabwean
people into submission and blunt their will to resist. On the
other, we see dastardly unprovoked attacks against neighbouring States aimed at forcing them to abandon their
sacred and brotherly duty to help their fellow men to
liberate themselves.
96. Needless to say, neither internal repression nor attacks
against us will stop the war; nor will these attacks st,op 11s
from supporting the just struggle of the Zimbabwean
people. Instead, the determination to presson to the bitter
end will increase. Victory is on the side of Lhe people of
Zimbabwe. As a matter of fact, the drastic measures
employed by the r&me internally and externally are a
manifestation of its own desperation as the noose tightens
and as the end drawsnearer.

90. It should be realized that these attacks are invariably
aimed at the vital economic and social infrastructures of
Zambia so as tb cause suffering and demoralisation among
the civilian population.
91. Zambia has had more than its fair share of suffering as
a result of the continued existence of the illegal regime at
Salisbury. That great nation has suffered tremendously as a
result of unconditionally supporting the liberation struggle,
closing the border with the rebel colony and scrupulouslY
observing the United Nations sanctions against the rebel
colony. The people of Zambia are, in effect, carrying the
burden which should properly be fully borne by the
international community as a whole. Thus the international
community should throw its whole weight behind Zambia
in these very difficult times.

97, The international community must now more than
ever before rally behind the people of Zimbabwe, for the
days ahead are bound to be difficult and perilous as the
riginle becomes more and more desperate and hence more
and more aggressive.The neighbouring States should also be
assisted so as to be able to withstand Smith’s assaultsand in
this way effectively contribute to the speedy liberation of
Zimbabwe.
9

-.

racist Governments in southern Africa: the invasion of
Angola by South African troops, the Rhodesianattacksoa
Zambia, Botswana and Mozambique and other related
atrocities.

98. One thing is clear, then, about the situation in our
region. Domestic repression and attacks against the neighbouring States are bound to persist SO long as the illegal
r6gime remains in power. Only its total removal can restore
peace and stability in Zimbabwe and in the entire region.
That is the linking factor between this debate and the one
just concluded, So long as the illegal r&me remains in
power, the path to the Security Council will never be
without the footprints of complainants.

,’

107. The attack of Monday 6 March last againstthe border
vaages of the territory of the Republic of Zambia, which
resultedin fresh unnecessaryloss of life amonginnocent
Zambiancivilians and the destruction of property, warnsof
a fresh wave of aggression
and devastation being mounted
by the illegal racist and Fascist rbgime of Southern
Rhodesiaas a consequenceof Smith’s desperationin the
attempt to strengthenthe wickednessof his rebel Govern.
ment. We are watching the reality of an international plot
to undermine the future and stability not only of the
people of Zimbabwe but of the front-line States and all
other African States as well. This situation directly jeopardizesinternational peaceand security.

99. Once again we join others in urging the ‘United
Kingdom to persist in its search for a durable, genuine
solution. We noted the assurances given to the COUnCil
yesterday by the representative of the United Kingdom
1206 7tl1 meeting] to the effect that Her Majesty’sGovernment is determinedto pursuethis course.Wewill expect
results. So long as theseattempts are aimed at finding a
genuinesolution the full support of the Governmentof
Botswanawill alwaysbe forthcoming.
100. In the meantime, however, the Security Council
shouldunequivocally condemnthe attack againstZambia
and continue to seek ways to strengthen the existing
sanctions against the tigime and aim to broaden and
intensify them. For its part, the international community
should increaseits political, diplomatic and material support for the strugglingpeopleof Zimbabweto enablethem
to Iiberate their country and thus removethis cancerfrom
the body politic of our region.Membersof the Council,let
y’our decisionbe unanimousso that you do not give the
slightest comfort to the rhgime. Let your decision be
worthy of the trust the peopleof Zambiahaveplacedin the
C&n cil .

‘i

101. Mr, President, I wish you luck in guiding this
discussion.I’ am confident that your vast experienceand
diplomaticskill will seethis debateto a fruitful conclusion.

108. Passivity in the face of this situation would only
allow the problem to degenerateto the detriment of
adjoining free and peaceful countries that are sacrificing
their own resourcesin supportingthe strugglefor liberation
of an oppressedpeople and paying the price with the life
and blood of their own peoples.That is exactly what my
President,His Excellency Samora Moi& Machel, referred
to two years ago, on 3 March 1976, at Maputo, in his
address
proclaimingthe total imposition of sanctionsby the
People’sRepublic of Mozambique against the illegal minority racist regime of Southern Rhodesiain accordance
with the terms of the relevant United Nations resolution,
He said, “Ian Smith’s aggressions
have already mixed our
blood with the blood of the people of Zimbabwe” [see
S/12005, annex/.

109. It is no longer a matter for argument that the
violation of Zambia’sterritorial sovereignty and integrityand, for that matter, the territorial sovereignty and integrity of the territories of the other front-line States,namely
102. ‘Ihe PRESIDENT: I thank the representativeof
BO~SWUU
for his wishesfor good luck and expressionsof
Mozambique and Botswana-has become an old and regoodwill.
dundant story. The situation has become so grave that
another incursion into Zambia, Botswana or Mozambique
would not be consideredshocking or surprisingany more
103. The next speaker is the representative of
Mozambique.I invite him to take a place at the Council becausethroughout these years Smith hasbeen proved to
table andto makea statement.
be an irresponsibleman. The racist forces have becomeso
imbued with condemnable aggressiveness
that their in104. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique):It ismy honour to address human tendenciesare now a matter of daily expectation
the Security Council for a secondtime this month asthe
among the concernedmembersof the international comsearchfor a just and lasting solution of the problem in
munity. Meanwhile the destruction and the fatalities
Southern Rhodesiacauses
a new degreeof concern among steadily becomemore alarming;the situation is aggravated
the membersof the internationalcommunity in the wake andgrowsmoreterrifying than ever before.
@f‘the latest reported incursionby racist forces into the
Republicof Zambia,
110. The question is what measuresshould be taken to
stop this madman from constantly defying international
105. It is likewise an honour once againto congratulate public opinion. Can the Security Council retain ‘and
you, Mr. President, and all Council membersand #the continue to deserveits prestigeif he is allowed to commit
peoplesthey representfor their dedicationand sincerityin
such crimes indefinitely? As one traces the history of
tackling the issuesconfronting the Council today. I
complaintslodged with the Council such asthoseinvolving
reiterate to the Councilthe total commitmentandsupport the efforts of Zambia to repel aggressionand get the better
of the People’sKepublicof Mozambique,
of its losses,the tragic story that clearly emergesis long and
depressing.The decisionsand resolutions resulting from
106. I would &SO take this opportunity to acknowledge Zambiancomplaintsof actsof provocation, harassmentand
the concern anddedicationof the Secretary-General
andMs military offensive operationscommitted by Smith’s forces
immediate collaboratorsregardingthe problemscausedby
have not left any room for better possiblesolutions.Such
10

I

was the case with resolutions 326 (1973) and 328 (1973),
to mme two examples. Consecutively interspersed with
those
SCtiOrU
are COrOuarY
resolutions triggered by suecessive attacks against Botswana and Mozambique that
naturally added to the growing list of innocent lives lost,
valuable property levelled to the ground and numerous
other criminal acts that could be invented only by a
dehu’manizedFascistand racist mind.
111.
NOW,
early
in the year 1978, the escalationof the
illegal acts of aggressionperpetrated by the racist minority
regimes‘continues at an unprecedented rate asthe outlaws
persist in challenging the integrity and prestige of the
Security Council. Indeed, this is an unrelenting assaultupon
the international community, which has embodiedin the
United Nations its goals and aspirations concerning the
maintenanceof world peaceand security.

112. The observation made by Mozambique’sMinister of
Development and Economic Planning, His Excellency
Mr. Marcelino dos Santos, ashe spoke before the Security
Council on 28 June 1977 holds asmuch truth now asit did
then, in the light of the latest issueconfronting us.Minister
dos Santossaid:

Such is the casein connexion with lan Smith’sfarcical
machinationof a so-calledsettlementwhich, until yester.
day,
WaS the f0ca.l
point
of the Council’smeetings,Today,
as ehhced by the reasonfor the conveIling of this
meeting,a correlationhasbeenestablished,
116. The latest display of aggressive
raids by the illegal
racist forces of Southern Rhodesiaagainstthe territorial
integrity of the Republicof Zambiain the light of the most
recent precedingdevelopmentshas revealedthe kind of
thing the so-calledinternal settlementarrangedby the rebel
Government seeksto achievein the determinationof the
destiny of the oppressedpeople of Zimbabwe. If the
objective of the Smith-manipulatedinternal schemehad
been the achievementof the genuineindependenceand
self-determinationof Zimbabweand its people, that was
certainly denied by the continued commissioncf murder
aganist Zimbabweansnot long after that tactic was con.
ceived.
117. Whereis the sincerity of the Smith regimein aiming
for a just settlementand the creationof a peacefulsociety
when the perpetration of armed incursionsin the latest
style of warfare againstZambia remainsunabated? How
can a settlementclaimto pursueliberty andfreedom if its
very proponent disregards
the life andrightful existenceof
the peopleit pretendsto serveand uplift? Is that the kind
of man we can trust with an African governmentwhich
seeksto securepeaceandharmony in the area? After this
latest attack on Zambia,the answeris certainly no,

“The People’s Republic of Mozambique is being attacked becausethe Mozambican peoplehave assumed
the
commitment of supporting without reservationthe struggle for liberation ‘of the people of Zimbabwe. The
People’s Republic of Mozambique is being attacked
becauseit is fully implementing the sanctionsimposedby
the Council. The People’s Republic of Mozambique is
being attacked because it is an independent and free
country, whoseindependenceand liberty gavethe United
Nations the real capacity to realize the aspirationsof
mankind by endorsing the re-establishmentof peaceand
security in southern Africa.” f2014th meeting,para. 31.1

118. The whole imageis getting clearerasit is becoming
more serious.The continuedactsof aggression
without due
respect for overwhelminginternational disciplinein the
aftermath of a so-calledsettlementisclearproof that Smith
is an irresponsibleindividual who can no longerbe held
accountablefor his actions.All thoseactionsarepart of a
grand design to perpetuatein our part of Africa racism,
imperialismand neo-colonialismthrough Fascistmethods
that will gradually threaten to envelop the rest of the
continent if allowedto go uncontrolled.

It is in the same context and for the samereasonsthat
Smith attacked the Republic of Zambia from 6 to 8 March
of this year.
113. I am constrained to caution the Council that the
escalation of aggressioninterconnectedly and constantly
carried out againstZambia, Botswana and Mozambiquehas
made southern Africa a virtual theatre of confrontation,
endangering the very foundations of international peace
and security.
114. With the utmost alarm and concern, the world feels
helplessasit witnessesa further intensification of the racist
n?gime’simplementation of a maniacal policy of so-called
hot pursuit againstthe determined freedom fightersoperating from sympathetic and dedicated border States acting
under the mandate of the Organization of African Unity
and the United Nations. Consequently, the sameaggressive
policies are moving on to causemore human and material
lossesto those border States as the minority rebel regime
clings to power in Rhodesia, its actions condoned by a
feliow racist and Fascistally in South Africa.

119. Since Ian Smith’s forces have never hesitated to
violate the frontiers of Zambia,BotswanaandMozambique
in their repressionof Zimbabweans,
thereby compellingus
to an armed confrontation, it is only logicalto expect no
less than concerted and more widespreadhavoc to be
initiated by both Smith and Vorster with brutal aggressive
intent asa last resort to impedethe total collapseof their
regimes.ln the meantime,the peopleof Zimbabweareeven
more inspired in their determination to continue the
struggle.

120, The People’sRepublic of Mozambiqueaccordingly
remainssteadfastin its unreservedandunqualifiedSupport
of the efforts of the people of Zimbabwe to liberate
themselvesfrom the chainsof colonial racist domination
and oppression. At the sametime, we areconfident that all
peace-lov~g peopleswill enforce every necessaryaction
against the atrocities committed bY the minority racist
r&ghe
of Ian Smith againstthe Zimbabweanswith the
connivanceof South Africa-a connivancethat encourages
115. After failing in all conceivable moves to divert
Smith to engagein constant acts of provocation and
international attention from their oppressiveends and
military
attacks like the one suffered by Zambia at the
having steadily lost popular support, the illegal racist
beginning
of this month.
tighnes are back to the old game of military aggression.
11

121. On the other hand, we believe the Security Council
will move more effectively than it has ever done before and
vigorously condemn those atrocities committed by Smith
which have stretched to its limit the patience of the
international community in its peaceful efforts. The unrelenting acts of aggression committed by the rebel and racist
rigimes against neighbouring sovereign States are a clear
abuse of and an insult to the nobility of the objectives of
the United Nations.
122. Only a complete and immediate halt to Smith’s
desperate acts and his usurpation of power can prevent the
conflict from deteriorating and henceforth clear the way
for Africa’s freedom fighters to fulfi a dream of a genuine,
free, independent and self-determined society which will
bring peace, tranquillity, progress and harmony to the
region.
123. The freedom fighters and the people of Botswana
and Zambia are our brothers who have come to define their
struggle similarly as a contribution to the cause of
international peace, because it aims precisely at the
destruction of the causes of colonial wars and wars of
aggression whose goal is domination by a racist minority
and oppression of some countries by others.

sacrifice much more in the interests of international peace
and security.
125. In conclusion, I should like to recall Minister
Chissano’s declaration before this august body in his
statement on 16 March 1976 [189&h meeting] that the
People’s Republic of Mozambique regards the struggle for
the liberation of Zimbabwe as part and parcel of our own
struggle and will therefore not shirk that responsibility
whatever the price to ourselves. I here and now restate the
same commitment of the Mozambican people, in this same
venue, as we lament the continuation of those indiscriminate attacks and constant violation of the sovereignty and
integrity of our sister republics of Zambia and Botswana.
This is therefore a reaffirmation of our common solidarity
not only among the front-line States but also with all the
African and other peace-loving States of the world. No
amount of damage and loss inflicted on the fundamental
sectors of our respective economies, on our societies and
peoples will discourage or deter our endeavour for the sake
of world peace and Security.
126. The PRESIDENT: Before I adjourn the meeting, I
am sure that I speak for the entire Council in welcoming
the representative of Bolivia. This is the first opportunity I
have had of being with him on the Council and we look
forward very much to working with him in the future.

124. For us in the front-line States, there is no turning
back for much has been sacrificed and we are willing to

The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

12

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unitel
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

l,es publications
des Nations
Unies sont en venta dans les librairies
et les agences
ddpositaires
du mondo entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
A : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneva.
XAK

IlOJIYPHTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

HBAAHHR

OITAHM:

PUBLICACIONES

3AI&MM

DE LAS

I.& publicaciones
de Ias- Naciones
Unidas e&n
buidoraa
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

OWbE~MHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAqHH

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

7%700054anuary

1980-2,200
