A/75/811–S/2021/252

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
12 March 2021
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 39
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-sixth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2543 (2020), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of the previous report dated 9 December 2020 (A/75/634S/2020/1182).

II. Relevant developments
3.
Government formation progressed with the confirmation by the Wolesi Jirga
(lower house of parliament) of the ministerial nominees of the President, Ashraf
Ghani. The Afghanistan peace negotiations in Doha saw agreements on a code of
conduct and the start of agenda discussions, with the negotiating team of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan now backed by the newly formed Leadership Committee of
the High Council for National Reconciliation, chaired by Abdullah. The United States
of America completed the further reduction of its forces in Afghanistan to 2,500 as at
mid-January 2021. Security incidents in 2020 registered a record high and included
increased numbers of targeted killings, adding to the toll of civili an casualties. The
Government continued to promote a regional consensus on intra-Afghan peace and
reconciliation, economic cooperation and connectivity. Humanitarian needs reached
a record high owing to ongoing violence, natural disasters and heightened le vels of
food insecurity, further compounded by the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic.

21-02820 (E)

170321

*2102820*

A/75/811
S/2021/252

A.

Political developments
4.
The government formation process, including efforts to accommodate political
opposition actors, continued. From 16 November to 2 December 2020, the Wolesi
Jirga held six hearings and three votes for the confirmation of 23 ministerial and
3 other nominees introduced by Mr. Ghani on 21 October, pursuant to the political
agreement of 17 May 2020 with Mr. Abdullah. Of the 23, 19 appointments (including
2 women) received confirmation, while nominees (including 2 women) were rejected
for the positions of women’s affairs, education, culture, rural rehabilitation and
development, and central bank governor. The President subsequently dismissed two
confirmed ministers: the Minister of Public Health on 31 December 2020, following
the arrest on corruption charges of individuals affiliated to him, and the Minister of
Finance on 19 January 2021, inter alia citing non-observance of constitutional
provisions, and nominated acting ministers in their stead. In addition, Mr. Ghani
appointed a new State Minister for Martyrs and Disabled Affairs along with
establishing the Presidential Legal Unit for International Trade and Economic
Treaties and Agreements, the High Council for Revenue, the National Food and Drug
Administration and the Energy Regulatory Authority.
5.
Parliament reinforced its oversight of budgetary allocation and spending. On
9 December, the Ministry of Finance presented the first draft of the national budget
for fiscal year 1400 (2021) to parliament, with two thirds allocated to operational and
one third to development spending. The Wolesi Jirga returned the draft budget,
requesting harmonization of civil service salaries and a balancing of provincial and
sectoral development budget allocations. On 4 February 2021, the Ministry of Finance
submitted a third budget draft with amendments.
6.
In December and January provincial governors were replaced in Baghlan, Sari
Pul, Kandahar, Jowzjan and Logar Provinces. Since the President’s inauguration in
March 2020, 26 of the 34 provincial governors have been replaced. On 6 December,
nine women were appointed as second deputy provincial governors for social and
economic affairs, in Badghis, Ghazni, Laghman, Logar, Kapisa, Kunar, Nimruz,
Nuristan and Zabul. A total of 15 out of 34 second deputy provincial governors, a
position reserved for women, have been appointed.
7.
Efforts to undertake election reforms to prepare for constitutionally mandated
and overdue provincial, district council and municipal elections, as outlined in the
political agreement of 17 May 2020 between Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah, progressed
slowly. On 15 December, the two electoral management bodies, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) signed the extension of the United Nations Electoral Support
Project to continue United Nations technical assistance until the end of December
2021. Mr. Ghani and his two Vice-Presidents met with the Independent Election
Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission on 17 and 19 January to
discuss the holding of the delayed Wolesi Jirga election for Ghazni Province, as well
as provincial council, district council and municipal elections. The electoral
management bodies expressed their readiness to hold the elections in October 2021,
contingent upon security, budget and staffing. Domestic election observation
organizations, including the Transparent Election Foundation of Afghanistan and the
Free and Fair Election Forum of Afghanistan, expressed scepticism regarding the
practicality of holding elections in October. On 20 January, the electoral management
bodies held a national election forum on proposed amendments to the election law.
On 3 February, the Independent Election Commission published the draft
amendments for public comments.

2/15

21-02820

A/75/811
S/2021/252

8.
The Afghanistan peace negotiations saw continued meetings in Doha of the
negotiating teams of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban. Agreement
on a code of conduct was announced on 2 December, and preliminary discussions on
agenda topics were held from 5 to 7 December. The code of conduct includes the
defining principles for the negotiations, while proposed agenda areas included
governance, security, human rights and war victims. The negotiating teams
announced a three-week recess on 12 December. The negotiating teams met at the
level of the contact groups on 9 and 10 January and at the leadership level on
17 January, after which no further meetings have been held.
9.
In Kabul, the peace structures outlined in the political agreement continued to
take shape. On 5 December the Leadership Committee of the High Council for
National Reconciliation held its first meeting. On 17 December, the High Council,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the State Ministry for Peace launched monthly
meetings with international and regional partners to discuss the peace process. On
9 January, the Leadership Committee adopted guidelines for the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan negotiation team. The High Council formed 13 commissions to work on
specific topics concerning the peace process with the involvement of civil society and
international observers. On 2 February, the Commission on Women’s Affairs held its
inaugural meeting. Of the Committee’s 46 members, 9 are women.
10. During the three-week recess in the negotiations, the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan negotiation team members met with Mr. Ghani and the Leadership
Committee of the High Council for National Reconciliation, civil society
representatives and other stakeholders. From 16 to 18 December, a Taliban delegation
led by the deputy leader, Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, and including the chief
negotiator, Sheikh Abdul Hakim, visited Pakistan for meetings with the Prime
Minister, Imran Khan, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mahmood Qureshi, and other
officials. On 24 and 25 December, the former Vice-President of Indonesia, Jusuf
Kalla, visited Kabul, where he met with the Islamic Republic negotiating team for
discussions on the peace process with an offer of support from Indonesia, which was
reiterated to the Taliban team in Doha on 23 January.
11. During the first two weeks of January 2021, the United States Special
Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation, Zalmay Khalilzad, held various
engagements in Doha and Kabul and in the region, calling for tangible progress in the
negotiations and a reduction in violence or a ceasefire. On 15 January, the United
States announced that the number of its military forces in Afghanistan had been
reduced to 2,500. On 22 January, the United States National Security Adviser, Jake
Sullivan, announced that the United States would review its agreement of February
2020 with the Taliban to assess whether the Taliban was living up to its commitments.
12. From 26 January to 1 February, a Taliban delegation visited the Islamic Republic
of Iran for meetings with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Javeed Zarif, and the
Supreme National Security Council Secretary, Ali Shamkhani. From 1 to 4 February,
the Special Envoy of the Islamic Republic of Iran to Afghanistan, Ebrahim Taherian,
visited Kabul to discuss the outcomes of the Taliban visit with Afghan offici als. On
28 and 29 January, a Taliban delegation visited the Russian Federation for meetings
with the Russian Presidential Special Representative for Afghanistan, Zamir Kabulov.
On 5 February, a Taliban delegation visited Turkmenistan for meetings with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Rashid Meredov, and other officials. The Taliban
publicly called for the United States to respect the agreement of February 2020,
including the timeline for the withdrawal of international military forces by 1 May
2021, and claimed their commitment to upholding the accord.
13. On 11 February, the General Secretariat of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation issued a statement in which it condemned the surge of violence,
21-02820

3/15

A/75/811
S/2021/252

including targeted killings, in Afghanistan and urged all parties to concentrate on
peace efforts. On 17 and 18 February, the Ministers of Defence of the States members
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) met to discuss the situation in
Afghanistan, among other matters. In a statement, the Secretary-General of NATO,
Jens Stoltenberg, announced that the Ministers of Defence had decided to defer a final
decision on the future of the NATO presence in Afghanistan pending further
consultations ahead of the deadline of 1 May 2021. The statement expressed the
strong support of NATO for the peace process and its continued commitment to the
Resolute Support Mission, with training and funding provided to the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces.
14. Civil society engagement in the peace process continued. From 15 to
20 November, Afghan women leaders met at a peace summit in Dubai, United Arab
Emirates, where recommendations were developed for the two negotiating teams. On
1 February, women members of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan negotiation team
engaged in a virtual discussion with women representatives from 16 provinces on
concerns about the peace negotiations. On 4 February, the Kabul -based
non-governmental organization Women and Peace Studies Organization organized a
virtual dialogue between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan negotiation team and
civil society activists from 34 provinces. Participants expressed concern over
continued violence, the loss of momentum in negotiations and the safeguarding of
women’s rights. On 4 February, the Afghan Women’s Network reiterated its call for
women’s meaningful inclusion in the peace process. From November to January, a
series of global open day events were held across the country, supported by UNAMA
and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and focused on the inclusion of women in peace negotiations.
15. Women’s networks continued to amplify calls for a ceasefire. On 6 February, in
a virtual round table on the role of Afghan women in the peace process, a Taliban
spokesperson justified the absence of women from the Taliban negotiation team by
arguing that women did not fight in the war. Following that debate, on 7 February,
15 civil society organizations and the Afghan media formed a national consortium,
the Women Initiative for Peace and Security, aimed at ensuring women’s meaningful
participation in the peace process.
16. UNAMA continued the implementation of 14 local peace initiatives, with 5 new
initiatives launched in December 2020. These initiatives brought together youth
representatives in Badakhshan, Baghlan, Balkh, Faryab, Kabul, Nangarhar, Paktiya
and Samangan Provinces, women and religious scholars in Balkh, Baghlan and
Badakhshan Provinces and youth and tribal leaders in Kandahar Province as part o f a
long-term initiative involving community leaders from across the southern provinces
of the country, focused on local conflict resolution and the peace process.

B.

Security
17. The security situation worsened in 2020, during which the United Nations
recorded 25,180 security-related incidents, a 10 per cent increase from the 22,832
incidents recorded in 2019. This is the highest on record since the United Nations
started documenting incidents in 2007 and despite the start of the Afghanistan peace
negotiations. Whereas the number of air strikes declined by 43.6 per cent in 2020
after the conclusion of the agreement between the United States and the Taliban, from
1,663 in 2019 to 938 in 2020, the number of armed clashes increased by 18.4 per cent,
from 13,155 in 2019 to 15,581 in 2020. In addition, the number of detonations caused
by improvised explosive devices rose by 32 per cent, from 1,949 in 2019 to 2,572 in
2020, and assassinations by 27 per cent, from 782 in 2019 to 993 in 2020, amid rising
concerns over the targeted attacks against State officials, civil society activists,

4/15

21-02820

A/75/811
S/2021/252

journalists, judicial personnel and ulama, among others. The Taliban captured seven
district administrative centres in 2020, including four in November and December;
all but two were recaptured by the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
18. The United Nations recorded 7,138 security-related incidents between
13 November and 11 February, a 46.7 per cent increase compared with the same
period in 2020 and contrasting with traditionally lower numbers during the winter
season. Established trends of incident types remained unchanged, with armed clashes
accounting for 63.6 per cent of all incidents. Anti-government elements initiated
85.7 per cent of all security-related incidents, including 92.1 per cent of armed
clashes. The southern, followed by the eastern and northern regions, recorded the
highest number of security incidents. Those regions collectively accounted for
68.9 per cent of all recorded incidents, with Helmand, Kandahar, Nangarhar and
Balkh Provinces recording most incidents.
19. High-profile attacks by anti-government elements continued countrywide,
especially in the city of Kabul. Between 13 November and 11 February, 35 suicide
attacks were documented, compared with 42 during the previous reporting period.
Some 32 consisted of suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices, primarily
targeting bases and checkpoints operated by the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces. On 20 December, one of those detonated against the convoy of a
member of parliament in Kabul, killing 10 civilians (including 3 children) and
injuring another 44 (including 3 women and 10 children). In addition, 88 attacks were
carried out using magnetic improvised explosive devices, 43 of those in Kabul,
including against prominent public figures. Targeted assassinations, often unclaimed,
further increased. They included the killings of three male prosecutors on 13 and
22 December, the Kabul Deputy Provincial Governor on 15 December, the Executive
Director of the Free and Fair Election Forum of Afghanistan on 23 December, two
female judges assigned to a Supreme Court directorate on 17 January, the Jamiat -e
Eslah Council Chair and religious scholar on 2 February and a commercial court judge
on 3 February.
20. No party to the conflict achieved significant territorial gains. The Taliban
maintained pressure on key transportation axes and urban centres, including
vulnerable provincial capitals such as in Farah, Kunduz, Helmand and Kandahar
Provinces. The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces continued to conduct
operations to secure key highways and reverse Taliban gains, particularly in the south
following recent Taliban offensives on Lashkar Gah and Kandahar cities.
21. The Government continued its security sector reforms through the Future Forces
programme. Initiatives include the creation of the Afghan National Special
Operations Command, leadership appointments, the dismantlement of the Afghan
Local Police and the establishment of future resource requirements. Implementation
of the Security Charter under the First Vice-President, Amrullah Saleh, continued in
10 cities. Early initiatives in Kabul, as the priority, included a focus on crime
reduction and efforts to increase police presence in the city by handing responsibility
to the army for checkpoints surrounding Kabul. Planning continued for the
implementation of the Security Charter in all provinces.
22. The number of attacks claimed by or attributed to Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-K) increased during the reporting period to 25, compared
with 11 during the prior period. While many incidents occurred in the eastern
provinces of Laghman, Kunar and Nangarhar, ISIL-K also continued to target
civilians in urban areas using asymmetric tactics. ISIL-K claimed responsibility for
two rocket attacks on the city of Kabul, first on 21 November, when 23 rockets hit
populated areas, and then on 12 December, when 4 rockets reportedly hit the Hamid
Karzai International Airport. The group also claimed attacks against a female
21-02820

5/15

A/75/811
S/2021/252

journalist in the city of Jalalabad on 10 December and against medical staff and
government officials in Kabul on 22 and 28 December, respectively.
23. The United Nations documented 27 incidents affecting its personnel during the
period under review, including 8 cases of intimidation and 12 criminal incidents. A
United Nations staff member was abducted and released, and a team of the Afghan
Directorate of Protection Services dedicated to the protection of the United Nations
in Afghanistan was fired on while protecting a United Nations convoy travelling from
Jalalabad to Kabul, resulting in the killing of five personnel of the Directorate of
Protection Services.

C.

Regional cooperation
24. Efforts to enhance regional cooperation and economic and infrastructure
connectivity continued. On 10 November, at the virtual summit of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, Mr. Ghani underlined that a strong consensus within the
Organization would enable Afghanistan to reach an agreement on the process of
making peace. Mr. Ghani also offered to expand his country’s cooperation with the
Organization’s members and observers on counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics.
Participants expressed support for the ongoing peace efforts in Afghanistan, noting
that increased stability would pave the way for the opening of new transport corridors
connecting Central and South Asia.
25. On 19 November the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Imran Khan, visited Kabul,
where he met with Mr. Ghani and other senior officials to discuss the Afghan peace
process, bilateral relations, refugees, trade and transit and other bilateral matters.
Mr. Khan assured them that Pakistan would do everything possible to help to reduce
violence in Afghanistan. The two sides concluded an agreement on establishing a
shared vision to support peace and stability in both countries and the wider region.
26. Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran continued high-level consultations
over a comprehensive partnership agreement. On 15 November, the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mirwais Nab, visited Tehran to conduct the fifth
round of negotiations. On 11 December, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Abbas Araghchi, visited Kabul. On 22 December, the
National Security Adviser of Afghanistan, Hamdullah Mohib, visited Tehran to
discuss the security situation in Afghanistan, as well as the withdrawal of foreign
forces from the country.
27. In a virtual ceremony on 10 December, Mr. Ghani and the President of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Hassan Rouhani, inaugurated the first three sections of the
225-km-long railway which will connect the Iranian city of Khaf in Khorasan Razavi
Province with Herat Province in Afghanistan. On the same day, the Afghanistan
Railway Authority launched the construction of the final section of railway from
Rozanak to Robat Paryan, both in Herat Province.
28. On 8 and 9 January, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkmenistan, Rashid
Meredov, visited Afghanistan, where he met with Mr. Ghani and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Haneef Atmar, to discuss the Afghan peace process and
the expansion of bilateral relations. Mr. Meredov stated that Ashgabat was committed
to cooperating with Afghanistan on the political, economic and regional connectivity
tracks and considered successful Afghan peace talks fundamental to the
aforementioned peace process and expansion of bilateral relations . On 14 January,
Mr. Ghani and the President of Turkmenistan, Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov,
inaugurated three infrastructure projects intended to boost economic ties between the
two countries. They include a 30-km railway link, a power transmission line and the
installation of fibre optic communication lines.

6/15

21-02820

A/75/811
S/2021/252

29. On 13 January, the National Security Adviser of India, Ajit Doval, visited Kabul
and met with Mr. Ghani to discuss counter-terrorism cooperation and efforts to build
a regional consensus in support of the Afghan peace process. Mr. Doval offered
assurances of his country’s commitment to continuing cooperation and support for
the Constitution of Afghanistan and democratic achievements.
30. From 19 to 22 January, Mr. Atmar visited Saudi Arabia, where he met with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Prince Faisal bin Farhan Al Saud; the Secretary-General
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, Yousef bin Ahmad al-Othaimeen; and the
Secretary-General of the Gulf Cooperation Council, Nayef Falah al-Hajraf.
Interlocutors highlighted the role of Islamic scholars in supporting a political solution
to the Afghanistan conflict.
31. From 30 January to 3 February, Mr. Atmar led a high-level delegation to
Tashkent for bilateral exchanges. He also participated in a trilateral meeting of
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Uzbekistan aimed at strengthening regional connectivity,
expanding trade and transit and promoting regional cooperation. Representatives
signed a road map for the implementation of a railway project from Mazar-e Sharif
through Kabul to Peshawar, Pakistan.

III. Human rights
32. In 2020, civilians continued to bear the brunt of the armed conflict, as
documented in the annual report on the protection of civilians in Afghanistan
published by UNAMA and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) on 23 February. UNAMA documented 8,820 civilian
casualties (3,035 killed, including 390 women and 760 children; and 5,785 injured,
including 756 women and 1,859 children) in 2020. This represents a 15 per cent
decrease compared with 2019, mainly because of fewer civilian casualties from
suicide, from complex attacks carried out by anti-government elements and from air
strikes by international military forces. However, UNAMA documented increases in
civilian casualties from targeted killings by anti-government elements, Taliban
pressure-plate improvised explosive devices, and Afghan Air Force air strikes. In the
last quarter of 2020, UNAMA documented a 45 per cent increase in civilian casualties
compared with the same period in 2019.
33. In 2020, the majority of civilian casualties were caused by anti-government
elements (62 per cent), mainly by the Taliban (45 per cent), ISIL-K (8 per cent) and
undetermined anti-government elements (9 per cent). A quarter of all civilian
casualties were attributed to pro-government forces, mostly caused by Afghan
national security forces (22 per cent), followed by international military forces,
pro-government armed groups, and undetermined or multiple pro-government forces.
Ground engagements were the leading incident type causing the most civilian
casualties (36 per cent), followed by suicide and non-suicide improvised explosive
devices (34 per cent), targeted killings (14 per cent) and air strikes (8 per cent).
34. The armed conflict continued to inflict serious casualties on children. During
the fourth quarter of 2020, the country task force on monitoring and reporting on
grave violations against children in armed conflict verified 837 grave violations
against 770 children (526 boys and 244 girls), including 729 child casualties verified
in the fourth quarter of 2020 (196 killed, including 67 girls and 129 boys, and 533
maimed, including 172 girls and 361 boys). Anti-government elements were
responsible for more child casualties (365) than pro-government forces (227). Ground
engagements remained the leading cause of child casualties, with 264 child casualties
(70 killed and 194 maimed) accounting for approximately 36 per cent of the overall
total.
21-02820

7/15

A/75/811
S/2021/252

35. The country task force verified the recruitment and use of 33 children (all boys)
by the Taliban (25) and by the Afghan Local Police and a pro-government militia (8)
compared with 119 children during the previous quarter. It verified the abduction of
12 children (8 boys and 4 girls) by the Taliban (11) and a pro-government militia (1).
Of the 12 children abducted, 1 was killed, 10 were released to safety, and 1 is still in
the custody of the pro-government militia. The country task force verified 17 attacks
on schools, a decrease from the previous quarter (25), attributing incidents to the
Taliban (11), the Afghan National Army (2), undetermined armed opposition
groups (2) and crossfire during operations between armed opposition groups and
pro-government forces (2). Attacks against hospitals tripled, with 39 veri fied attacks
against hospitals and health-care personnel compared with 13 verified in the previous
quarter. Thirty-one were attributed to the Taliban, six to fighting between the Taliban
and the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, one to pro-government militia,
and one to ISIL-K.
36. UNAMA documented 86 cases of violence against women and girls from
November 2020 to January 2021, including 10 cases of murder, 14 cases of rape,
22 cases of beating, 11 cases of harassment, 8 cases of forced marriage, 8 cases of
forced self-immolation or suicide, 7 cases of child marriage and 6 cases of causing
injury or disability.
37. On 25 November, UNAMA hosted seven awareness-raising and outreach
meetings to mark the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against
Women and to launch the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-based Violence
campaign. In December, UNAMA held nine additional events in support of the
campaign, while UN-Women engaged a total of 22,074 people through support for
52 women’s rights activists and for organizations in 27 provinces and also shared
568 radio messages on violence and gender equality. On 7 December, UNAMA and
OHCHR released a joint report, In Search of Justice for Crimes of Violence against
Women and Girls. Examining the response by the justice system and the redress
provided to survivors in reported cases of violence, the report authors found that the
justice system continues to fail women and girls in many respects.
38. The Government also conducted activities to support the above-mentioned
16 Days of Activism campaign, with reports on violence against women issued by the
Ministry of Women’s Affairs and, for the first time, the Attorney General’s Office.
The Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission released a report which
recorded an 11 per cent decrease in the number of cases received compared with the
same period in 2019, reflecting challenges in gaining access to justice institutions, a
deterioration in the security situation and movement restrictions related t o the
COVID-19 pandemic.
39. On 3 February, UNAMA and OHCHR published their sixth report on torture and
ill-treatment in the custody of the Government of Afghanistan. Based on
656 interviews with those deprived of liberty for security and terrorism-related
offences, the report highlights that torture allegations are prevalent and that there is
widespread disregard for the procedural rights of detainees. While acknowledging
efforts made by the Government, in particular the National Directorate for Security
and the Anti-Torture Committee of the Attorney General’s Office, to eradicate torture,
the report stresses the need to enhance capacity, resources and training for law
enforcement officials.
40. Human rights defenders and media workers faced increasing security threats.
During the reporting period, three human rights defenders were killed in three
separate attacks by unknown perpetrators in Kabul and Kapisa Provinces. Another
was injured in a Taliban-claimed explosion of an improvised explosive device
attached to a police vehicle in Baghlan Province. Eight human rights defenders were
8/15

21-02820

A/75/811
S/2021/252

threatened by unknown perpetrators; 13 others were arrested and released after three
days by the government in Bamyan Province. One civil society activist was arrested
by the Afghan National Police in Kabul and released after one day, allegedly on
account of a complaint by community elders.
41. UNAMA recorded three journalists and a media worker killed in three separate
attacks, one of which was claimed by ISIL-K, in Nangarhar, Ghazni and Ghor
Provinces, and three injured in three separate unclaimed attacks (two in Kabul and
one in Faryab) during the reporting period. Thirteen journalists were threatened (of
which seven cases were attributed to the Taliban) in eight provinces and two others
allegedly intimidated by law enforcement actors. A local radio station in Kunduz city
was attacked by a crowd for broadcasting music. Another local radio/television
station in Nimruz Province was threatened, allegedly by the Taliban, for perceiv ed
biased reporting.
42. In a special report published on 15 February, UNAMA noted an increase in the
deliberate killings of human rights defenders, journalists and media workers in
Afghanistan in the last quarter of 2020. Mostly unclaimed, those killings have
generated a widespread sense of insecurity among civil society actors all over the
country, exacerbated by the appearance and circulation on social media of an
anonymous “target list” on 4 January. On 1 December, a presidential decree
established the Joint Commission for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders,
chaired by the Second Vice-President.
43. UNAMA continued to support the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission on issues related to peace, human rights and victim-centred justice. On
10 December, UNAMA participated in the Victims National Convention, organized
by civil society in Kabul.

IV. Coordination of development assistance
44. The Government of Afghanistan, UNAMA and the World Bank co-led
coordination efforts in partnership with donors to identify steps for the
implementation of a transparent monitoring and review mechanism to track progress
against the principles, outcome indicators and priority action targets outlined in the
Afghanistan Partnership Framework. A steering group and a task force were
constituted to facilitate and oversee implementation of the Framework, leading up to
the annual review at the Senior Officials Meeting in November 2021. The first
meeting of the task force was held on 11 February. Discussions commenced between
the Ministry of Finance, UNAMA and UNDP on a results framework and monitoring
system for the second version of the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework.
45. Work intensified towards meeting the Afghanistan Partnership Framework
benchmarks with strengthened conditionality on corruption prosecution. In late
November, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre adopted an action plan to accelerate
prosecutions. From 1 December to 14 February, 9 cases were processed at trial and
10 cases at the appeals level. On 6 February, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre
Primary Court convicted three members of the Meshrano Jirga (upper house of
parliament) on allegations of corruption and sentenced each to 10 years and 1 month
imprisonment and a cash fine. On 2 January, a special panel at the Supreme Court
convicted the former Minister of Mines and Petroleum, Wahidullah Shahrani, on
charges of misuse of authority, to one year and one month of imprisonment and
restitution of funds.

21-02820

9/15

A/75/811
S/2021/252

46. In collaboration with international partners, UNAMA provided technical
support for developing the draft amendments to the Law on the Structure and
Authority of the Attorney General’s Office, aiming to strengthen its independence and
reinforce merit-based elements in prosecutorial appointments. On 12 November, the
President appointed five commissioners of the new Anti-Corruption Commission,
which made the Commission operational. The Commission began integrating into its
structure the staff and resources of existing institutions, including the Independent
Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation Committee, the Special
Anti-Corruption Secretariat and the Asset Registration and Verification Agency.
Parliamentary approval of the Anti-Corruption Law continued to be pending, but the
Law remained in force as a presidential legislative decree.
47. The Government continued to implement measures to strengthen the capacity of
subnational institutions and to improve subnational governance. During the reporting
period, Badakhshan, Balkh, Jalalabad, Kunduz and Uruzgan Provinces started to
implement the presidential decree issued on 4 October requiring district governors to
undergo a performance evaluation. On 1 February, the Independent Directorate of
Local Governance submitted the draft local administration law for Cabinet
deliberations; it clarifies the relationships between institutions at the subnational level
and addresses subnational planning and budgeting.
48. On 10 January, the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service
Commission completed the 2020 countrywide annual mass recruitment examinations
for 12,291 vacant civil service positions in all 34 provinces. It also completed the
recruitment process for 495 senior positions to replace acting staff, with women
constituting about 30 per cent of those recruited. On 13 January, the Commission
launched its new civil servant performance appraisal system, which includes
provisions to prevent harassment in the workplace and to provide citizens access to
government information.
49. As the COVID-19 pandemic continued to have an impact on the lives of
Afghans, the United Nations developed a “One United Nations” plan for COVID -19
vaccination support and established an inter-agency task force to identify areas of
support for the planning and implementation of the Government’s vaccination
programme.
50. Ahead of a formal launch on 1 February of the European Union-United Nations
Spotlight Initiative for Afghanistan programme, a multi-year partnership to eliminate
all forms of violence against women and girls by 2030, the European Union, the
United Nations and the Government of Afghanistan co-hosted the first stakeholders
meeting attended by donor, government and civil society representatives. The partner
ministries (women’s affairs, education, health, and hajj and religious affairs) and
implementing United Nations entities (UN-Women, United Nations Population Fund,
United Nations Children’s Fund and UNDP) presented the programme of work to
address gender-based violence in Afghanistan through a multisectoral approach.

V. Humanitarian assistance
51. Humanitarian needs continued to rise owing to ongoing violence, natural
disasters and heightened levels of food insecurity, further compounded by the
COVID-19 pandemic. Some 18.4 million people, or almost half the population, a
record number, need humanitarian assistance in 2021, up from 9.4 million at the
beginning of 2020. From 5 to 11 December, the Acting Assistant Secretary -General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator visited Kabul
and Kandahar to draw attention to the dramatically escalating needs.

10/15

21-02820

A/75/811
S/2021/252

52. As at 13 February, more than 55,000 people across Afghanistan were confirmed
to have contracted COVID-19, but the actual number was believed to be much higher.
Health and nutrition data showed that patients were not receiving basic health services
because the system was overwhelmed, and many people were staying away from
health facilities out of fear that they would contract the virus.
53. Since the beginning of the pandemic in Afghanistan in March 2020,
humanitarian aid workers have reached more than 4.7 million people with
COVID-19-specific assistance. This includes supporting the establishment of
15 laboratories; deploying 34,000 polio surveillance volunteers to assist with case
identification and contact tracing; supplying more than 40 million units of protective
equipment to health providers and front-line aid workers nationwide; training more
than 22,000 health-care workers in infection prevention and control; screening more
than 4.6 million people at points of entry; providing water and sanitation assistance
to almost 3.3 million people; and reaching more than 4.7 million people with
COVID-19 awareness-raising activities.
54. Between 15 November and 13 February, health partners provided medical
assistance to over 34,500 people, 52 per cent of whom were women and girls. The
number of trauma cases in the reporting period was almost 12 per cent higher than
the same period in 2020.
55. In 2020, 56 polio cases were confirmed, compared with 29 cases in 2019. Most
of the cases occurred in areas where house-to-house vaccination campaigns had been
banned since May 2018 by anti-government elements. Polio has now spread to
14 provinces, indicating declining immunity among people. In addition to wild
polioviruses, Afghanistan has also experienced an outbreak of circulating vaccinederived poliovirus type 2 following a spillover from an outbreak in Pakistan, resulting
in 303 confirmed vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 cases in 2020.
56. Afghanistan is facing an acute food insecurity crisis driven by poverty and the
COVID-19 pandemic. By March 2021, 16.9 million people are expected to be at
“crisis” and “emergency” levels of food insecurity, including 5.5 million people at
“emergency” levels – the second highest in the world. Almost one in two children
under 5 will face acute malnutrition in 2021. Between 1 November and 31 January,
the United Nations and its partners provided more than 15,600 tons of food to nearly
3.4 million food-insecure people and supported more than 954,000 shock-affected
people with livelihood assistance. The already dire situation of food insecurity could
further deteriorate because of the high likelihood of low rainfall and high
temperatures related to the La Niña weather event affecting the country.
57. The year 2020 recorded the highest annual number of undocumented returnees
coming home to Afghanistan, with 865,793 crossing the country’s borders. The vast
majority (859,092) returned from the Islamic Republic of Iran, driven by the
COVID-19 outbreak and related restrictions, limited access to health care and the
associated deteriorating economic circumstances. An additional 2,030 refugees
returned from neighbouring countries in 2020. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees visited Afghanistan from 14 to 18 November, calling for
international solidarity as well as support for Afghanistan and refugee -hosting
countries in the region. Between 15 November and 4 February, 188,193
undocumented Afghans returned from the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan. A
total of 11,258 Afghans were deported from Turkey in 2020.
58. In 2020, 400,593 people were internally displaced by conflict. Between
15 November and 13 February, 24,000 people were newly internally displaced by
conflict. Between November and mid-February, the United Nations and partners
provided emergency shelter, household items, winterization assistance and related

21-02820

11/15

A/75/811
S/2021/252

cash support to more than 311,000 vulnerable people affected by the harsh climate,
conflict and natural disasters.
59. From November to February, the Mine Action Service and partners cleared
1.74 km2 of land contaminated by high-impact explosives, safely removing over 450
items of explosive ordnance, benefiting 32 communities. In addition, 150,795 people
in Afghanistan received explosive ordnance risk education during the reporting
period.
60. Widespread insecurity continued to present challenges for humanitarian access,
with more than 1,000 incidents of interference reported by the end of 2020 – a 146 per
cent increase compared with 2019. These incidents regularly delayed assistance and
prolonged the suffering of vulnerable people. Since 1 January 2021, humanitarian
workers have reported 210 access-related incidents, a 165 per cent increase compared
with the same period in 2020. Between 12 November and 13 February, 9 aid workers
were killed, 12 injured and 21 abducted.
61. The international air bridge established by the United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service in April 2020 owing to the stoppage of international flights into Afghanistan
because of COVID-19 ended operations on 31 December after transporting
1,097 passengers. The Service continues its domestic flights to 21 destinations across
Afghanistan.
62. The 2020 Humanitarian Response Plan was only 49 per cent funded at the end
of 2020, leaving a $573 million shortfall and significant unmet needs. By the end of
the year, humanitarian organizations had reached almost 11.8 million people with
some form of humanitarian assistance across all 401 districts, against a target of
11.1 million people. This was partly achieved through higher-reach, lower-cost
emergency activities, such as COVID-19 risk communication campaigns, and many
people were not able to receive a comprehensive aid package owing to underfunding.
Under the 2021 revision to the multi-year Plan, $1.3 billion is requested to provide
humanitarian assistance to 15.7 million Afghans; as at 14 February, the Plan was 3 per
cent funded.

VI. Counter-narcotics
63. From 15 November to 15 February, law enforcement authorities in Afghanistan
conducted a total of 971 counter-narcotics operations. Those operations led to
seizures of 632 kg of heroin, 1,622 kg of opium, 201,935 kg of hashish and cannabis,
487 kg of methamphetamine, 180 kg of poppy seeds, 405 kg of ammonium chloride
and 15 kg of methylenedioxymethamphetamine. The seizures resulted in the arrest of
1,156 suspects and the confiscation of 150 vehicles and 74 weapons. On 18 December,
senior officials of the Counter-Narcotics Police and the Afghan Border Force
inaugurated the Airport Interdiction Unit at Kandahar airport. The newly established
unit includes four female officers.
64. As part of ongoing efforts to provide farmers with licit livelihoods to replace
opium cultivation, the United Nations delivered alternative develo pment activities
that resulted in 3,895 farmers receiving extension services; six farmers’ associations
established; 2,495 women trained in animal husbandry and dairy processing;
1,700 women trained in poultry farm management; 280 farmers trained in pest a nd
post-harvest crop management; two irrigation structures constructed in Jawzjan and
Badakhshan Provinces; 20 women trained in small businesses development; and
240 women receiving vocational training.

12/15

21-02820

A/75/811
S/2021/252

VII. Mission support
65. As at 31 December, vacancy rates in UNAMA were at 14 per cent for
international staff, 19 per cent for United Nations Volunteers, 8 per cent for National
Professional Officers and 3 per cent for national staff compared with approved rates
of 8 per cent, 7 per cent, 3 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively. The proportion of
female staff remained low, at 36 per cent for international staff, 45 per cent for United
Nations Volunteers, 14 per cent for National Professional Officers and 9 per cent for
national staff.
66. While sustaining the delivery of critical programmes and activities in the midst
of the COVID-19 pandemic, alternate work arrangements remained in place.
UNAMA and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes decided not to increase
the numbers of international personnel present at the duty station and of national staff
reporting to work, with numbers to be reviewed regularly, taking into account
potential changes in the COVID-19 caseload.

VIII. Observations
67. Despite slower progress in the recent period, I am encouraged by the public
commitment reiterated by the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban to
achieving a peaceful solution. It is important to safeguard that commitment. I call
upon both sides to continue discussions towards establishing a substantive agenda for
the Afghanistan peace negotiations. I also urge both parties to refrain from any further
military escalation, which would cause additional human suffering and risk public
trust in the peace process. Both sides, but especially the Taliban, must heed the call
of the Afghan people for an immediate cessation of violence, leading to a just,
sustainable, and inclusive peace.
68. The sustained support of the international community, particularly the countries
of the region, remains essential in creating a conducive environment for the
Afghanistan peace negotiations. I welcome increased diplomatic engagement by
Member States in support of the peace process, and their interest in leveraging
multilateral forums to facilitate common messaging. The United Nations will remain
actively engaged in existing multilateral efforts towards peace and stands ready to
support proposed initiatives at the request of the Afghan parties.
69. All Afghan constituencies, including women, youth, minorities, victims of war
and displaced persons, must have an opportunity to participate in the peace process.
I welcome the establishment by the High Council for National Reconciliation of
several commissions within its structure and its expanded outreach to diverse
elements of Afghan society. More work must be done to connect grass-roots efforts
with high-level decision-making to ensure that any eventual peace agreement will be
accepted by all communities. The United Nations will continue its work to ensure that
the voices of all relevant constituencies, including marginalized groups, are heard.
70. The full, equal and substantive participation of women at all levels will remain
critical to ensuring the success of the peace process. However, women remain
underrepresented in key bodies, including both negotiating teams, as well as the High
Council for National Reconciliation. I strongly urge the Government to increase
women’s participation in all peace structures to ensure that their views are broadly
represented. I similarly call upon the Taliban to include women meaningfully in their
peace structures so that their interests and concerns are reflected at the negotiating
table.

21-02820

13/15

A/75/811
S/2021/252

71. The role of civil society and the media is becoming ever more critical as the
peace process evolves. I am outraged by the recent spate of targeted killings in
Afghanistan. Such attacks are illegal and aimed at creating an atmosphere of fear.
They also risk further constraining the civic space when debate and dialogue are most
needed. I call upon all parties to cease such attacks immediately. I urge the
Government to take steps to combat impunity for the perpetrators of such violence
and to improve protections so that civil society actors are able to perform their roles
safely and without fear. The United Nations stands in solidarity with members of the
media sector, the non-governmental sphere, the public sector and the legal profession,
among others, as they carry out their vital work in support of peace.
72. The worsening security situation in Afghanistan is of deep concern. Civilians
continue to bear the brunt of the conflict. I regret that the peace process has not yet
improved conditions for Afghan civilians, with UNAMA documenting an increase in
civilian casualties since the start of the Afghanistan peace negotiations. I urge both
parties to refrain from further military escalation and to end the violence, in order to
save lives and to protect public confidence. I call upon the Taliban to cease the use of
improvised landmines, which have caused an increased number of civilian casualties.
I also call upon the Government of Afghanistan to redouble efforts to prevent and
mitigate civilian casualties from indirect fire and air strikes; to improve the
documentation of civilian casualties; and to conduct investigations with a view to
ensuring accountability.
73. I am deeply disturbed by the allegations of torture and ill-treatment in Afghan
detention facilities as documented by UNAMA and OHCHR. Torture is a grave
affront to human dignity and has lasting consequences for its victims and their
families. It exacerbates community tensions and creates new grievances, threatening
the prospects for genuine reconciliation. I urge the Government to take concrete steps
to eradicate the practice of torture, including by reforming the questioning techniques
of law enforcement officers, ensuring respect for the procedural rights of detainees
and prosecuting perpetrators of torture and ill-treatment. I also call upon the
Government to undertake effective investigations into allegations of enforced
disappearances, to determine the fate and whereabouts of those forcibly disappeared
and to hold those responsible accountable.
74. Women and children continue to face extremely high levels of violence. Access
to justice remains far too difficult for victims of gender-based violence. Lockdowns
due to the COVID-19 pandemic have heightened the risk of violence faced by women
and children and made it still more difficult for victims to report violence to
government authorities. I call upon the Government to strengthen the implementation
of the Elimination of Violence against Women Law, including by providing additional
resources and training for police officers, prosecutors and legal aid networks and by
implementing a functioning case management system for categorizing and tracking
such crimes. The Government must do more to ensure that allegations of violence
against women and girls are actively investigated and prosecuted.
75. I am distressed by the humanitarian needs in Afghanistan, which have reached
a record high. The extremely high number of people facing “crisis” or “emergency”
levels of food insecurity in Afghanistan is particularly troubling. I implore donors to
step up and generously fund the 2021 Humanitarian Response Plan so that
Afghanistan and its humanitarian partners can urgently scale up life-saving activities.
Noting the alarming increase in interference with humanitarian activities in 2020, I
call upon all parties to refrain from attacks against humanitarian workers and facilities
and to ensure safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian activities at all times.
76. Continued progress against corruption will be critical in building public trust in
State institutions and ensuring the sustainable support of donors. I welcome the
14/15

21-02820

A/75/811
S/2021/252

important steps towards operationalizing the Anti-Corruption Commission, whose
work could be further enhanced by adopting the pending anti-corruption legislation.
The action plan by the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre to accelerate prosecution and
the increase in the Centre’s caseload over the last quarter of 2020 are encouraging
signs.
77. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to pose a serious threat to the health,
livelihoods and welfare of the Afghan people, the recent decline in the reported
caseload notwithstanding. Continued vigilance will be needed to limit the
transmission in Afghanistan of the virus responsible for COVID-19. Over the longer
term, the country’s economic recovery from the pandemic will depend on sustained
financial, technical and in-kind assistance from the international community. I urge
Member States to continue their support to the health and socioeconomic response of
Afghanistan throughout the recovery process, in order to avert the worst effects of the
pandemic while preparing the ground for a future of sustainable development beyond
COVID-19.
78. I thank all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative and Head of UNAMA, Deborah Lyons, for their continued dedication
under challenging conditions to fulfilling commitments in support of the Government
and people of Afghanistan.

21-02820

15/15
