3. Invites the Special Committee to examine,
in the spirit of paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 1
and of Article 55 of the Charter, the summaries
and analyses of information transmitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter on the economic, social
and educational conditions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, irtcluding any papers prepared
by the speciali1t!d agencies and any reports or
information o~-fneasures taken in pursuance of the
resolutions adopted. by the General Assembly concerning economic, social and educational conditions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Considers that the Special Committee should
meet in 1950, 1951 and 1952 before the opening
of the regular sessions of the General Assembly,
at places and dates to be determined by the
Secretary-General, in order that it should conclude its work not later than one week before the
opening of each session ;
5. Invites the Special Committee to submit to
the regular sessions of the General Assembly in
1950, 1951 and 1952 reports containing such procedural recommendations as it may deem fit and
such substantive recommendations as it may deem
desirable relating to functional fields generally but
not with respect to individual Territories;
6. Decides that at its regular sessions in 1950
and 1951 the General Assembly will proceed to
any new elections for the Special Committee that
may be necessary, and examine in 1952 the question whether the Special Committee should be
renewed for a further period, together with the
questions of the composition and terms of reference of any such future Special Committee.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.
*

*

the UNION OF Sov1ET SocIALIST REPUBLICS;
For a term of two y,·ars: MExtco, the PHILIPPINES;

For a term of one year: VENEZUELA, SWEDEN.
The General Assembly, informed of these elections through document A/1214, took note of them
at its 274th plenary meeting on 9 December 1949.
The Special Committee is therefore composed of
the above-mc11tioncd ciglit Members. and of the follm»ing l\Icmbcrs transmilting information under
Article 73 c of the Chartrr ·
AUSTRALIA,
BEI.GllJM, DF.:-!MARK, FRANCE, the
NETHERLANDS, Nnv ZEALAND, the U:-irTED KINGOF GREAT BRITAIN A"!D NoRTIIERN
the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

333

2. Invites members of the Special Committee
to make special preparations in this field for the
1950 session, with a view to facilitating the constructive interchange of ideas and experience on
such educational problems;

3. Invites the Secretary-General to consult with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and other specialized agencies in order to secure their collaboration in the
study of these problems.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

*

In accordance with the terms of the abo,•e resolution, the Fourth Committee, at its 142nd meeting
on 5 December 1949, elected eight members to the
Special Committee. Thr f olloiving M embrrs of the
United Nations were elected:
For a term of three ymrs: BRAZIL, EGYPT, INDIA,

DOM

Considering that the value of the work of the
Committee would be enhanced if, without prejudice to the annual consideration of all the functional fields enumerated in Article 73 e of the
Charter, special attention were given to one field
each year,
Noting that the Special Committee will have
before it at its 1950 session a considerable volume
of documentation on the subject of education including various reports from the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Considering that information on the development of facilities for the training of the peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories deserves
particular attention at a time when programmes
of economic and social development are being extended or initiated,
l. Invites the Special Committee at its 1950
session, without prejudice to the consideration of
the other two functional fields, to give special
attention to the problems of education in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories, with particular
attention to development of training in the economic and social fields;

]REI.AND,

nv). Work of the Sprria! Committee on Information transmiUetl
under Artide ·,;i c of 1)u'. Clrnrh'r

The c;cneral ,·lssnnl,/y,
N otinr; that resoiut ion 3J2 ( IV ) ado1,tccl hv the
General Assembly on 2 I kccml )('f l CJ.+') provided
for the estalili.,lm1enc of a Special Committee on
Information transmitted undn Article 73 e of the
,Charter for a three-year periorl without pn·judice
as to the future,

43

334 (IV). Territories lo which Chapter
XI of the Charter applies
The General Assembly,

H ai>ing regard to the obligation to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter accepted by the Members which have or assume
responsibilities for the administration of territorif's whose peoples have not yet attained a full
measurl' of self-government,

Ii aving regard to resolution 66 (I) 15 adopted
by the (ieneral Assembly on 14 December 1946 in
which seventy-four territories were enumerated,
in accordance with the declarations of the responsible Governments, as falling within the scope of
Article 73 e,
H aviny uotcd the information supplied by
certain l\Iembers concerning the constitutional
chauges which have led to the cessation of the
transmission of information under Article 73 e
in respect of certain territories which were e11t1111eratl'd in resolution (>CJ (I),

l. Collsidcrs that it is within the responsibility
of the ( ;eneral A~scmbly to express its opinion
on the principles which have guided or which
may in future guide· Lhc l\lernhers concerned in
enunH·rating the terriluries for \Yhich the obligation exists to transmit information under Article
73 e of the Charter;
5
'
See Hcsolulions adopted /,y the General Assembly
dnring tlw second part of its first session, page 124.
