General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

42

governmental experts, initiate an expert study on the
relationship between disarmament and development in
view of the relationship between expenditure on armaments and economic and social development and the
need to release real resources now being used for
military purposes to economic and social development
in the world, particularly of the developing countries, 17
Affirming the urgent need for the promotion of
negotiations on effective measures for the cessation of
the arms race, especially in the nuclear field, for the
reduction of military expenditures and for general
and complete disarmament,
l. Calls upon the Disarmament Commission to
give priority consideration to the elements of a comprehensive programme of disarmament at its session
to be held in 1979 and to exert its best endeavours
to transmit its recommendations thereon, through the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session, to the
Committee on Disarmament;
2. Expresses its satisfaction that the Group of
Governmental Experts on the Relationship between
Disarmament and Development has been convened
by the Secretary-General to commence its study and
looks forward to receiving an interim report on the
study at its thirty-fourth session;
3. Takes note of the preparations for the strategy
for the third United Nations development decade and
stresses the need to continue to promote the link
between the strategy for disarmament and the strategy
for development in view of the close relationship between disarmament and development affirmed by the
General Assembly at its tenth special session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "Consideration
of the declaration of the 1980s as a disarmament
decade".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

33/63.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa

The General 'Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/81 of 12 December
1977, in which it requested all States to refrain from
such co-operation with South Africa in the nuclear
field as would enable the aggressive and racist regime
of that country to acquire nuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa18 adopted by the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo
from 17 to 21 July 1964,
Recalling its resolutions 1652 (XVI) of 24 November 1961, 2033 (XX) of 3 December 1965, 3261 E
(XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3471 (XXX) of 11
December 1975, 31/69 of 10 December 1976 and
32/81 of 12 December 1977, in which it called upon
all States to consider and respect the continent of
Africa, comprising the continental African States,
11 Ibid., para. 94.
18 Official Records of

the General Assembly, Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 105, document A/5915.

Madagascar and other islands surrounding Africa, as
a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 418
(1977) of 4 November 1977, in which the Council,
inter alia, decided that all States should refrain from
any co-operation with South Africa in the manufacture
and development of nuclear weapons,
Gravely concerned that South Africa has not renounced the acquisition of nuclear weapons and therefore may still detonate a nuclear explosion and acquire nuclear-weapon capability in contravention of
the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa
adopted by the Organization of African Unity and of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council,
Convinced that this situation constitutes a grave
danger to international peace and security and a
permanent challenge to the efforts of the international
community to establish Africa as a nuclear-weaponfree zone,
Reiterating its decision, taken at the tenth special
session, that the Security Council should take appropriate effective steps to prevent the frustration of the
decision of the Organization of African Unity for the
denuclearization of Africa, 19
1. Strongly reiterates its call upon all States to
consider and respect the continent of Africa, comprising the continental African States, Madagascar and
other islands surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weaponfree zone;
2. Vigorously condemns any attempt by South Africa to introduce in any way whatsoever nuclear weapons into the Africa continent;
3. Demands that South Africa refrain forthwith
from conducting any nuclear explosion in the continent
of Africa or elsewhere;
4. Requests the Security Council to exercise a
close watch on South Africa and to take appropriate
effective s_t~ps to prevent South Africa from developing
and acqumng nuclear weapons, thereby endangering
international peace and security;
5. Condemns any nuclear collaboration by any
State, corporation, institution or individual with the
racist regime which could frustrate the objective of
the Organization of African Unity to keep Africa a
nuclear-weapon-free zone;
6. Demands that South Africa submit all its
nuclear facilities for inspection by the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
7. Appeals to all States to refrain from such cooperation with South Africa in the nuclear field as
would enable the racist regime to acquire nuclear
weapon~, and to dissuade corporations, institutions
and individuals within their jurisdiction from any cooperation with South Africa in this field;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
nec_essary assistance to the Organization of African
Umty towards the realization of its solemn Declaration
on the Denuclearization of Africa;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
i!s thirty-fourth sessio~ the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of
Africa".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
1 9 Resolution

S-10/2, para. 63 (c).
