UNITED NATIONS

TWENT’Y-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 22 DECEMBER 1967
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l386/Rev.2)

... ..... ... ....... .......

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Cyprus
(S/8286)
. ...... .. ,. .......,..... ....... ...,..........

1

S/PV. 1386

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-SIXTH

MEETING

Held in NW York on Friday, 22 December 1.967, at 3.30 pm.
Presidci?t: Chief S. 0. ADEBO (Nigeria),

3. The text which has been agreed upon by the members
of the Council in the course of our consultations reads as
follows:

Bese?rt: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, Prance, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet hkilist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

‘&The Security Council,
“Noting the appeals addressedby the Secretary-Genera1
to the Governments of Greece, Turkey and Cyprus on 22
November, 24 November and 3 December and the report
of the Secretary-General of 8 December 1967 (S/8286),

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 386/Rev.2)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

‘Woting the replies of the three Governments concerned to the appeal of the Secretary-General of
3 December in which the Secretary-General proffered his
good offices, and their replies to his previous appeals,

2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/.5488).
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cyprus (S/8286).

“‘Noting from the said report of the Secretary-General
that circumstances continue to require the presence of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for a
further period,

Adoption of the agenda

‘trroting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that
it is necessary to continue the Force beyond 26
December 1967,

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5488):

“1. Reaffirms its resolution 186 (1964) of 4March
1964 and its subsequent resolutions as well as its
expressions of consensuson this question;

Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operatinn in Cyprus (S/8286)

“2. Extends the stationing in Cyprus of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force established under the Council’s resolution 186 (1964), for a period of three months
ending on 26 March 1968;

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Cyprus,
Turkey and Greece to take places at the Council table in
order to participate, without vote, in the discussion.

“3. Invites the parties promptly to avail themselves of
the good offices proffered by the Secretary-General and
requests the Secretary-General to report on the results to
the Council asappropriate;

At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. Kyprianou
(Cyprus), Mr. 0. &alp (Turkey) and Mr. A. S. Bitsios
(Greece) took places at the Council table.

“4. Cc& upon all the parties concerned to continue to
show the utmost moderation and restraint and refrain
from any act which might aggravate the situation;

2. The PRESIDENT: Before proceeding to call upon any
speakers, I should like to announce that as the result of the
intensive consultations in which members of the Council
have engaged in the past two weeks agreement has,
fortunately, been arrived at on the text of a draft resolution
which I shall read out. Before doing so, 1 wish to express
my profound thanks to all my colleagues around this table
for their patience and for their active co-operation in
making this happy development possible. I also wish to
thank the representatives of the parties for their understanding and co-operation, without which our efforts might
have been in vain.

“5. urges the parties concerned to undertake a new
determined effort to achieve the objectives of the
Security Council with a view, as requested in the
Council’s consensusof 24 November 1967, to keeping the
peace and arriving at a permanent settlement in
accordance with Security Council resolution 186 (1964)
of 4 March 1964;
“6. Decides to remain seized of this question and to
reconvene for its further consideration assoon ascircumstances and developments so require.”
1

I

4. There are already one or two members of the Council
who wish to speak before the vote and I shall now invite
them to do so.

Nations Force in Cyprus, since its mandate expires 0n 26
December.
13. The French delegation will not object to a brief
extension’ of the mandate-for three months, for examplewithin the framework of the resolution of 4 March 1964,
without broadening the terms of the mandate formulated in
that resolution in terms sufficiently general to cover all
eventualities and permit the Force to function effectively.

5. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French): On
the eve of the Security Council meeting in November
/1383rd meeting/, the crisis caused by the events in Cyprus
justified the deepest fears: serious incidents there had just
brought the two ethnic communities into conflict; the
Island was threatened by a landing; Greek and Turkish
troops faced one another on their continental border; these
new complications threatened to aggravate the differences
created between the Powers by events in the Near East.

14. The three Governments concerned must remember
that the Force’s mandate is to deal with an emergency
situation and that its presence cannot be considered a
settlement of the question. UNFICYF’ was established by
the resolution of 4 March 1964 solely to restore the
conditions necessary for such a settlement and, at that
time, it wasassigned a mandate of three months. More than
three and a half years have passed and the progresstowards
the restoration of peace and calm on the Island has not
been sufficient to bring the mandate to an end, or evento
reduce the numerical strength of the Force. The gravity of
the recent incidents shows this. Those incidents also show
that a lasting settlement is urgent and indispensable. We
would be allowing a precarious and dangerous situation to
persist, were we to remain satisfied with the statusquo.We
cannot do this. We cannot help feeling that each extension
of the Force’s mandate is an insurance to the parties
concerned, encouraging them to maintain their opposing
demands in full, without seeking to surmount them with a
reasonable solution.

6. The emotion aroused in my country was all the greater
because centuries of friendship bind us to both these
ancient peoples. We feel that two countries with such a
great past should settle their differences by peaceful means;
it would truly be unworthy of them to do otherwise.
7. We were therefore gratified by the consensus of 24
November in which the Council unanimously called upon
“all the parties concerned to show the utmost moderation
and restraint and to refrain from any act which might
aggravate the situation in Cyprus and constitute a threat to
the peace”.
8. We were pleased that the leaders in Ankara, Athens and
Nicosia rdsponded to such appeals, particularly the Secretary-General’s, and that, along with other efforts being
made elsewhere, the mission of Mr. Rolz-Bennett, who,
with the Council’s consent, had been sent to the scene by
the Secretary-General, proved successful. Finally, we were
pleased that there was an agreement on a military disengagement, which will help to promote a return to calm in
Cyprus.

15. It is therefore necessary that, during this short
extension of the Force’s mandate, the three Governments
of Ankara, Athens and Nicosia make every effort to reacha
concerted and lasting solution of the Cyprus problem. We
believe it indispensable to draw the three Governments’
most serious attention to this necessity. The efforts desired
from them are, to some extent, the pre-requisite for the
extension of the UNFICYP mandate.

9. However, the situation is still far from normal and even
further from satisfactory. In his report of 8 December, the
Secretary-General said: “. . , how precarious the situation
regarding Cyprus remains and how easily and rapidly, in
spite of the best efforts of the United Nations Force,
relatively small incidents can develop into an imminent
threat to international peace” [S/8286, para. 155].

16. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Four years have passed
since the question of the situation in and around Cyprus
first appeared on the Security Council’s agenda. It is,
however, to be regretted that in that time it has not been
possible to settle the problem or to remove the causes0f
the crisis. I should like to recall that during this time the
Soviet Union has repeatedly stated its position on the item
now before the Council. That position is well known and
has lost none of its validity or importance.

10. It is quite obvious that we cannot stop there and that
we must continue to work diligently to achieve further
progress towards peace and a lasting settlement of the
Cyprus problem.
11. That was what our consensus of 24 November sought’
in requesting “all concerned urgently to assist and cooperate in keeping the peace and arriving at a permanent
settlement in accordance with the Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4March 1964”. The Council has
repeated that appeal in every text it has adopted since that
resolution, adopted as long ago as 4 March 1964. In its
resolution 238 (1967) of 19 June 1967, the Council
extended the stationing of the United Nations Force in
Cyprus for another six months “in the expectation that by
then sufficient progress towards a solution will make
possible a withdrawal or substantial reduction of the
Force”.
12. The present meeting was convened primarily to take
another decision concerning the maintenance of the United

17. The Soviet Union has based and continues to base its
position on the fact that the Cyprus question should be
settled by peaceful means, in the interests of the CYPri0t
people, and for the purposes of relaxing tension in that Part
of the world. The Soviet Union firmly supports the
Cypriots’ struggle against the imperialists for the full
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity Of
Cyprus which is, as we know, a full Member of the United
Nations.
18. There can be no doubt that the internal affairs Of
Cyprus should be settled by the Cypriots themselves.The
question of Cyprus must be settled without interference
2

from the outside, The lawful rights of the Greek and
Turkish communities in Cyprus should be fully observed by
all. The Soviet Union resolutely opposes any plan or
attempt to settle the Cyprus question behind the backs of
the Cypriot people, to the detriment of their vital interests
and for the benefit of the imperialist Powers.

25. The position of the Soviet Union on the use of United
Nations forces to prevent or halt aggressiveaction and to
Protect the sovereignty of a State which has become the
victim of aggression is generally known, Our position was
set forward in detail in the well-known memorandum of the
Soviet Government dated 10 July 1964 entitled “Certain
measures to strengthen the effectiveness of the United
Nations in the safeguarding of international peace and
security”2 and the memorandum dated 16 March 1967
concerning “United Nations operations for the maintenance
of international peace and security”,3

19. We are firmly convinced that if full independence and
territorial integrity are to be ensured to the Republic of
Cyprus, then all, I repeat all, foreign troops must be
withdrawn from its territory and any foreign military bases
located there must be eliminated. This is particularly
important now in view of the recent sharp aggravation of
the situation in the Eastern Mediterranean.

26. We think we should at this point emphasize once more
that a decision to send United Nations armed forces into
any particular country should be taken only in the last
resort and only after careful consideration of all the
circumstances concerned, bearing in mind that the use of
foreign troops, including United Nations troops to settle
conflicts, and even the mere presence of such tro.ops on
foreign soil may, as past experience has shown, lead to
diametrically opposite results, to interference in the domestic affairs of States, serious international implications and
increased tension.

20. In that connexion, we should like to draw the
attention of Council members to the statement made by
the Soviet Government on 22 November of this year, in
which the position of the Soviet Union regarding the recent
events in and around Cyprus is set forth.
21. That statement emphasizes in particular that the
present events in Cyprus cannot be regarded in isolation
from the policy of the reactionary circles in Greece, which
have for a long time been hatching plans, with the support
of outside forces, to settle the Cyprus question through
so-called enosis-that is by joining Cyprus to Greece. The
military circles now in power in Greece, and their agents in
Cyprus, are trying to turn the whole Island into a NATO
war base and to deal with the democratic forces of that
country by terroristic methods, The Soviet Government’s
statement was distributed as an official Security Council
document’ and members have been able to acquaint
themselves fully with its contents, The Soviet delegation
also wishes to stress the need for all States Members of the
United Nations, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964 to refrain from any
action or threat of action likely to worsen the situation in
the sovereign Republic of Cyprus.

27. An essential pre-requisite for the application of such
an extreme mefisure as the use of United Nations armed
forces should at all times and in all circumstances be the
scrupulous observance of all those provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations relating to the use of force for the
maintenance or restoration of international peace.
28. We should like to recall that, in line with the position
it has adopted, the Soviet Union wasin principle opposed
to the sending of any troops, including United Nations
armed forces, to Cyprus. We stated this repeatedly in the
Securi,ty Council when the question of Cyprus was discussed,particularly in 1964.
29. However, the Soviet Union did not stand in the way of
the adoption by the Security Council of the resolution of
4 March 1964, since it wished to meet the wishes of the
Republic of Cyprus, which considered the resolution, in
spite of all its deficiencies, to be auseful one. Turkey, too,
it will be remembered, supported the resolution.

22. Today the Security Council is again considering the
Cyprus question in connexion with the report submitted by
Secretary-General U Thant, on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus for the period 13 June to 8 December
1967 [S/8286]. That report again contains recommendations for the extension of the stationing of UNFICYP for
an additional period of three or six months.

30. We should like to draw attention to a dangerous
tendency that is now becoming apparent, namely, the
tendency to enlarge the powers of UNFICYP and even to
make those troops perform “internal security” and other
functions on Cyprus. We wish to state categorically that we
shall oppose the transformation of UNFICYP-whose stay
on the Island has already been unduly protracted-into
some sort of police force using arms against the Greek or
Turkish community on Cyprus. That would be a violation
of the United Nations Charter, would constitute interference in the internal affairs of Cyprus and would be
bound to have the most harmful consequences for the
United Nations. We should plan not for an increase in the
strength and an extension of the powers of UNFICYP but

23. Allow me to point out that such a protracted stay of
UNFICYP on Cyprus can certainly not be regarded as
normal. Nearly four years have passed since these troops
were stationed in Cyprus, but the settlement of the Cyprus
problem has not been advanced in any way as a result.
24. That very fact is recognized by the Secretary-General
himself when he states that “the recent events in the Island
and their very serious repercussions have shown how
precarious the situation regarding Cyprus remains” and that
“relatively small incidents can develop into an imminent
threat to international peace”. [Ibid., para. 155.]

2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Nineteenfh
Session, Annexes, annexNo. 21, documentA/5721.
3 See Offichl Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second
Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1967, document S/7841.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1967,
document S/8268.

3

for the withdrawal of the Force at the earliest possible
moment, since no foreign troops, including United Nations
troops, can do what it is the inalienable right and duty of
any nation, including the people of Cyprus, both Greek and
Turkish, to do.

37. The resolution invites the parties to avail themselvesof
the good offices proffered by the Secretary-General aad I
wish to assure the parties that I am immediately available to
them, that I will do all within my power to help them find
a way to resolve their differences and that I hope they will
respond to the invitation of the Security Council without
delay. Bearing in mind the sharply divergent views of some
of the parties in regard to the issues that may be raised
during their forthcoming discussions with me or my
representatives, I would have weldomed clear guidance by
the Council on the basic points which have been the subject
of much negotiation with the parties during the drafting of
the resolution. The weight of the Council’s views would
have been invaluable to me in the exercise of my good
offices and in its absence I deem it my duty to forewarnthe
Council of the difficulties that lie ahead. The members of
the Council will understand, therefore, why I regard it as
necessary now to reiterate in the strongest possible terms
the call which I made to the parties concerned in my report
to the Council of 8 December 1967 (S/8286], namely, to
display the statemanship and goodwill which is essentialto
resolve this complex and long-standing question.

31. These are some of the general observations which my
delegation thought fit to make at this time in connexion
with the Security Council’s consideration of the Cyprus
question.
32. With regard to the dl-aft resolution submitted by the
President of the Council, our colleague Ambassador Adebo,
proposing that the stationing of UNFICYP should be
extended for an additional three-month period, we note
that this draft reaffirms the Security Council resolution of
4 March 1964, as well as other decisions taken by the
Security Council on the Cyprus question. So, although we
did not and do not consider that an extension of the
stationing of United Nations troops on Cyprus is justified,
we shall nevertheless not prevent that extension for an
additional three-month period, on the understanding that
that decision is in accordance with the wishes of the
Government of Cyprus and other interested parties, and on
condition that such an extension is carried out in full
conformity with the provisions of the Security Council
resolution of 4 March 1964, namely, only if the present
functions of UNFICYP and the present procedure for the
financing of these troops-i.e. on a voluntary basis-are
maintained.

38. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): The arduous consultations
of recent days, Mr. President, which as you said have
brought great credit to all concerned-to the representatives
of the parties as well as to members of the Council-have
finalIy produced a substantive result. And under your genial
and effective guidance the Council has just adopted a
resolution which, the Canadian delegation hopes, will be a
constructive step forward.

33. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution which I read to the Council a few minutes

39. The resolution just adopted provides for the extension
of the UNFICYP mandate for three months, in the light of
the fact that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that the
Force’s continuation is necessary. The resolution also places
the extension of UNFICYP in the proper context by
emphasizing the riced for renewed efforts towards a
permanent settlement. Furthermore, the resolution offers
us hope that the coming weeks will be used to good
advantage for the purpose of clarifying various issueswhich
have been raised by the parties and which may require the
detailed consideration of this Council. In this connexion, as
we have just been reminded by the Secretary-General, the
Secretary-General has proffered his good offices. Whether
the parties choose to rely mainly or solely on this offeris
for them to decide; but it is our hope that the parties Will
avail themselves of every opportunity to compose their
differences.

agO,
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

The draft resole tiorz was ndopted unanimously. 4
34, The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The resolution just
adopted by the Security Council provides for the extension
of the stationing of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus for a further period of three months ending on
26 March 1968. I am immediately requesting the Governments of the States providing contingents for the Force to
co-operate by continuing to make their contingents avail.
able.
35. I take this opportunity to express once again my deep
appreciation to the Governments of Australia, Austria,
Canada, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Sweden, and the
United Kingdom for their whole-hearted and unfailing
contribution
to this important
United Nations peacekeeping operation, which has discharged the Mandate
defined for it by the Security Council with impartiality,
restraint, and a high sense of duty.

40. It is in this light that the Canadian delegation hasbeea
able to vote for the resolution.
41, Looking to the future, and conscious of the fact that
in recent weeks an outbreak of hostilities in the eastern
Mediterranean was only narrowly averted, Canada fully
supports the view expressed by the Secretary-General that:
‘L. . . neither the parties nor the Security Council can afford
to allow the situation regarding Cyprus to stumble from
crisis to deeper crisis and from danger to graver danger”
[Ibid., para. 1.571. Already before the recent crisis w%in
Canada, had been greatly concerned at the fact that while
UNFICYP had been able to keep some of the current
tensions on the Island in check, there had been lack Of

36, May I also express gratitude to those States which
have shown their active concern for the effectiveness of the
Organization by making the generous voluntary financial
contributions
which have made possible the continuing
existence of the United Nations operation in Cyprus?
4 SCCresolrrtion 244 (1967) of the Council.

4

progress towards settlement of the dispute, We believe that
it is essential for the parties to do all in their power to press
on
towards a solution of the underlying problemsproblems which have already made necessary the presence
of a large ‘and costly peace-keeping force in the Island for
more than three and a half years, and now the Force’s
continued presence for at least a further short period.

United Nations can only be achieved if the sending of a
peace-keeping force is combined with energetic efforts in
the political field.
48. Denmark has therefore welcomed the offer of the
Secretary-General to the parties to make his good offices
available to them, and we are happy to note that the parties
have agreed to avail themselves of that offer. In that way
the purpose of promoting a peaceful solution and an agreed
settlement of the problem confronting Cyprus in accordance with the United Nations can be truly served,

42. In conclusion, I should like to urge, in the language of
the resolution just adopted, that the parties undertake “a
’ new determilied effort” to achieve a political settlement.
; Meanwhile, as long as UNFICYP is required, I would also
! urge that CO-Operation with the force should be improved in
’ the directions indicated in the Secretary-General’s report,
! SO that UNFICYP may carry out the functions which the
\ Security Council has already assigned to it, on which the
1 parties are in principle already agreed.

49. It is my pleasure to use this opportumty to respond
immediately to the request made by the Secretary-General
in the statement which he just made and to state that
Denmark is ready to maintain its military and police
contingent in Cyprus for the coming three months.

43. Finally, I should like to pay tribute to our distinguished Secretary-General for his extremely valuable initiatives during the recent crisis, and those of his able and
1 distinguished colleagues of the Secretariat. The SecretaryGeneral’s efforts have had, and continue to have, our full
* understanding and our support.

50. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
United States was pleased to support the draft resolution
extending the life of the United Nations Force in Cyprus
for three months and we are gratified that it was adopted
unanimously by the Security Council.
51. Like all draft resolutions adopted by the Security
Council, no single Member can give it an authoritative
interpretation. The resolution speaks for itself.

44. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): The crisis of November, in
the view of my delegation, clearly demonstrated two
predominant needs, namely, that UNFICYP should be
extended for another period of time and that new and
concerted efforts should now be made towards an incipient
solution of the underlying problems of the Cyprus question. We have noted with satisfaction that the resolution
deals with both aspects, in the second and in the third and
fifth operative paragraphs respectively. We have therefore
been happy to vote for the draft resolution which has just
been adopted unanimously,

52. The world has only recently watched with great
concern as violence increased in Cyprus itself and the
danger of hostilities mounted rapidly. It was only due to
the strenuous efforts by many, including the SecretaryGeneral and ltis Representative, Mr, Rolz-Bennett, and the
ultimate co-operation of Greece, Turkey and Cyprus, that
the corner was turned. It was, of course, the appeal of the
Secretary-General of 3 December’ that was the critical
element in making this favourable turn of events possible.

45. Allow me here to add, Mr. President, that this result is
yet another sign of and testifies once again to your
patience, perseverance and wisdom.

53. Two critical factors were involved: first, the withdrawal of Greek and Turkish excess troops and the
abatement of military measures as a first step following the
appeals of the Secretary-General, and second, the extension
of the good offices of the Secretary-General as proffered by
him. We are gratified that all three Governments welcomed
the appeal of 3 December and that prompt action was
undertaken by Greece and Turkey in response to the first
part of the appeal. We are also gratified with the favourable
attitude shown towards the Secretary-General’s offer of
good offices, and particularly with the prospect that those
good offices can now, in the light of the Secretary-General’s
statement today, which we listened to with interest and
which we welcome, can now be expected to go forward
with the support of the Council in the resolution we have
just adopted and without the time pressures which the
extension of the life of the Force have relieved. We believe
this process will be a highly important one, and we urge
those concerned to approach it with the greatest determination to reach an understanding exactly in the spirit of
the statement which the Secretary-General made here
today.

46. My Government has all along attached the greatest
importance to the role played by UNFICYP in the interest
of peace and tranquillity in Cyprus. Denmark has therefore
supported UNFICYP with troops and with money from the
very beginning. We have paid a total amount of more than
$1 million in support of this peace-keeping force and we
have participated in it in providing a contingent. We have
done so because my Government firmly believes that the
United Nations must be made to play as important a role as
possible in the maintenance of international peace and
security and because we thought that in the caseat hand a
certain pacification and reduction of tensions wasnecessary
in order to create an atmosphere in which negotiations
towards political solutions could profitably be entered
upon.
47. Developments during the last four years have proved
that UNFICYP has been able to contribute substantially to
pacification in Cyprus. However, although efforts to that
end have been made, no real progress towards political
solutions has been achieved. Thus, it is borne out that the
presenceof a peace-keeping force is in itself not enough and
that the ultimate goal of the peace-keeping activities of the

5 See official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second
Year, Supplement
for October, November and December 1967,

document S/8248/Add.6, para. 1.
5

54. For our part, we shall continue to support the work of
LJNFICYP both politically ‘and financially. I should like to
say parenthetically that my Government has contributed,
since the inception of the Force, in excess of $30 million to
the Force.

provide the contribution of $1 million to cover the three
months period immediately ahead of us.
59. I do not think any of USwish at this stage and at this
season of the year to introduce discordant notes into our
discussions. I listened with great attention to the speechof
the representative of the Soviet Union. His speech, if I may
say SO, illustrated the difficulties which have faced us jn
coming to an agreed conclusion, and indeed illustrated the
extent of the achievement which has now been secured.

55. We also believe that we must look beyond the
immediate issues towards a permanent solution, as the risk
from the recurring crises can be seen to be becoming
progressively larger, The provision to this effect in the
resolution is therefore of great importance, and we hope
that early attention can be given to the methods by which
this aspect of the problem can be best approached, none of
which methods we have excluded in adopting the resolution.

60. I would wish to say that we listen to advice; we are
glad to listen to advice. We shall certainly listen to advice
even when we consider it to be negative. But we would
greatly hope that the contribution which comes from
members of the Council was not only advice, but was also
somewhat more practical. We would greatly hope that those
who have so far not been prepared to contribute would in
the future be prepared to reconsider their position and to
make their contribution too.

56. I regret that at this meeting of the Council, which it is
to be hoped will be the last one before the holiday season,
on the threshhold of unanimous agreement around this
table, we were once again subjected to the familiar and
platitudinous Soviet theme of an imperialist conspiracy to
extinguish the independence of Cyprus. It is precisely those
countries described in such heavy-handed and entirely
mendacious terms which Ambassador Fedorenko accuses of
this plot that have been in the forefront of efforts to
uphold the independence of Cyprus. It is those countries,
both directly and in support of the United Nations, which
have given tangible evidence of their willingness and anxiety
to contribute to peace and security in that troubled Island.
Surely the intensive efforts, for example, of our own
emissary, Mr. Cyrus Vance, can hardly be considered as
anything but &sincere and vital commitment to assure the
maintenance of peace and security and to create opportunities to find a solution. It is entirely pertinent to note
that those efforts have been applauded by all of the parties
concerned.

61. I should like to take this opportunity of paying the
respects of my Government to the United Nations Force
and to convey, very respectfully, to General Martola and to
all members of the Force our admiration for the vigilance
and steadiness which the Force has shown, particularly
during the tense and dangerous* circumstances through
which it has just passed.
62. I join with all other members of this Council in
praising the role of the Secretary-General throughout the
recent crisis, and of his staff-and not only those at
Headquarters. I have already had opportunity to pay my
tribute to the contribution made, with others, by Mr. Rolz.
Bennett as the Representative of the Secretary-General sent
so promptly to the arca. And I am glad that we have with
us this evening Ambassador Osorio-Tafall, whom we know
has given his unstinting effort, with great patience and great
skill and great perseverance, in co-operation with all
concerned, to seek improvements in the conditions in the
Island itself. We have a great respect for him and we wish
him well in his future endeavours.

57. Nor can I let this occasion pass permitting UNFICYP
to be described as a foreign force. It is an agent of the
world Organization, established by the Security Council at
the request of the Government of Cyprus. We are all deeply
indebted to those nations which have contributed their
soldiers to the United Nations Force and to the cause of
peace-keeping. Now if the Soviet Union were to change its
policy and show a willingness to contribute to the efforts of
this Organization and UNFICYI? to maintain peace in
Cyprus, if, to use an American slang term, it would “put
up” in support of peace-keeping, I am sure we would all
listen with much closer attention to the Soviet comments

63. Then I would like also, again very respectfully, to say
how much we have benefited from the presence of the
Foreign Minister of Cyprus. I do not believe that we should
have been able to achieve the result which we can welcome
tonight without his presence. I would certainly wish to
record my admiration for the wisdom and the reasonand
restraint which he has shown. All of us, I am sure too, very
well recognize that we have been extremely fortunate in
this Council in having as representatives of Greece and
Turkey two of the most experienced and able Ambassadors
in the United Nations, We thank them for the contribution
which they have made to the result which we have before
us this evening.

on this subject,

58. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I had the opportunity of speaking shortly when we last met and I do not
wish to keep the Council now, but I would like to say a
word about the provision of troops and of finance for the
United Nations Force. When we wish the end, we must
provide the means, and I am glad to be amongst the first,
with the representative of Denmark and the representative
of the United States, to be able to make our statement in
response to the request which has just been put to us by the
Secretary-General. My country will maintain its full military contingent as its contribution to the Force and will
meet alI the costs of that contingent. I am also glad to be
able to announce immediately that my Government will

64. Finally, I should like to say that all of US,I am sure,
will join in extending to you, Sir, our President and OUI
leader, a message of our gratitude for the initiative which
you have taken, for the tact which you have shown, for tht
readiness to find a way when sometimes we could not set
any course which could be followed successfully. lt maybt
that we shall not have another opportunity to PaY e”
6

; respects to you, but I am sure that I speak not only for
every member of this Council but for every representative
in the United Nations when I say that we all hold you in
: th.e highest respect as one of the Ieaders of the United
Nations. Long may you continue SO.
61:. I suppose that, finally, we would all wish to extend to
Cyprus our wishes for a very peaceful Christmas and a
much happier New Year-a New Year, so we trust, of
reconciliation and peaceful settlement.
: 66. The PRESIDENT: I call now on the representative of
Greece.
t
I
( 6’!. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece) (truarzsluted from Fremzh):
1
Wr. President, you were kind enough to express your
appreciation of the co-operation you have received from
t
the parties concerned. I represent one of these parties and I
> ! sllould like to take advantage of your permission to exercise
my right of reply and, in my turn, very briefly express my
: d~eIegation’s gratitude to you and to the members of the
Council for your patience and perseverance, which have
:
2 I helped the Council to reach a positive and, I hope,
3 ; e3nstructive result this evening.
e /
i 68. I shall use my right of reply to answer the representl 1 tative of the Soviet Union. Mr. Fedorenko is getting into
’ the habit of attacking Greece every time we meet to discuss
tile Cyprus situation. Yet he is too experienced not to be
n I1 aware that the Council’s rules of procedure are thereby
e 1 infringed. He knows the Charter well enough to realize that
tt Eby saying what he has said, he is violating Article 2,
y i paragraph 7. He is usually much too courteous to seek to
E- 1 take advantage of the courtesy of others, and deep down he
It
I must realize how preposterous it is for him to play the
.h i professorin democracy and choose a Greek for his pupil.
w i
/ 69. Mr. Fedorenko is very much aware of all these things.
at
tll 1 One point, however, escaped his attention and I should like
ie 1 to say a word or two about it. He made a statement in the
Cl1
{ Council. He said that the Greek Government and its agents
’ in Cyprus, in seeking to impose enosis on the Island, were
1 responsible for present events there. In other words, he
/ directly accused my country of having wished to annex
1Y
xe
Cyprus. The Council will surely agree that the accusation
Id
Callsfor a reply.
ae
t0
‘70. Mr. Fedorenko must be familiar enough with the
?d
(definition of the word “annexation”. According to the
dictionary, it means to attach a certain country to one’s
ry
in
awn country against the wishes of the inhabitants of the
territory. Contemporary history books and those written
nd
m
before the October Revolution show us that the desire of
the Cypriots to join Greece has always existed.
on
ne
71. I once mentioned that a certain Kyprianou-not
our
colleague, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, but an archbishop-was hanged 150 years ago for uttering that word.
re,
JUT Since then, Cypriots have continously called for the
attachment of their country to Greece and, with the
ich
establishment of the United Nations and its Charter, they
the
see finally found a peaceful and democratic means to attain
that goal, by exercising their right to self-determination.
be
31ir Yet it is precisely during the United Nations era that they

have been told -they shall not exercise this fundamental
human right. I do not believe that during all these years
Greece has shown signs of wishing to annex Cyprus. Nor do
I believe that the Cypriots themselves have given any sign of
wanting to join Greece without the democratic procedure
of exercising the right to self-determination.
72. To come here at this moment and say that the Greek
Government has just discovered enosisin order to annex
Cyprus is, I feel, an insult to the Cypriot people on the part
of the Soviet Union’s representative, which they will find it
difficult to forget. Moreover, it runs counter to statements
made the other day by the representative of Turkey, when
he assured the Council that it was not Greece, but Cyprus,
which was following the course attributed to Greece by
Mr. Fedorenko.
73. The PRESIDENT: I recognize the representative of
the Soviet Union in exercise of his right of reply.
74, Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, when we
stated our position on this item, we, as you obviously
realized, based ourselves only on facts and did not refer to
any particular State. The Soviet delegation has, as always,
stressed in that statement the fact that the destiny of the
people of Cyprus should be decided lawfully, asin the case
of all the peoples of this world, by the Cypriots themselves,
both Greek and Turkish.
75. But it was quite clear that the United States representative, to whom these things are more obvious, took our
comments about the hatching of intrigues and the imperialist conspiracies against Cyprus as applying to him. He even
tried to boast about the mission of the American envoy,
Vance, of whom the United States probably expected a
great deal and whom they were ready to place in the role of
a peace-maker. But no disguises could conceal the interference of NATO and Washington in the internal affairs of
Cyprus.
76. The question is being examined by the United
Nations, and the constant attention of the Security Council
is focused on it. In accordance with the decisions that had
been taken, the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
U Thant, took appropriate steps with the approval of the
Security Council, having sent his Representative, Ambassador Rolz-Bennett, to the capitals of the countries which are
involved in the situation on and around Cyprus. In this
way, he as chief executive of this Organization, tried to do
everything he could to bring the situation back to normal.
So why is an attempt being made in these circumstances to
bring in certain personalities, as a substitute for the efforts
of the Secretary-General and of the United Nations as a
whole? And why, I would ask, in these circumstances send
envoys extraordinary from one of the countries?
77. We realize that somebody would like to place the blue
helmet of the United Nations on Washington’s travelling
salesman, Mr. Vance, and then pay him, at the expenseof
others, including the Soviet Union, for useless services
rendered not for the United Nations nor for peace, but for
the NATO military bloc. But even in our most sanguineand
fanciful dreams, we should keep a sense of proportion. We

happen to be in the Security Council, not in our private
theatre-box, where we can indulge our dreams and fancies.

problem of Cyprus is for the people of Cyprus to determine
and decide and resolve on the basis of accepted democratic
principles, the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations-the principles which we uphold in every similar
case.

78. We fully confirm our position of principle, and if the
United States representative considers that respect for an
observance of the United Nations Charter is merely, to use
his own words, commonplace, then we can only express our
deep regret.
79. The PRESIDENT:
Turkey.

85. Apart from that, I do not wish to enter into any
controversial subject or into any controversy.
86. I should simply like to thank the Council most
sincerely for its keen interest and continuous efforts to
reach a conclusion, as exampled by the resolution adopted
earlier; we welcome it as a most constructive one.

I call upon the representative of

80. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): I had no intention of speaking
at this late stage and I wish only to say that the Council is
fortunate in having had the opportunity of hearing the
remarks made by my colleague from Greece with regard to
the question of enosis, or annexation, It only hopes to
throw light on what I had to clarify to the Council the
other day on the same subject.

87. In particular I should like to express thanks for what
has been said about my contribution in this respect, and for
the generous remarks made by the representative of the
United Kingdom. I can assure the Council that we shall
abide by what I stated the other day-that we consider
ourselves committed to a peaceful solution, but a solution
which is in accordance with the principles of the United
Nations.

81. It is obvious that a people can do whatever it likes
except alienate its sovereignty, especially if the question is
not one of a people but of two peoples inhabiting the same
country. The peoples of Cyprus have chosen to live
together as a nation and live together as a nation they shall,
and neither the one community nor the other should be
given the right to take the other by force and bring it under
the rule of a foreign country.

88. Above all, Mr. President, I should like to thank you
personally most sincerely for your guidance and your great
contribution towards achieving the results which have been
achieved.
89. I should like to reiterate our gratitude to the Secretary-General for everything that he has been doing for
Cyprus and for everything he continues to do, and also to
express our appreciation for his representative, Mr. RolzBennett, who went to the three countries during the crisis
in an effort to assist in resolving it. And I should not like to
let this opportunity go by without making specific reference to Mr. Osorio-Tafall and General Martola, who are
doing their utmost in fulfilling the task which was entrusted
to them.

82. Having said that, I wish to express my deep gratitude
to you, personally, Sir, and to all others who have helped to
bring forth a resolution which we consider to be constructive.
83. The PRESIDENT:
Cyprus.

I call upon the representative of

84. Mr. KYPRIANOU
(Cyprus): I intend to keep the
promise which I gave to this Council at the last meeting and
not to enter into any kind of polemics. There is much I
could say on what has been said, and on some of the things
that have been said today; indeed, I could also elaborate at
length on things that were said the other day. However, in
reply to what has just been said by the representative of
Turkey, I simply wish to state that, as we see it, the

90. In conclusion, I welcome what has been said tonight
by the Secretary-General and I wish to assure him that my
Government accepts his good offices and that we are ready
to co-operate promptly with him.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m

8

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications.moy
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS
be

obtoined
or write

from
bookstores
tar United
Nations,

and

distributors
Soles
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
ddpositoires
du
Notions

Unies,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Las publicaciones
en todos
portes
Yentas,

Litho in U.N.

des
monde

Nuevo

Section

LES
Nutions
entier.

PUBLICATIONS

DES

Unies
son!
Informer-vous

en vente
ouprhr

des ventes,

PUBLICACIONES
de 10s Nociones
de1 mundo.
Consulte

York

New

York

ou

DE LAS
Unidas
estbn
o su tibrero

NATIONS

de

UNIES

dons
les librairies
votre
librairie
ou

et les ogences
adressez-vour
61

Genbve.

NACIONES
en vento
o dirljose

UNIDAS
en

librerios
o: Nociones

y coscts distribuidoras
Unidas,
Secci6n

de

o Ginebra.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

35741-January

1971-2,100
