UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/221
12 March 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 11 MARCH 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached letter dated 9 March 1998 which I
have received from the Chairman of the International Monitoring Committee
established pursuant to the mandate of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) (see annex).
Attached to the letter is the report of the Member States participating in
MISAB, as requested by the Security Council in its resolution 1152 (1998) of
5 February 1998. I should be grateful if you would bring the letter and its
enclosure to the attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

98-06035 (E)

120398

120398

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/221
English
Page 2

Annex
[Original:

French]

Letter dated 9 March 1998 from the Chairman of the International
Monitoring Committee addressed to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the report covering the
period from 3 February to 10 March 1998, requested by the Security Council in
paragraph 10 of its resolution 1152 (1998) concerning the situation in the
Central African Republic.

(Signed) Gen. Amadou Toumani TOURÉ
Chairman of the International
Monitoring Committee

/...

S/1998/221
English
Page 3

Appendix
[Original:

French]

Report to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1152 (1998)
concerning the situation in the Central African Republic
(10 March 1998)

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
On 5 February 1998, the Security Council unanimously adopted its resolution
1152 (1998), which was a continuation of its earlier resolution 1136 (1997). In
paragraph 10 of its resolution 1152 (1998), the Council requested the Member
States participating in the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB), namely, the International Monitoring Committee
for the Follow-up of the Bangui Agreements, which represents them, to provide a
report to the Security Council through the Secretary-General before
16 March 1998.
2.
This report describes the developments in the situation in the Central
African Republic during the period from 3 February to 10 March 1998.

II.

POLITICAL LEADERSHIP

3.
The International Monitoring Committee for the Follow-up of the Bangui
Agreements, chaired by General Amadou Toumani Touré, is the body that directs
the actions of MISAB, since it receives the necessary political guidance
directly from the heads of State concerned, and especially from the President of
the Gabonese Republic, who is Chairman of the International Mediation Committee.
4.
MISAB is under the patronage of President El Hadj Omar Bongo of the Gabon
Republic, senior head of State of the International Mediation Committee. It is
under the political authority of General Amadou Toumani Touré, Chairman of the
International Monitoring Committee.

III.

LOGISTICAL AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT TO THE INTERNATIONAL
MONITORING COMMITTEE

5.
It should be noted that, since its establishment by the heads of the States
members of the International Mediation Committee, the International Monitoring
Committee has received logistical and technical support from the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP).

/...

S/1998/221
English
Page 4

IV.

LOGISTICAL AND FINANCIAL SUPPORT TO THE MISSION

6.
As indicated in the previous reports, MISAB receives logistical support
from the participating States, France and the Government of the Central African
Republic. It also received support previously from the Organization of African
Unity (OAU).
7.
The International Monitoring Committee welcomes the imminent establishment
of a United Nations peacekeeping force in the Central African Republic to
strengthen the peace that has been restored with the involvement and support of
the International Monitoring Committee and MISAB. While not wishing to prejudge
the mission to be entrusted to the peacekeeping force, the Committee suggests
that its mandate include the implementation of those provisions of the Bangui
Agreements that have not yet been implemented.

V.

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BANGUI AGREEMENTS

8.
The Bangui Agreements of 25 January 1997, the outcome of strenuous efforts
of the Committee on Consensus-building and Dialogue, endorsed and chaired by
General Amadou Toumani Touré, Chairman of the International Monitoring
Committee, constitute the indispensable basis for the establishment and
strengthening of peace and the achievement of national reconciliation, a
necessary stage in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Central African
Republic.
9.
The implementation of these Agreements was planned in accordance with a
timetable established by the International Monitoring Committee and accepted by
all. However, it must be acknowledged that there has been some delay in the
full implementation of certain provisions deemed important by one or another of
the parties. After the many incidents that have lined the perilous path of the
national reconciliation process, implementation of the main headings in the
timetable established by the Committee is currently proceeding at a somewhat
faster pace.
10. The Forum to Evaluate the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements, held on
19 February 1998, noted the following:
(a) A number of major provisions have been implemented in their entirety;
these provisions concern:
-

Deployment of an inter-African force;

-

Formation of a government of national union;

-

Abandonment of the judicial enforcement of the parliamentary audit;

-

Amnesty covering offences in the context of the third rebellion;

/...

S/1998/221
English
Page 5

-

Certain disarmament issues (reintegration of the soldiers who took
part in the rebellion into the Central African armed forces, security
measures and resumption of short-wave broadcasts by Radio
Centrafricaine);

-

Situation of former heads of State (Act No. 97/012 of 31 October 1997
has been followed by Implementation Decree No. 98.038 of
4 March 1998);

-

Pacification measures, especially security conditions in educational
institutions and the revision of the 1996/97 school calendar;

-

Measures to ensure peace and development;

-

Preliminary Agreement on a National Reconciliation Pact.

The provision concerning the holding of a national reconciliation conference,
which on 19 February 1998 was considered to be in the process of implementation,
should now be included among the provisions that have been implemented,
following the memorable conference held from 26 February to 5 March 1998.
(b) Other provisions are in an advanced stage of implementation; these
provisions concern:
-

The Electoral Code and the Independent Joint Electoral Commission (the
relevant bill, which was considered for the first time at a special
session of the National Assembly in February, will probably be adopted
during the National Assembly's regular session, which began on
9 March 1998);

-

The Press Code and the National Council for Radio and Television (the
relevant bills will be considered during this first session of the
National Assembly);

-

Recommendations of the General Meeting on National Defence;

-

Procedures for appointment to the University of Bangui.

(c) Certain provisions implementation of which has begun and will continue
over a more or less extended period; these provisions concern:
-

Implementation of the Political Agreement Protocol and the Minimum
Standards Programme;

-

Respect for the Constitution and constitutional legality, for the
institutions, laws and regulations of the Republic, and for human
rights;

-

National reconciliation with its two components: evaluation of the
damage caused by the various crises and compensation of the victims;

-

Good governance.
/...

S/1998/221
English
Page 6

(d) Certain other provisions have not yet begun to be implemented; these
provisions concern:
-

Recommendations of the General Meeting on Youth;

-

Amendment of the codes of criminal procedure;

-

Streamlining of the Office of the President of the Republic;

-

Revision of certain articles of the Constitution;

-

Negotiation of a social contract with trade unions.

11. It must be stressed that the thorny problem of arrears of wages and
salaries, pensions and scholarships unfortunately falls into the category of
measures that have not yet been implemented owing to the precarious state of the
national economy and public finance.
12. Following an assessment of all the provisions that have not yet been
implemented or have been implemented only in part, a three-stage plan of action
(short, medium and long term) was prepared and submitted to the National
Reconciliation Conference, which adopted the plan with a number of slight
amendments.
13. More specifically, we are pleased to report that all the headings in the
timetable established by the International Monitoring Committee have been
implemented either entirely or in part (at an advanced stage).
14. In particular, the heading concerning disarmament is still being
implemented, even if the recovery of arms is proceeding at a slower pace than at
the outset. The disarmament operations in Bangui took place in accordance with
methodology described in the previous reports. To date, the results have been
as follows:
(a)

Heavy weapons:

92.91 per cent;

(b)

Light weapons:

57.47 per cent;

(c)

Munitions of various types:

464,604 units;

(d)

Explosives and detonators:

26,714 units.

15. Considering the various factors mentioned in the previous reports, it is
easy to understand why the recovery of all light weapons remains uncertain in
spite of all the means and strategies employed. While some hope remains for the
successful continuation of disarmament operations both in Bangui and in remote
areas of the country, it would be unrealistic to believe that the recovery of
light weapons will be as extensive as that of heavy weapons.
16. In the light of the various unconfirmed rumours, which have given rise to
suspicion and a sort of psychosis, to the effect that a quantity of weapons
difficult to estimate was imported into the country on various dates, the
/...

S/1998/221
English
Page 7

International Monitoring Committee and MISAB believe that the disarmament
operations are not yet finished, and are continuing to devote painstaking and
patient attention to them.
17. It is clear that the accounts relating to weapons recovery pertain only to
arms and munitions taken from the State armouries. This is why the
International Monitoring Committee and MISAB have remained vigilant and have not
ignored any information provided to them concerning weapons caches.
18. The provision concerning the parliamentary audit has had varying degrees of
success, and an act was finally adopted by the National Assembly on
13 February 1998 and promulgated as Act No. 98.003 on the same day by the
President of the Republic.
19. With regard to the provision on the implementation of the recommendations
of the General Meeting on National Defence, the Commission on the Restructuring
of the Defence and Security Forces, chaired by the Minister of Defence under the
supervision of the Chairman of the International Monitoring Committee, filed its
report on 29 January 1998. The Commission provides the framework in which
solutions acceptable to all can be worked out for the main recommendations in
dispute. These are the recommendations relating to the "dissolution" of the
Section d'enquête, de recherche et de la documentation (Survey, Research and
Documentation Section) and the Centre national de recherche et d'investigation
(National Research and Investigation Centre) and the recommendation relating to
the "reduction of the staff" of the Presidential Guard. The Commission on the
Restructuring of the Defence and Security Forces has decided on:
(a) Dissolution of the Section d'enquête, de recherche et de la
documentation and the assignment of its members to their original units;
(b)

Dissolution of the Centre national de recherche et d'investigation;

(c) Establishment of a documentation bureau to take charge of national
security;
(d) Strict implementation of Presidential Decree No. 94/87 of 8 March 1994
concerning the Presidential Guard, which conferred on the Guard functions
accepted by all (excluding abuses, which were noted and censured), and,
consequently, restriction of the number of members of that unit.
20. On 4 March 1998, the President of the Republic signed decrees dealing with
the four above-mentioned measures. However, it must be acknowledged that
certain provisions differ from the proposals submitted by the Commission on the
Restructuring of the Defence and Security Forces, in particular with regard to
the presence in the provinces of a battalion of the new Force spéciale pour la
défense des institutions républicaines (Special Force for the Defence of
Republican Institutions) and the inclusion of an investigatory police unit in
the Direction générale de la documentation d'État (Directorate-General for State
Documentation) attached to the Office of the President of the Republic.

/...

S/1998/221
English
Page 8

21. The National Reconciliation Conference finally took place from
26 February to 5 March 1998. It was opened by President Patassé, with the
participation of representatives from all components of Central African society.
A few incidents occurred but were quickly brought under control thanks to the
vigilance of the International Monitoring Committee and the real desire of the
majority of the Central African people to achieve national reconciliation.
Thus, the suspension declared by the delegates of the Groupe des onze partis
politiques de l'opposition (Group of Eleven), the Mouvement pour la démocratie
et le développement (Movement for Democracy and Development) and the Union des
syndicats des travailleurs centrafricains (Union of Trade Unions of Central
African Workers) was of short duration.
22. At the technical level, the work of the Conference, chaired by
Reverend Isaac Zokoé, Dean of the Bangui School of Theology, proceeded smoothly
thanks to the methodical and meticulous preparation by the Preparatory Committee
headed by Mr. Laurent Gomina-Pampali, Minister for Human Rights and Promotion of
Democratic Culture and National Reconciliation, with the political support of
the International Monitoring Committee and financing from UNDP.
23. After six days of work, the National Reconciliation Conference adopted a
number of important resolutions and decisions the most important of which are
those relating to the National Reconciliation Pact and its annexes (Plan of
Action for the effective implementation of the provisions of the Bangui
Agreements that have not yet been implemented and the establishment of the
Monitoring and Arbitration Committee).
24.

Other resolutions and recommendations should also be mentioned:
(a)

(b)
leaders;
(c)

Recommendation on regionalization and decentralization;
Recommendation on the restoration of the authority of traditional

Recommendation on the implementation of the Family Code;

(d) Recommendation on the implementation of the conclusions of the General
Meeting on Youth;
(e)
Policy;

Recommendation on the implementation of the National Population

(f) Recommendation on the organization of the General Meeting on Economy
and Finance;
(g)

Recommendation on foreign relations;

(h) Recommendation on the preparation and implementation of a national
plan of action to combat poverty;
(i)

Recommendation on respect for democratic rules;

(j)

Resolution on the economic and social situation;
/...

S/1998/221
English
Page 9

(k)

Resolution on the administrative situation;

(l)

Resolution on national union;

(m)

Resolution on democratic culture;

(n)

Resolution on the political situation;

(o) Resolution on an agreement between the Central African Republic and
the Bretton Woods institutions;
(p) Resolution on the measures to be taken to compensate the victims of
the rebellions;
(q) Resolution on the proclamation of 5 March as National Day of
Reconciliation.
25. The Conference also took note of three declarations and two motions to
strengthen the spirit of reconciliation among all components of the nation. As
Mr. Laurent Gomina-Pampali, General Rapporteur of the Conference, concluded:
"The important results that have been achieved are a result of the
physical, moral and political contributions of all components of the
Central African nation during the six days of work. These results involve
all components. Their effective implementation is the condition sine qua
non for the country's return to peace and unity, and its ability to ensure
sustainable human development."
26. The closing meeting was held on 5 March 1998 under the chairmanship of
His Excellency President El Hadj Omar Bongo of Gabon, and was attended by
President Idriss Deby of Chad, President Alpha Oumar Konaré of Mali,
President Laurent Désiré Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of the Sudan, General Amadou Toumani Touré,
Chairman of the International Monitoring Committee, representatives of the heads
of State of Senegal, Burkina Faso, Togo, Uganda and Cameroon, Mr. Ibrahima Fall,
Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations for Political Affairs,
representatives of the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity,
the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Cultural and Scientific
Organization (UNESCO), the Secretary-General of the French-Speaking Communities
(Francophonie) and the Administrator of UNDP.
27. After listening to the messages of the Secretary-General of the FrenchSpeaking Communities, the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity, the Director-General of UNESCO, the Administrator of UNDP and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, the General Rapporteur of the
Conference presented the results of the work of the Conference, the success of
which justified the deep satisfaction of all participants.
28. Three important statements, full of lessons of wisdom, tolerance,
acceptance of the right to be different, love of one's neighbour, national
solidarity and peaceful coexistence among all of the country's social strata and
/...

S/1998/221
English
Page 10

ethnic groups marked the conclusion of this great meeting, which will be a
milestone in the history of the Central African Republic:
(a) Statement by General Amadou Toumani Touré, Chairman of the
International Monitoring Committee;
(b) Statement by Mr. Ange Félix Patassé, President of the Central African
Republic, Head of State;
(c) Statement by El Hadj Omar Bongo, President of the Gabonese Republic,
Chairman of the International Mediation Committee.
29. One concern was widely shared by the participants in the National
Reconciliation Conference, namely, the need to create a climate conducive to
national reconciliation. Necessary and useful conditions for the creation of
such a climate include:
(a)

Regular payment of wages and salaries;

(b) Full implementation of the various provisions of the Bangui
Agreements;
(c) Vigorous measures to ensure economic recovery (including an agreement
with the Bretton Woods institutions);
(d) Launching of initiatives to find a solution to the problems of the
victims of the rebellions.
30. Given the excellent results of the National Reconciliation Conference, it
is to be hoped that the situation will progressively improve. One of the most
significant indications of the beginning of the long-awaited détente was the
understanding, reached on 3 March 1998 through the good offices of the
International Monitoring Committee, between the Minister of the Interior,
General François Ndjadder-Bedaya, and Professor Abel Goumba, acting on behalf of
the Group of Eleven. It should be recalled that General Ndjadder had lodged a
complaint against the leaders of the Group of Eleven following a statement made
by those leaders on 1 July 1997 that the General considered slanderous. This
incident jeopardized not only the holding of the Conference but also the entire
process of restoring and strengthening peace. As a result of the understanding,
General Ndjadder withdrew his complaint, to the relief of all concerned.

VI.

COOPERATION WITH THE CENTRAL AFRICAN AUTHORITIES AND
THE VARIOUS GROUPS OF POLITICAL PARTIES

31. The International Monitoring Committee remains in permanent contact with
all persons active in the country's political and social life during this final
stage of the Mission in which the essential measures to be taken to strengthen
peace cannot and must not be neglected. The Committee and MISAB must therefore
not lower their guard until they are replaced by the proposed United Nations
peacekeeping force.
/...

S/1998/221
English
Page 11

VII.

COOPERATION WITH INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

32. Everyone in Bangui (the political class, civil society, the military and
foreigners) is convinced of the need for the presence after 16 March 1998 of a
military and security force that would help consolidate the peace and stimulate
the process of national reconciliation. Everyone recognizes that, even though
the elections are not an end in themselves, their smooth conduct can only help
stabilize the situation.
33. In spite of all the recovery efforts currently in progress, the Central
African Republic, where industrial and commercial activities have clearly been
in a state of paralysis for several months, is still experiencing difficulties
in meeting both its internal obligations (wages and salaries, pensions,
scholarships, the functioning of basic social services and of the State
apparatus) and its external commitments, in particular the repayment of the
arrears due to the Bretton Woods institutions.
34. Moreover, failure to resolve the problem of arrears of wages and salaries,
pensions and scholarships accounts for the persistence of a very charged social
situation. The main concern of the Central African authorities is therefore to
find the resources needed to resolve the problem of seven months' arrears of
wages and salaries and several additional months' arrears of pensions and
scholarships.
35. The groups of affiliated trade unions, which hitherto have demonstrated a
great deal of understanding and moderation given the situation, are beginning to
show signs of irritation and impatience.

VIII.

DEPLOYMENT OF THE FORCE

36. Brigadier-General Barthélémy Ratanga, recently appointed by President Bongo
to replace late Brigadier-General Augustin Mombo-Moukagni, took up his duties on
27 February 1998, becoming the third Commander of MISAB.
37. MISAB is continuing to ensure security in all neighbourhoods of the Central
African capital by occupying 20 surveillance posts and is participating in joint
security patrols in conjunction with the Central African security and defence
forces in all districts of Bangui.
38. Hold-ups, armed robberies and other criminal acts have diminished
considerably thanks both to the progress achieved in disarmament and the
constant vigilance instituted by the system of joint patrols.

IX.

CONCLUSIONS

39. The International Monitoring Committee for the Follow-up of the Bangui
Agreements is keenly interested in extending until 15 April 1998 the effect of
Security Council resolution 1152 (1998) relating to the mandate of MISAB, as
recommended by the Secretary-General. This period will enable the various
parties concerned to make all the necessary arrangements for the deployment of a
/...

S/1998/221
English
Page 12

multinational force during the post-MISAB period in order to ensure the security
conditions required for the implementation of essential reforms and the
organization of free, democratic and transparent elections.
40. The International Monitoring Committee hopes to continue to enjoy the
logistical and technical support of UNDP in order to pursue its twofold mission
of ensuring the political direction of MISAB and monitoring the implementation
of the Bangui Agreements through continuing mediation until the relevant
Security Council decisions have been implemented.
41. In order to avoid any slippage or any risk of a return to square one, which
might lead to social disruption, it is urged that all measures should be taken
at the appropriate levels, including the level of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, to promote greater awareness among States Members of the United
Nations, international organizations and financial institutions with a view to
providing the necessary assistance to the development of the Central African
Republic, as requested by the Security Council in paragraph 9 its resolution
1152 (1998). It is well understood that all these measures will complement the
necessary efforts of the Central African authorities. Any contrary approach
could jeopardize the opportunity for this country to overcome the crisis once
and for all, thus irreparably causing the failure of this original experiment in
internal conflict resolution that the current mediation effort in the Central
African Republic represents.
42. The International Monitoring Committee is determined to succeed in its
mission, which is to satisfy the expectations of the peoples and heads of State
of Africa that the Central African crisis will be properly settled, and it will
continue to spare no effort in urging all the parties to the Central African
crisis to continue to work with wisdom and dignity towards the effective
implementation of the Bangui Agreements. This is the price of real and lasting
peace.
43. At a meeting that he chaired on Monday, 9 March 1998, and attended by
members of the Government and by prefects and mayors from all over the country,
His Excellency Mr. Ange Félix Patassé, President of the Republic and Head of
State, reiterated his unwavering commitment to respect the National
Reconciliation Pact that he signed together with official representatives of the
various components of the nation on 5 March 1998.
44. The International Monitoring Committee hopes that the structures that will
replace it and MISAB, namely the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations International Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINURCA), will make every effort not only to complete the tasks already begun
but also to strengthen the peace that has been regained with the invaluable and
unforgettable assistance of the countries participating in MISAB, France, UNDP
and OAU.
45. The International Monitoring Committee and MISAB are pleased to have made,
together with the heads of State of the International Mediation Committee, their
very African contribution to the search for solutions to the serious crisis that

/...

S/1998/221
English
Page 13

nearly rent the heart of Africa. They are grateful to all components of Central
African society, particularly official authorities at all levels and officials
of political parties and trade unions, for their vital and inspiring cooperation
with the mediation team in a spirit of African solidarity and in the higher
interests of the Central African Republic.

-----
