V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1. Reaffirms the right of land-locked developing countries to free access to and from the sea and their right to
freedom of transit;
2. Appeals to all States, international organizations and
financial institutions to implement, as a matter of urgency
and priority, the specific actions related to the particular
needs and problems of land-locked developing countries
envisaged in resolutions 63 (III), 98 (IV) and 123 (V) of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
in the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade, in the Substantial
New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the least developed countries 73 and in other relevant resolutions of the
United Nations;
3. Urges all donor countries, as well as others in a
position to do so, and the international organizations concerned, to provide land-locked developing countries with
appropriate financial and technical assistance in the form
of grants or concessional loans for the construction and
improvement of their transport and transit infrastructures
and facilities;
4. Urges also the international community and multilateral and bilateral financial institutions to intensify efforts
in raising the net flow of resources to land-locked developing
countries to help offset the adverse effects of their disadvantageous geographical situation on their economic development efforts, in keeping with the over-all development
needs of each land-locked developing country;
5. Invites the transit countries to co-operate effectively
with the land-locked developing countries in harmonizing
transport planning and promoting other joint ventures in the
field of transport at the regional, subregional and bilateral
levels;
6. Commends the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other United Nations agencies for their work
and the assistance they have provided to the land-locked
developing countries and invites them to continue to take
appropriate and effective measures to respond to the specific
needs of those countries;
7. Invites the international community to give financial
support to interested transit and land-locked developing
countries in the construction of alternative routes to the sea;
8. Recommends continued and intensified activities relating to the conducting of necessary studies and the implementation of special actions and action programmes for
the land-locked developing countries, including those in the
area of economic co-operation among developing countries,
as well as those that have been envisaged in the programme
of work of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the regional commissions and other programmes and activities at the regional and subregional
levels.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/176.

Expansion of the conference facilities of the
Economic Commission for Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1981 /
65 of 24 July 1981,
Recalling also that the Economic Commission for Africa
was established at Addis Ababa in 1958 and that its con13
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 1981 (United Nations publication. Sale,
No. E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A.

111

ference facilities, which were donated to the United Nations
by the Government of Ethiopia, were designed to service
the limited number of African countries that were States
Members of the United Nations in the late 1950s and early
1960s,
Noting with satisfaction the increase in the number of
independent States in Africa as a result of decolonization,
Noting further that there are at present fifty African States
Members of the United Nations and that there is the prospect
that more will be admitted to membership in the United
Nations,
Mindful of the heavy responsibilities entrusted in the present decade to the Economic Commission for Africa as the
main centre for the promotion of the economic development
of Africa, in general. and for the implementation of the
Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, in
particular. which the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity adopted at its
second extraordinary session, held at Lagos on 28 and 29
April 1980. 74
Noting that the present conference facilities at the headquarters of the Economic Commission for Africa are believed to be inadequate in relation to the needs of the large
number of African States that have become members of the
Commission since its establishment and the growing number
of international, intergovernmental and regional organizations participating in conferences there,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake, as a
matter of urgency, a study of the adequacy of the conference
facilities at the headquarters of the Economic Commission
for Africa to meet the demands thereon as a result of the
enlarged membership and increased activities of the
Commission;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to report the
findings of the study together with his suggestions, through
the Economic Commission for Africa at its seventeenth session and the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1982, to the General Assembly at its
thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/177.

Transport and Communications Decade in
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ I60 of 19 December 1977,
33/ 197 of 29 January I 979 and 34/ 15 of 9 November 1979
on the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa
and. in particular, its resolution 35/108 of 5 December 1980,
by which it approved the organization of consultative technical meetings for the various African subregions,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions 1979/
61 of 3 August 1979, 1980/46 of 23 July 1980 and 1981 /
67 of 24 July 198 I on the Transport and Communications
Decade in Africa,
Recalling also resolution 341 (XIV) adopted on 27 March
1979 by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa at its fifth meeting,7 5 in which the Conference urged member States to give high priority to the
development of transport and communications,
Recalling further resolution CM/Res. 738 (XXXlll) adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
'

4

A/S-11114. annex I

·, See Official Rffords of th,· Iiconormc and Social Co1111cil, /979,
.\upplemn11 No 15 (E!l<J79i50). part two. sect I)
