II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(f) To report to the Special Committee on the
measures taken in the implementation of the present
resolution;
4. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations having a special
interest in the field of decolonization to undertake or
intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and within their respective spheres of competence,
the large-scale dissemination of the infarmation referred to in paragraph 2 above;
5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the
implementation of the present resolution and report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-faurth
session.
82nd plenary meeting
13 December 1978

the General Assembly at its thirty-faurth session,
through the Economic and Social Council, which could
then be made available to Governments of Member
States far their assistance in setting up national institutions far the promotion and protection of human
rights;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the participation of Member States in seminars organized at a world-wide level is based on the principie of equitable geographical representation;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to transmit
the present resolution to all Member States, drawing
their attention to paragraphs 2 and 3 above.
83rd plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/107.

33 / 46.

National institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/123 of 16 December
1977 on the observance of the thirtieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in
which it suggested that a special seminar within the
programme of advisory services should be organized
in 1978 at Geneva, at a world-wide level, on the
subject of national and local institutions far the
promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
23 (XXXIV) of 8 March 1978, 28 in which the Commission decided that the seminar on national and
local institutions far the promotion and protection
of human rights, to be held in September 1978, should,
as a part of its task, suggest certain possible guidelines far the structure and functioning of national
institutions, based on the provisions of that resolution
and the annex thereto,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report on
the Seminar on National and Local lnstitutions far
the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, 29
which took place at Geneva from 18 to 29 September 1978;
2. Requests Member States to comment on the
guidelines far the structure and functioning of national institutions, as suggested by the Seminar and
circulated by the Secretary-General in accordance
with Commission on Human Rights resolution 23
(XXXIV);
3. Invites Member States to communicate their
comments to the Secretary-General, together with all
relevant infarmation relating to their own experience
in the functioning of national and local institutions in
the field of human rights, befare the thirty-fifth session
of the Commission on Human Rights;
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
consider the guidelines suggested by the Seminar in
its report far the structure and functioning of national
institutions far the promotion and protection of human
rights;
5. Further requests the Commission on Human
Rights to send its recommendations in this regard to
2 8 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
29 ST/HR/SER.A/2 and Add.1.

21

Admission of the Commonwealth of
Dominica to membership in the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 6 December 1978 that the Commonwealth
of Dominica should be admitted to membership in the
United Nations, 30
Having considered the application far membership
of the Commonwealth of Dominica, 81
Decides to admit the Commonwealth of Dominica
to membership in the United Nations.
87th plenary meeting
18 December 1978
33/182.

Question of Namibia:12

A
SITUATION IN NAMIBIA RESULTING PROM THE ILLEGAL
OCCUP ATION OF THE TERRITORY BY SouTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council far Namibia 38 and the relevant chapters of
the report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, 34
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI)
of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967
and subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council relating to the question of
Namibia, as well as the advisory opinion of the In ter3o Official Records of the General Assemb/y, Thirty-third
Session, Annexes, agenda item 25, document A/33/442.
3t A/33/404-S/12942. For the printed text, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Thirty-third Year, Supplement
far October, November and December 1978.
32 See also sect. I, foot-note 3, and sect. X.B.6, decision
33/407.
33 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplemcnt No. 24 (A/33/24).
B4 /bid.,
Supp/ement No. 23 (A/33/23/Rev.l ), vol. 1,
chaps. I, 11, IV and V, and vol. II, chap. VIII.

22

General Assemhly-Thirty-third Session

national Court of Justice of 21 June 1971,35 delivered
in response to the request addressed to it by the
Council in its resolution 284 (1970) of 29 July 1970,
Taking into consideration the relevant resolutions
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-first ordinary session,
held at Khartoum from 7 to 18 July 1978,36 and
subsequently endorsed by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its fifteenth ordinary session, held at Khartoum from 18 to 22 July 1978,37
Reafjirming that the Territory and people of Namibia are the direct responsibility of the United
Nations and that the Namibian people must be enabled
to attain self-determination and independence within
a united Namibia,
Strongly condemning South Africa's continued illegal
occupation of Namibia, its brutal repression of the
Namibian people and its persistent violation of their
human rights, as well as its efforts to destroy the
national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia,
Strongly condemning South Africa for its refusal to
comply with Security Council resolutions 385 (1976)
of 30 January 1976, 431 (1978) of 27 July 1978,
435 (1978) of 29 September 1978 and 439 (1978)
of 13 November 1978 and for its decision to promote
bogus arrangements under the pretense of conducting
a bona fi,de electoral process and to create a neocolonial puppet régime in Namibia in order to maintain
its policies of exploitation of the people and the
natural resources of the Territory.
Calling upan the international community, especially
all Member States, to refrain from according any
recognition to or co-operating with any régime which
the illegal South African administration may impose
u pon the N amibian people in disregard of the provisions of the resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council on the question of Namibia,
Noting with satisfaction the opposition of the Namibian people to South Africa's illegal presence in
the Territory and to its oppressive racist policies and,
in particular, the progress of their struggle in all its
forms for national liberation under the leadership of
the South West Africa People's Organization,
Strongly reiterating its support for the national
liberation movement of Namibia, the South West
Africa People's Organization, the sale and authentic
representative of the Namibian people in their struggle
to achieve self-determination, freedom and national
independence in a united Namibia,
Reafjirming its full support for the armed struggle
of the Namibian people under the leadership of the
South West Africa People's Organization,
Strongly condemning, as an act of colonial expansion, the decision of South Africa to annex W alvis
Bay, thereby undermining the territorial integrity of
Namibia,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
despite the relevant decisions of the United Nations
35 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence
of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) 110twithstanding
Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion,
J.C.!. Reports 1971, p. 16.
36 See A/33/235 and Corr.1, annex J.
37 /bid., annex II.

and the advisory op1mon of the International Court
of Justice of 21 June 1971, continue to maintain
diplomatic, economic, consular and other relations
with South Africa, purporting to act on behalf of or
concerning Namibia, as well as military or strategic
collaboration, all of which has the effect of supporting
or encouraging South Africa in its defiance of the
United Nations,
Strongly condemning the racist régime of South
Africa for its efforts to develop a nuclear capability
for military and aggressive purposes,
Gravely concerned at the militarization of Namibia
by the illegal occupation régime of South Africa, its
threats and its acts of aggression against independent
African countries,
Declaring that the natural resources of Namibia
are the birthright of the Namibian people and that
the exploitation of those resources by foreign economic
interests under the protection of the repressive racist
colonial administration, in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, of the pertinent resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council and
of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural
Resources of Namibia enacted by the United Nations
Council for Namibia on 27 September 1974,38 is
illegal and contributes to the maintenance of the illegal
occupation régime,
Strongly supporting the efforts of the United Nations
Council for Namibia in the discharge of the responsibilities entrusted to it by the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly,
l. Approves the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia;
. ~- Reiterates that Namibia is the direct responsib1hty of the United Nations until genuine self-determination and national independence are achieved
in the Territory and, for this purpose, reaffirms the
mandate given to the United Nations Council for
Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for
Namibia until independence;
3. Reafjirms the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination, freedom and national
independence in a united Namibia, including Walvis
Bay, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Na_tions and as recognized in General Assembly resolutlons 1514 (XV) and 2145 (XXI), as well as in
subsequent resolutions of the Assembly relating to
Namibia, and the legitimacy of their struggle by all
means at their disposal against the illegal occupation
of their Territory by South Africa;
4. Requests all Member States to co-operate fully
with the United Nations Council for Namibia, the
legal Administering Authority for the Territory until
independence, in discharging the mandate entrusted to
the Council under the terms and provisions of General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) and subsequent
resolutions of the Assembly;
5. Declares that the continued illegal occupation
of Namibia by South Africa constitutes an act of
aggression against the Namibian people and their national liberation movement, as well as against the
United Nations, which has direct responsibility over
the Territory until independence;
:is Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Twe11tv-11inth
Session, Supplement No. 24A (A/9624/Add.l), para. 84. The
Decree has been issued in final form in Namibia Gazette No. J.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

6. Declares that, in view of South Africa's consistent defiance of the United Nations, its illegal
occupation of the Territory of N!lmibia _and the war
of repression being waged there, 1~s pers1s_te!1t act~ of
aggression launc~ed from ~ases_ m Namibia ~gamst
independent Afncan countnes, 1ts present pohcy of
colonial expansion and its policy of apartheid, any
development of nuclear weapons by South Africa
constitutes a serious threat to international peace and
security;
7. Strongly condemns the activities of all foreign
corporations operating in Namibia. under the ill_e~al
administration of South Africa wh1ch are expl01tmg
illegally the human and natural res~mrces of the ?"erritory and demands that transnat10nal corporat10ns
comply with all pertinent resolutions of the United
Nations by immediately abstaining from any new investment in Namibia, by withdrawing from the Territory and generally by putting a~ end to_ ~heir . cooperation with the illegal South Afncan admmistrat10n;
8. Declares that South Africa is liable to pay
reparations to Namibia f?r. the d~mage caused by. its
illegal occupation of Namibia and its acts of aggress10n
against the Namibian people since the terminati?n
of its mandate over Namibia in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI);
9. Reiterates that Walvis Bay is an integral part
of Namibia in accordance with United Nations resolutions, in particular General Assembly resolution
S-9/2 of 3 May 1978 and Security Council resolution
432 (1978) of 27 July 1978, and that any decision
by South Africa to annex Walvis Bay is therefore
illegal, null and void;
1O. Strongly condemns South Africa for its persistent refusal to comply with the pertinent resolutions
of the Security Council, in particular resolution 385
(197 6), and subsequent resolutions of the Council;
11. Strongly condemns the decision by South
Africa to impose in Namibia a so-called interna!
settlement, designed to give a semblance of power
to a puppet régime and a cover of legality to the
racist occupation, to foster civil war and to propagate
the fiction that the struggle of the Namibian people
for the liberation of the Territory constitutes aggression
perpetrated from the outside;
12. Expresses grave concern that South Africa has
decided to promote its puppets and quislings of the
Democratic Turnhalle Alliance and other groups in
the service of neo-colonial and racist interests as an
altemative to the South West Africa People's Organization, which is fighting for the genuine national and
social liberation of Namibia as a united political
entity;
13. Recommends that, in the light of South
Africa's failure to comply with the provisions of
Security Council resolution 385 (1976) and its subsequent resolutions, the Council should urgently convene to take effective measures, including sanctions
provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter, particularly the imposition of comprehensive economic
sanctions, including a trade embargo, an oil embargo
and a complete arms embargo;
14. Decides to reconvene its thirty-third session,
at a time to be decided in consultation between the
President of the General Assembly, the President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia and the Secre-

23

tary-General in order to consider fully the question
of Namibia' and the implications of South Africa's
continued defiance of the resolutions of the Assembly
and the Security Council;
15. Calls upan the international community, especially all Member States, to refrain from according
any recognition to or co-operating with any régime
which the illegal South African administration may
impose upon the Namibian people in disregard of the
provisions of Security Council resolution 385 ( 1976)
and subsequent resolutions of the Council;
l 6. Strongly condemns the illegal South African
administration for its massive repression of the people
of Namibia and their national liberation movement,
the South West Africa People's Organization, with the
intention of establishing, among other things, an
atmosphere of intimidation and terror for the purpose
of imposing upon the Namibian people a political
arrangement aimed at subverting the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia and perpetuating a
ruthless policy of racial segregation;
17. Demands that South Africa release ali Namibian political prisoners, including all those imprisoned or detained in connexion with "offences"
under the so-called internal security laws, whether
such N amibians have been charged or tried or are
being held without charge, whether in Namibia or
South Africa;
18. Demands that South Africa ensure that all
Namibians currently in exile for political reasons may
return to their country without risk of arrest, detention,
intimidation, imprisonment or loss of life;
19. Reaffirms that the national liberation movement of Namibia, the South West Africa People's Organization, is the sole and authentic representative
of the Namibian people;
20. Appeals to all Member States to grant all
necessary support and assistance to the South West
Africa People's Organization in its struggle to achieve
independence and national unity in a free Namibia;
21. Strongly condemns South Africa for its military build-up in Namibia, its recruitment and training
of Namibians for tribal armies and the use of other
agents to carry out its policy of military adventurism
against neighbouring States, its threats and acts of
aggression against all independent African countries
and the forceful removal of Namibians from the
northern border of the Territory for military purposes;
22. Requests all States to take effective measures
to prevent the recruitment, training and transit of
mercenaries for service in Namibia;
23. Strongly condemns the racist régime of South
Africa for its development of a nuclear military
capacity;
24. Condemns those Western States which have
assisted South Africa in developing a nuclear-weapon
capability and urges again all Member States, individually and/ or collectively, to frustra te the attempts
by South Africa to develop nuclear weapons;
25. Requests those States which have not done
so to take steps to ensure the termination of all arrns
licensing agreements with South Africa and to prohibit
the transfer to South Africa of all information relating
to arms and armaments;

General Assembly-Thirty-tbird Session

24

26. Requests all States to cease any form of direct
or indirect military consultation, co-operation or collaboration with South Africa;
27. Decides to expand the United Nations Council
for Namibia by the addition of up to six members
on the basis of consultations by the President of the
General Assembly with the regional groups.
91 st plenary meeting
21 December 1978

B
REFUSAL OF SOUTH AFRICA TO COMPLY WITH
UNITED NATIONS RESOLUTIONS ON NAMIBIA

imposition of effective sanctions under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations;
8. Requests the Security Council to consider as
a matter of urgency further appropriate action under
the Charter, including Chapter VII thereof, in order
to secure South Africa's compliance with its relevant
resolutions;
9. Decides, if the Security Council should be
unable to act effectively, to consider the situation
further and to take all necessary measures in conformity with its relevant resolutions and the Charter
for the purpose of dealing with this threat to international peace and security;
l O. Requests the Secretary-General to report on
the progress in the implementation of the present
resolution.
91 st plenary meeting
21 December 1978

The General Assembly,
Having examined the current critica! situation in
Namibia,
Having noted the reports of the Secretary-General3 9
submitted pursuant to Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) of 29 September 1978 and 439 ( I 978) of
13 November 1978,
Reaffi,rming the legal responsibility of the United
Nations for Namibia and the obligation of the United
Nations to enable the Namibian people to exercise
freely their right to self-determination and independence through democratic elections under United
Nations supervision and control,
Recalling the Declaration on Namibia and Programme of Action in Support of Self-Determination
and National Independence for Namibia40 adopted
by the General Assembly at its ninth special session,
l. Condemns the South African régime for unilaterally holding elections in Namibia from 4 to 8
December 1978, in contravention and defiance of
Security Council resolutions 385 (1976) of 30 January 1976 and 439 (1978);
2. Declares those elections and their results to be
null and void and of no consequence to the attainment
of genuine independence for Namibia;
3. Calls upon all Member States not to accord
any form of recognition to any representative or
organ established as a result of those elections;
4. Condemns South Africa for its recent acts of
violence against, and its intimidation and detention of,
leaders of the South West Africa People's Organization and demands their immediate release;
5. Expresses dissatisfaction with and concern at
the replies and reactions so far of the Government of
South Africa to the demand of the Security Council
for co-operation in the implementation of its aforementioned resolutions;
6. Demands that South Africa urgently comply
fully and unconditionally with the resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular resolution 3 85 (197 6),
and subsequent resolutions of the Council relating to
Namibia;
7. Solemnly declares that South Africa's noncompliance with the aforementioned resolutions of
the Security Council constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security and necessitates the

Noting with appreciation the efforts of the United
Nations Council for Namibia to obtain the withdrawal
of the illegal presence of South Africa from the
Tcrritory and to promote the compliance of Member
States with the resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council on the question of Namibia,
Convinced of the urgent need to increase the resources available to the United Nations Council for
Namibia in arder that it may effectively cope with
the increasing complexity of the challenge to the
United Nations resulting from the refusal of South
Africa to comply with Security Council resolutions
385 (1976) of 30 January 1976, 431 (1978) of
27 July 1978, 435 (1978) of 29 September 1978

39 Official Records of the Security Counci/, Thirty-third
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1978,
documents S/12903, S/12938 and S/12950.
40 Resolution S-9/2.

41 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supp/ement No. 24 (A/33/24).
4 2 /bid.,
Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/Rev.l ), vol. I,
chaps. I, II, IV and V, and vol. II, chap. VIII.

e
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE UNITED NATIONS
CüUNCIL FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
lfaving considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia41 and the relevant chapters of
the report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 42
Recalling its rcsolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May
1967, by which it established the United Nations
Council for Namibia as the legal Administering
Authority of Namibia until independence,
Reaffirming that the Territory and people of Namibia are the direct responsibility of the United
Nations and that the Namibian people must be enabled
to attain self-determination and independence within a
united Namibia,
Rea_ffirming that, in the discharge of the responsibilities entrusted to it by resolution 2248 (S-V) and
subscquent resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council relating to the question of Namibia, the United Nations Council for Namibia acts
as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia
until independence,

11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and 439 (1978) of 13 November 1978 as well as
the resolutions of the General Assembly on the question of Namibia,
Reafjirming the responsibility of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system to take all effective measures, within
their respective spheres of competence, in support of
the resolutions of the General Assembly on the question of Namibia, particularly in the provision of
moral and material assistance on a priority basis to
the people of Namibia through the South West
Africa People's Organization, their sole and authentic
representative,
l. Approves the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, including the recommendations
contained therein, and decides to make adequate
financia! provisions for their implementation;
2. Decides that the United Nations Council for
Namibia, in the discharge of its responsibilities as the
legal Administering Authority for Namibia until independence and as a policy-making organ of the
United Nations, shall:
(a) Denounce all fraudulent constitutional or political schemes through which South Africa may
attempt to perpetuate its system of colonial oppression
and exploitation of the people and resources of
Namibia;
(b)
Endeavour to ensure non-recognition of any
administration or entity installed in Windhoek not
issuing from free elections in Namibia, conducted on
a territory-wide basis, under the supervision and
control of the United Nations, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 385 (1976) and subsequent resolutions in their entirety;
( c) Secure the territorial integrity of Namibia as
a unitary State comprising, inter alia, the total area
of Walvis Bay;
( d) Counter the policies of South Africa against
the Namibian people and against the United Nations
and the legal Administering Authority for Namibia,
the United Nations Council for Namibia;
(e) Continue to consult with the South West
Africa People's Organization, as appropriate, in the
formulation and implementation of its programme of
work as well as in any matter of interest to the Namibian people;
(f) Continue to entrust such executive and administrative duties as it deems necessary to the United
Nations Commissioner for Namibia, who, in the performance of his tasks, shall report to the Council;
(g) Continue to mobilize international political
support in order to press for the withdrawal of the
illegal administration of South Africa from Namibia
in accordance with United Nations resolutions on
Namibia;
(h) lnform leading opinion makers, media
leaders, political and academic institutions and other
concerned non-governmental organizations of Member
States about the objectives and functions of the
United Natic:m_s Council for Namibia and the struggle
of the Nam1bian people under the leadership of the
South West Africa People's Organization and also hold
consultations with, and seek the co-operation of, those
personalities and institutions by inviting them on special occasions to participate in the deliberations of
the Council, thereby ensuring the most effective mo-

25

bilization of public opinion in support of the cause
of the Namibian people;
(i) Represent Namibia to ensure that the rights
and interests of Namibia are protected, as appropriate,
in ali intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, bodies and conferences;
(j) Take all appropriate measures to ensure the
full application of, and compliance with, the provisions of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the
Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia on 27 September 1974, 43
and such other measures as may be necessary to assist
in the protection of the natural resources of Namibia;
( k)
Formulate policies of assistance to Namibians
and co-ordinate aid for Namibia provided by United
Nations agencies and other bodies within the United
Nations system;
([) Act as trustee of the United Nations Fund for
Namibia and, in this capacity, administer and manage
the Fund;
( m) Open a special account in the United N ations
Funcl for Namibia for the financing of the Nationhood
Progr:imme for Namibia;
(n)
Co-ordinate, plan and direct the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia in consultation with the
South West Africa People's Organization;
3. Decides to increase the financia! provision in
the budget of the United Nations Council for Namibia
to finance the Office of the South West Africa People's
Organization in New York, in order to ensure appropriate representation of the people of Namibia through
the South West Africa People's Organization at the
United Nations;
4. Decides to continue to defray the expenses of
representatives of the South West Africa People's Organization, whenever the United Nations Council for
Namibia so requires;
5. Declares that the United Nations is committed
to genuine self-determination and national independence for Namibia and that all United Nations programmes for the benefit of the Namibian people will
be carried out in accordance with the resolutions of
the General Assembly in support of the struggle of
the N amibian people under the leadership of the South
West Africa People's Organization, their sole and
authentic liberation movement, to achieve genuine selfdetermination and national independence for Namibia
and, for this purpose:
'
(a) Decides to undertake an examination of the
resources available to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia, its programmes and projects, and of the
possibilities of increasing its allocations and contributions, which would enable the Fund to concentrate on
its main projects for assisting the Namibian people;
(b) Revises the present guidelines for the United
Nations Fund for Namibia, taking into account the
experience gained in the administration of the Fund
and the increasing responsibilities resulting from
the expansion of the programme of assistance for
Namibians;
( c) Decides to allocate the sum of $US 500,000
as a temporary measure to the United Nations Fund
for Namibia from the regular budget of the United
Nations for 1979;
43 !bid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 24A (A/9624/
Add. l), para. 84. The Decree has been issued in final form in
Namibia Gazette No. 1.

26

General Assemhly-Thirty-third Session,

(d) Decides to review the question of the relations between the Institute for Namibia and the United
Nations in arder to enhance the effectiveness of the
lnstitute;
(e) Decides to include the Rapporteur of the
Committee on the United Nations Fund for Namibia
and a representative of the United Nations Development Programme in the Senate of the Institute for
Namibia as full members;
(f) Requests the Secretary-General to direct the
Department of Public lnformation of the Secretariat,
in consultation with the United Nations Council for
Namibia, to continue to make every effort to generate
publicity and disseminate information with a view to
mobilizing public support for the genuine self-determination and national independence of Namibia;
(g) Requests the specialized agencies and other
organizations and bodies within the United Nations
system to intensify the dissemination of information
on Namibia, in consultation with the United Nations
Council for Namibia, with a view to informing their
respective audiences of the position of the United
Nations on genuine self-determination and national
independence for Namibia;
(h) Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia, as the legal Administering Authority for the
Territory, to continue to direct and co-ordinate, in
consultation with the South West Africa People's Organization, the planning and implementation of the
Nationhood Programme for Namibia, with the aim of
consolidating all measures of assistance to Namibians
by the specialized agencies and other United Nations
organizations and bodies into a comprehensive assistance programme of the United Nations system;
(i) Expresses its appreciation to those specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies within
the United Nations system which have contributed to
the planning of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia by submitting project proposals for the consideration of the United Nations Council for Namibia
and by other means, and calls upan them to continue
their participation in the Nationhood Programme by:
(i) Implementing projects approved by the
United Nations Council for Namibia;
(ii) Preparing new project proposals at the request of the Council;
(iii) Allocating funds from their own financial
resources for the implementation of the
projects approved by the Council;
(j) Expresses its appreciation to the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its substantial contribution to the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia, in particular for its emphasis
on the cultural identity of the Namibian people and
the preparation of an educational programme in clase
co-operation with the South West Africa People's
Organization;
(k) Expresses its appreciation to the United
Nations Development Programme for its decision to
increase the indicative planning figure for Namibia
and calls upon it to allocate, at the request of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, funds from the
indicative planning figure for the implementation of
the projects within the Nationhood Programme for
Namibia;
(l) Expresses its appreciation to all States, governmental and non-governmental organizations and

individuals that have made voluntary contributions to
the Nationhood Programme for Namibia and appeals
to them to make further financia! contributions to
the Programme through the United Nations Fund
for Namibia;
(m) Requests the Secretary-General and the
United Nations Council for Namibia to appeal to
Governments, governmental and non-governmental organizations and individuals for additional financial
contributions to the Nationhood Programme for Namibia through the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
(n) Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation with the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, to strengthen the Office of the
United Nations Commissioner for Namibia and provide it with the necessary resources for the performance of its responsibilities in the implementation
of the duties related to the Nationhood Programme
for Namibia entrusted to it by the Council;
(o) Requests the Secretary-General, in the light
of the increased responsibilities of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, to study urgently the organization and staffing of the secretariat of the Council and
to make proposals for strengthening it, to be considered for adoption at the current session of the
General Assembly;
6. Proclaims 1979 the International Year of Solidarity with the People of Namibia and for that
purpose:
(a) Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia, to
instruct the Department of Public Information to set
up a permanent exhibit on Namibia at United Nations
Headquarters in New York, Geneva and Vienna;
( b) Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia, to
instruct the Department of Public lnformation to maintain throughout the year in the United Nations information centres around the world permanent exhibits
related to the responsibility of the United Nations with
respect to Namibia and all aspects of the struggle,
including armed struggle, of the people of Namibia
under the Ieadership of their sale and authentic liberation movement, the South West Africa People's Organization, to achieve self-determination, freedom and
national independence in a united Namibia;
(e) Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia,
to instruct the Department of Public Information to
prepare radio programmes of information on the
decisions and activities of the Council for dissemination through the radio services of Member States;
(d) Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia,
to publish a yearbook on Namibia as the authoritative
source on the question of Namibia since the General
Assembly terminated the mandate exercised by South
Africa over the Territory;
(e)
Decides to allocate an additional sum of
$US 300,000 for the budget of the United Nations
~ou~cil for Namibia, to be administered by the Counc,l, m support of its programme of activities related
to the International Year of Solidarity with the People
of Namibia.
91 st plenary meeting
21 December 1978
*
*
*

11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-Genera/4 4 that, in accordance with paragraph 27 of resolution A above, he had appointed the following
members of the United Nations Council for Namibia: ANGOLA,
BELGIUM, BULGARIA, CYPRUS, UNITED REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON

and VENEZUELA.
As a result, the Council is composed of the following Member States: ALGERIA, ANGOLA, AUSTRALIA, BANGLADESH, BELGIUM, BOTSWANA, BULGARIA, BURUNDI, CHILE, CHINA, COLOMBIA, CYPRUS, EGYPT, FINLAND, GUYANA, HAITI, INDIA, INDONESIA, LIBERIA, MEXICO, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, POLAND, ROMANIA,
SENEGAL, TURKEY, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,
UNITED REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON, VENEZUELA, YUGOSLAVIA

and ZAMBIA.

33/183.

Policies of apartheid of the Government
of South Africa46
A

UNITED NATIONS TRUST FUND FOR SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa,46 to which is annexed the report of the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa,
Reaffirming that humanitarian assistance to those
persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia
is appropriate and essential,
Grave/y concerned over the continued and increased
repression against all opponents of apartheid and racial
discrimination in South Africa, Namibia and Southern
Rhodesia,
Recognizing the need for increased contributions to
the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies concerned, in arder to enable them to provide legal assistance to persons persecuted under repressive and
discriminatory legislation, as well as assistance to
their families and to refugees from South Africa,
1. Commends the Secretary-General and the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa for their efforts to promote humanitarian assistance;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to
the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies engaged
in rendering humanitarian assistance to the victims
of apartheid and racial discrimination;
3. Again appeals for generous contributions to
the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies concerned.
93rd plenary meeting
24 January 1979

B
INTERNATIONAL MOBILIZATION AGAINST apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its numerous resolutions on the policies
of apartheid of the Government of South Africa and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
44 A/33/560 and
45 See also sect.

33/446.
4 6 A/33/313.

Add.l.
I, foot-note 5, and sect. X.B.3, decision

27

Recalling, in particular, its resolution 3411 C (XXX)
of 28 November 1975 proclaiming that the United
Nations and the international community have a special responsibility towards the oppressed people of
South Africa and their liberation movements,
Further recalling its resolution 32/105 B of 14 December 1977 proclaiming the year beginning on
21 March 1978 International Anti-Apartheid Year,
Considering that the United Nations has an important and vital role in the promotion of international
action for the elimination of apartheid,
Reaffirming its full commitment to the eradication
of apartheid and the elimination of the threat to international peace and security caused by the apartheid
régime,
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against the
conscience and dignity of mankind,
Aware that the righteous struggle of the oppressed
people of South Africa has led to an international
consensus against apartheid and to growing support
for the struggle for freedom and human dignity in
South Africa,
Considering that the observance of the Intemational
Anti-Apartheid Year must lead to acceleration of
concerted intemational action towards the eradication
of apartheid and the liberation of the South African
people,
T aking note of the recommendations of the Special
Committee against Apartheid far an international mobilization against apartheid,47
1. Calls upon ali Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to join in
the intcrnational mobilization against apartheid;
2. Authorizes the Special Committee against Apartheid, with the assistance of the Centre against Apartheid of the Secretariat and in co-operation with the
liberation movements recognized by the Organization
of African Unity, to promote the intemational mobilization against apartheid and to facilitate co-ordination
of action;
3. Appeals to anti-apartheid movements, solidarity
committees, trade unions, churches, youth organizations and all other non-govemmental organizations to
participate in the intemational mobilization against
apartheid by appropriate action.
93rd plenary meeting
24 January 1979

e
TRIBUTES TO THE MEMORY OF LEADERS AND OUTSTANDING PERSONALITIES WHO HAVE MADE SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE STRUGGLES OF THE
OPPRESSED PEOPLES

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid,48
Conscious of the great contribution to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations made by the
leaders of the oppressed peoples in their struggles
47 Official Records o/ the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/33/22 and Corr.1), paras.
235-245.
4 8 fbid., Supplement No. 22 (A/33/22 and Corr.l ).
