S/PV.8349

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8349th meeting

Wednesday, 12 September 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley/Mr. Cohen/Mr. Hunter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-28335 (E)
*1828335*

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Fiji, Indonesia, Lebanon, Pakistan, Romania,
Rwanda, Senegal and Uruguay to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; and Ms. Sarah Blakemore, of Keeping
Children Safe.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations; and His
Excellency Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate on peacekeeping
reform and how we can maximize our collective
efforts to improve the performance of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Almost a year ago, the Council adopted resolution
2378 (2017), a landmark resolution on peacekeeping
reform, under the presidency of Ethiopia. Since then,
many efforts have been made to enhance peacekeeping,
but much more needs to be done.
We welcome today’s discussion. It comes at a
time when our operations face significant challenges:
elusive political solutions, intra-State conflicts that
are intertwined with broader threats, including
international terrorist movements and organized crime,
large-scale violence against civilians, and the targeting
of our peacekeepers. Too many are making the ultimate
2/42

12/09/2018

sacrifice. I want to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to them.
Improving peacekeeping is by its very essence a
collective endeavour. Ensuring that our missions are fit
for purpose and perform well requires action by all of
us and all of us working together. All stakeholders who,
in one form or another, take part in peacekeeping need
to improve our performance, and we all need to support
each other in doing so. That includes the Secretariat, as
well as the Member States, Security Council members,
troop- and police-contributing countries, host nations,
regional and subregional organizations and others. That
is why the Secretary-General launched the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative in March. Following intensive
consultations with all of our Member States, as well as
intergovernmental organizations, the Secretary-General
put forward the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations to all Member
States for their endorsement. The mutual commitments
that it proposes, including on performance, are key to
enhancing peacekeeping.
The Secretariat is committed to playing its full part
in responding to the challenges that I just highlighted.
First, we continue our efforts to enhance
performance, particularly by implementing the action
plan to strengthen the safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers. The action plan is ultimately
about performance, and it includes the requisite
elements to strengthen it. Through its implementation,
we are changing mindset, strengthening our
operational readiness and modifying our posture. We
are also enhancing the capacity of United Nations
peacekeeping by providing better-tailored training
and doing our utmost to make sure that peacekeepers
have the equipment they need. We are strengthening
accountability and ensuring that if an incident occurs,
our peacekeepers receive the best care possible as soon
as possible.
Much work remains to be done, but we are beginning
to see the effects of our collective efforts. From
15 January to 31 August, 17 peacekeepers lost their life
due to acts of violence. The number over the same period
last year was 26. This represents a significant decrease.
In mentioning these figures, I want to remain cautious
and modest because threats against our peacekeepers
remain very high. I want to emphasize that each and
every peacekeeper killed is one too many. We mourn
the lives of the fallen and are reminded that we must
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

collectively do more to strengthen the safety and
security of our peacekeepers. It is essential to enable
us to better execute our mandates in the countries in
which we serve.
The trend that I have described calls on us to
remain vigilant and fully mobilized to continue
this course of action. In many of our missions,
peacekeepers are carrying out more effective responses
to threats and attacks. I recently returned from Mali
and I can attest to the positive changes that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSCA) has made. Many of its
camps are better protected, including through more
advanced systems for detecting threats. I saw that our
peacekeepers in Aguelhok and Tessalit are proactively
patrolling, despite the significant threats that they
face. Last April, a large group of assailants carried
out a sophisticated, complex attack against one of
our bases in Timbuktu, resulting in the death of one
peacekeeper. In that case, the mindset and the degree of
preparedness of the troops helped to significantly limit
the number of casualties, as the attackers were met with
a robust response.
We see such evolutions in other missions as well. In
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
for instance, our peacekeepers are protecting civilians
more effectively through a more proactive posture.
First, we have put in place a robust structure
here at Headquarters and in the field to take forward
implementation of the action plan. I assigned the
Office for Peacekeeping Strategic Partnership with
overseeing implementation, in close collaboration
with the Office of Military Affairs and other relevant
offices. The Implementation Support Teams established
at Headquarters and in the five high-risk missions
continue to be very active in taking forward their
respective action plans to drive concrete change on
the ground.
Secondly, we have undertaken a series of
independently led reviews of peacekeeping missions.
We have been going back to square one to assess
these missions’ mandates and whether we have the
appropriate strategies and resources to keep or restore
the peace. The recommendations of the reviews inform
the proposals and options that the Secretary-General
puts forward in his recommendations to the Security
Council. We are already beginning to learn lessons

S/PV. 8349

from this series of reviews, and we intend to continue
to strengthen and refine this methodology.
Thirdly, we are taking forward the SecretaryGeneral’s reforms of the peace and security architecture
in order to provide more integrated analysis and better
country and regional strategies. We are also preparing
to implement the Secretary-General’s management
reform, which will empower our peace operations in the
field and enable us to become more reactive and nimble.
Fourthly, we continue strengthening cooperation
with our key partners, especially the African Union
(AU) and the European Union (EU), both of which
are with us today. That includes more triangular
cooperation between the United Nations, the AU and
the EU at the strategic and operational levels.
As part of this wide effort to enhance the efficiency
of peacekeeping, we are devoting considerable attention
to better assessing performance. We are putting in
place the policies and evaluation systems that will
enable all of us, collectively, to better tailor our efforts
to strengthen peacekeeping and better support all
peacekeepers, whether uniformed or civilian.
For our military personnel, we have established
a clear framework of performance standards and
assessments based on regular performance evaluations
of military units, including on command and control,
the protection of civilians, conduct and discipline, and
training. These assessments will inform our reporting
to the Council, in accordance with several recent
mandate resolutions, including resolution 2409 (2018),
mandating MONUSCO. We have also stepped up our
efforts to make sure that the units joining our missions
meet our operational readiness standards before they
are deployed, including through the development of
a new methodology for carrying out predeployment
evaluations. Since April, we have used it to assess
eight units from six troop-contributing countries.
The evaluations examine whether they have the basic
military know-how and the requisite skills to carry out
the mandated tasks of the Mission. They also assess
whether these units have the expertise needed for the
specific environment in which they will be deployed.
We are also developing more specific performance
assessment criteria for formed police units.
Further, we are also investing significant resources
and efforts in the development of the integrated
performance policy framework requested by the Special
Committee for Peacekeeping Operations and supported

18-283353/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

by the Council. Through it, we aim to strengthen
and hold accountable all peacekeepers, civilian and
uniformed, at all levels and in equal measure, both in
the field and at Headquarters. Changing institutional
structures and individual behaviour requires us all
to rectify shortcomings, strengthen leadership and
accountability, and provide incentives for change. Our
goal is to maximize the effect we have on the ground as
we deliver on the Council’s mandates.
Data collection and analysis are an integral
element of our approach. The new comprehensive
performance assessment system will enable us to assess
whole-of-mission performance, civilian and uniformed
components, staff and leadership through data collection
and analysis. By identifying bottlenecks or problems,
we aim to promote better-informed decisions by senior
leadership to refocus efforts and take corrective action.
This system will also help Member States to craft
more targeted mandates and direct resources towards
areas where we can make the biggest difference. We
are already starting with three pilot missions. We have
already conducted a visit to MINUSCA last month,
and will visit a further two missions by the end of this
year. We are planning for all missions to be using the
new system by July 2020. We will continue to engage
Member States proactively on this topic.
We also attach particular importance to leadership
across all mission components, and we have enhanced
and professionalized the assessment process for
selection, as well as support to our heads and deputy
heads of mission.
Finally, but most importantly, we have developed
mechanisms to enhance accountability for when we fall
short. We have decided to systematically commission
independent, ad hoc investigations to clarify the causes
and circumstances of incidents that indicate serious
shortfalls in mandate implementation. Through frank
and precise analysis, these investigations have fostered
constructive engagement with troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and police-contributing countries
(PCCs), as well as amongst ourselves. This has enabled
us to work together to find solutions for such shortfalls.
We have taken measures to change the way we work,
notably by enhancing our procedures and our collective
preparedness, as we did following the July 2016 incident
in Juba, South Sudan. Where necessary, we have also
instituted remedial measures, including in some cases
by preventing the redeployment of troop or police units
4/42

12/09/2018

until we can confirm that they are able to meet relevant
standards and requirements.
Despite its full commitment to developing and
implementing these initiatives and tools, United Nations
peacekeeping cannot succeed without the engagement
and the mobilization of all stakeholders and, first and
foremost, the Member States.
Strengthening peacekeeping often requires
strengthening the capacities of those who provide its
men and women — the TCCs and PCCs. As has been
highlighted on many occasion in the Council and
other forums, it is an effort that involves not only the
Secretariat, but also fellow Member States. That is
precisely the goal of the light coordination mechanism,
which we established late last year. By identifying
specific needs for targeted training support, we can
facilitate training and capacity-building partnerships
among Member States. We therefore welcome the
development of triangular partnerships, whereby
Member States provide troop- and police-contributing
countries with training and equipment prior to
deployment. Such cooperation is an illustration of how
we can collectively respond to capacity challenges.
I encourage all Member States that have the
capacity to provide such training and equipment to
TCCs and PCCs to continue their efforts to respond to
the current needs so that our peacekeepers can operate
most efficiently in the challenging context in which
we are deployed. In that regard, I want to mention
the new action plan for training, for which we have
requested voluntary contributions. We are grateful
to those that have already provided support. I also
encourage all Member States to assess the evolution
of the performance of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, including by visiting operations on the
ground and sharing their conclusions with us.
I would also like to take this opportunity to call
on all Member States, particularly those with the most
advanced military capabilities, to contribute more
troops and police to United Nations peacekeeping.
We still have an ongoing need for critical capabilities,
including helicopters, capacities to counter improvised
explosive devices, rapid-reaction forces, situational
awareness and medical support. We welcome all
contributions in these areas.
The engagement of Member States is also key
to increasing the number of women who are part
of peacekeeping. More women in peacekeeping
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

simply makes peacekeeping more effective. We
need to significantly enhance the number of female
peacekeepers at all levels and within uniformed as
well as civilian components. We must also ensure that
they are able to meaningfully participate in our work.
Women make up only 21 per cent of our personnel. We
must do better.
I am pleased that, through our common work, we
have seen some improvements. Gender strategies for
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support, as well as within each of
our missions, and the uniformed gender parity strategy,
are starting to yield results. At Headquarters, women
officers now represent 18 per cent of all officers in
the Office of Military Affairs, and we are committed
to raising that proportion further. In the field, women
police officers represent 21 per cent of our individual
police officers and 7 per cent of our formed police
units. We intend to continue our efforts to increase the
number of female peacekeepers at Headquarters and in
the field, in line with resolution 2242 (2015).
.
The policies that we have promoted can be achieved
only through the active involvement of Members States.
I therefore welcome the efforts undertaken by a number
of Member States and call on all States to further those
initiatives and significantly increase their contributions
of women peacekeepers. Ensuring that all United
Nations personnel maintain the highest standards of
conduct must be at the heart of our collective efforts.
We fully share the Council’s expectations in that regard
and will continue to place prevention at the forefront of
our efforts.
We have done more in recent years to strengthen
accountability, transparency, enforcement, awarenessraising, advocacy and the provision of victim-centred
support. We have implemented greater transparency
in reporting, expanded the vetting of personnel,
improved investigation timelines and seen increased
responsiveness by Member States. The Secretariat now
vets all categories of personnel against a prior history
of misconduct while serving in the United Nations.
Last year, the Secretary-General appointed a
dedicated Victims’ Rights Advocate, Ms. Jane Connors,
to ensure that victims of sexual exploitation and abuse
have access to the support they need, including urgent
assistance, the ability to file complaints safely and
reliably and access to timely information on the progress

S/PV. 8349

of their case. Multiple channels exist to anonymously
report misconduct, including online and by phone.
Following the adoption of resolution 2272 (2016),
the Secretariat established a committee to consider
possible credible evidence of widespread or systemic
sexual exploitation and abuse, or instances where
Member States may not have taken appropriate steps to
investigate allegations, hold perpetrators accountable
or inform the Secretary-General of the outcome of
those processes. There is no one-size-fits-all approach
to this complex issue, but the 2272 Committee has not
shied away from engaging with Member States to take
preventive and corrective action, including repatriations
where required. We have removed or repatriated units
where we deemed it appropriate.
I am glad that we will shortly hear from
Ms. Sarah Blakemore, Chief Executive Officer of
the non-governmental organization (NGO) Keeping
Children Safe. One of the most critical partners for
our work in preventing sexual exploitation and abuse,
as well as for accountability and victim support, is the
network of NGOs and civil society partners operating
on the ground. Only by working together will the
United Nations, Member States and civil society end
that behaviour, which irreparably harms victims and
tarnishes the reputation of thousands of United Nations
personnel who serve with honour.
When, despite all our efforts, personnel violate
our standards of conduct, we must continue to work
to achieve accountability in partnership with Member
States, and we are strengthening our policies to do
so. United Nations investigative entities are required
to complete investigations into allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse within six months. Troopcontributing countries have also been asked to
complete their investigations within that time frame. In
matters deemed particularly urgent, troop-contributing
countries are requested to complete investigations
within 90 days. Such measures have led to a decrease
in the average reaction time by Member States.
We must be unequivocally clear that it is Member
States that possess the authority to hold all categories of
personnel accountable for criminal conduct. In the case
of police and military personnel, they can also enact
administrative sanctions as appropriate. Such responses
are essential, and we are grateful to the 98 Member
States that have signed the voluntary compact with the
Secretary-General on the commitment to end sexual

18-283355/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

exploitation and abuse. We share a joint responsibility
to end impunity, strengthen prevention and response,
respond rapidly and decisively to credible reports and
meet the needs of victims quickly and appropriately.
Drawing on all those efforts, the Secretariat is fully
committed to playing its part to enhance peacekeeping
performance. In that spirit, the Secretary-General
makes several concrete commitments, including on
performance, in the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, proposed
in the framework of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. We will spare no effort to deliver on those
commitments. We are very grateful for the willingness
shown by a large and growing number of Member
States and other stakeholders to also make such
commitments through their support for the Declaration.
I am happy to report that, as of today, 55 Member
States have endorsed the Declaration. The many troopand police-contributing countries that have done so
account for 65 per cent of all personnel contributions,
a number that is increasing every day. The broad and
cross-regional support for the Declaration reflects the
strong consensus around the key objectives that it lays
out. I want to express my thanks to all States that have
already endorsed the Declaration. We look forward
to a substantial number of additional endorsements
before the high-level event on Action for Peacekeeping
on 25 September. We also look forward to building
upon the Declaration to continue strengthening United
Nations peacekeeping.
Finallly, we are gratified to see the Security
Council’s commitment to supporting our efforts to
improve peacekeeping. We hope to be able to count on
the continued support of all Council members for Action
for Peacekeeping and all our ongoing initiatives to foster
a culture of continuous improvement and adaptation.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now welcome and give the floor to Ms. Blakemore.
Ms. Blakemore: I thank you, Ambassador Haley,
for inviting me to speak on this important topic.
My name is Sarah Blakemore and I am the the
Chief Executive Officer of Keeping Children Safe, an
international non-governmental organization (NGO)
that works with organizations in almost every country
of the world to protect children and adults at risk from
all types of abuse.
6/42

12/09/2018

The issue of preventing abuse by peacekeepers is
a particular concern to Keeping Children Safe because
its establishment, in 2002, coincided with the exposure
of widespread sexual exploitation and abuse carried
out by peacekeeping personnel and staff, in more than
40 humanitarian aid agencies, of children in refugee
camps in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Since then, in partnership with the University of
Reading, we have been researching evidence-based
solutions to addressing abuse in the context of
peacekeeping, with a particular focus on ensuring that
organizations do all they can to prevent abuse, and, if
abuse does occur, that they ensure that the rights and
wellbeing of victims are paramount. I am going to share
some of the stories of victims who have taken part in
that research.
The vast majority of peacekeeping personnel
perform their jobs with courage, dedication and
professionalism. Yet in conflicts and crises across the
world, peacekeepers have subjected people in situations
of extreme physical and psychological vulnerability
to rape, trafficking, violence and abuse, including
demanding sex for the basics of survival — food, shelter,
education and medicine. A significant proportion of the
victims have been children.
All organizations have the responsibility to
safeguard the people they serve, but the extreme
imbalance of power between peacekeeping personnel,
on the one hand, and the people whom they have been
sent to serve, on the other, makes it essential that robust
safeguarding systems be in place. Too often, however,
victims have no way of reporting the abuse, no medical
or psychosocial care and no access to justice. The
organizations that fail to protect them continue putting
them at risk, and the abusers go unpunished.
A mother in Haiti explained to us the desperate
situations in which this sexual exploitation takes place:
“We know which bars they go to. They come there
to buy sex. I need the money to feed my children.
Before we did not need to make money like this, but
now there is no work or food.”
One woman in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo told us:
“Some of them pay money. But they also give you
food or tarpaulin or things we need. Where else can
we get these things?”
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8349

Another woman in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo told us:

of victims and survivors and to help bring perpetrators
to justice.

“We stand near the bases because they come out
looking for us at night.”

But if we are going to have any real and sustained
impact on this issue, then it is critical that we keep
listening to the voices of those victims. So I will end
with the words of a woman in Haiti, who told us:

Sometimes babies are born as a result, and women
are left with little or no support for themselves or the
child. A young woman in the Central African Republic
told us:
“They say they will pay for the baby. Many do not,
but he did pay some money. But when he left the
money stopped. Now I cannot go to school. I cannot
afford to send my baby to school. What will happen
to us?”
Many women and their children suffer ongoing
stigma and discrimination:
“Everyone knows who is a MINUSTAH baby.
They say things about us. They treat our
children differently.”
Child sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers
is well known about within communities. Here is what
one 13-year-old girl in the Central Central African
Republic told us:
“Sometimes they just ask you to take your clothes
off so they can take photographs. But sometimes
they say you are their girlfriend. Those ones give
more money and help. But if you get pregnant they
find someone else.”
Many of the children describe the ongoing impact
of being known to be exploited or abused:
“We can’t go back to school because everyone
knows. The others, they won’t come close to us.
The teachers don’t want us there. Everyone knows
who has been with the peacekeepers.”
That was from a 12-year-old girl in Haiti.
The abuse is not hidden. “Everyone knows who is
doing it”, a little boy in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo told us. If everyone knows who is doing it, then
it is incumbent upon all of us to act to prevent it.
Keeping Children Safe calls on world leaders to
champion the safety of children at the highest levels by
requiring all organizations involved in peacekeeping
to implement robust international child-safeguarding
standards, including having advocates for victims’
rights, to prevent abuse, to protect the rights and dignity

“I told them what he [the soldier] did to me. But they
never told me what happened to him. Until I know
what happened to him, I will never have peace”.
The President: I thank Ms. Blakemore for
her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and Ms. Blakemore for their briefings and for their
commitment to United Nations peacekeeping reform.
In a speech to the General Assembly in 2003, President
George W. Bush pointed out something important that
the founding ideas of the United Nations and the United
States have in common. He said:
“Both recognize a moral law that stands above
men and nations, but which must be defended and
enforced by men and nations.” (A/58/PV.7, p. 12)
Of all the activities in which the United Nations
engages, peacekeeping best embodies this founding
ideal. We ask our peacekeepers to go into dangerous
situations and put themselves in between warring
parties. We ask them to be brave and impartial and,
above all, to protect some of the most vulnerable people
in the world. We ask this all in the name of peace. But
in the end, our peacekeepers are just men and women.
They are human beings, and, although our ideals
are perfect and eternal, human beings are imperfect
and fallen.
Our peacekeepers do much that is good. United
Nations peacekeepers were instrumental in Côte
d’Ivoire’s transition from civil war to peace. Now
Côte d’Ivoire is paying it forward as an important new
peacekeeping force for others. In Sierra Leone, our
peacekeepers helped secure peace after a civil war of
unspeakable violence. In the Congo, peacekeepers from
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are enabling
a response to the Ebola outbreak and standing ready
to provide logistical support to elections in December.
And in South Sudan, thousands of civilians are alive

18-283357/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

today because of protection-of-civilians sites created
and maintained by United Nations peacekeepers.
United Nations Mission in South Sudan peacekeepers
recently partnered with humanitarian organizations
to relocate 3,500 internally displaced persons, mostly
women and children, from a protection-of-civilians site
in Juba to a site in the community where they could
reunite with their families.
But those success stories are sadly overshadowed
by other instances in which peacekeepers fail to live up
to the ideals of their mission. In some cases, they are
even destructive to our ideals. In instances when even a
minority of peacekeepers abuse and exploit the citizens
they are supposed to protect, that harm can overshadow
the good. We hear far too many stories of vulnerable
civilians who put their trust in peacekeepers, and our
peacekeepers fail to protect them. Just last week we were
reminded of the horrific events at the Terrain housing
compound in Juba in 2016. A South Sudanese court just
convicted soldiers loyal to President Kiir for raping
aid workers and killing a journalist. An American was
among the women raped. The attack lasted for hours,
and during that time the victims reportedly called the
United Nations peacekeepers’ station just a mile away.
They begged for help, but no help came.
These convictions are a measure of accountability
for the men who committed those crimes, if not for the
officers who led them. But what about the peacekeepers
who failed to intervene? Where is the accountability
for them? Peacekeeping is based on trust between the
protected and the protectors. The United Nations puts
peacekeepers in this position of trust. We, the Security
Council, give them this power. We are responsible for
what they do with it, not just for the sake of the victims,
but for the sake of the mission, the United Nations and
peacekeeping itself. Once that critical trust is gone, no
matter how many resources a mission has or how strong
its leadership, the mission will fail.
Even worse than failures to protect are instances
in which civilians have been attacked, abused and
exploited by the peacekeepers who were supposed
to protect them. We have all heard the stories, some
of which Sarah has just described in haunting detail.
The Council has just heard about young girls and boys
grabbed off the streets; young girls forced to have sex
with soldiers for as little as an egg to eat; sexual assaults
so common that they are not reported; and young
girls and women left alone to care for their so-called
8/42

12/09/2018

peacekeeping babies, after the rapists who fathered
them have left the country. A farmer and mother of
seven in the Central African Republic said it better than
I could when she told a reporter:
“We were told that the peacekeepers had come to
protect us. Instead, we see that it is the peacekeepers
who cause the rapes. It makes me sick”.
It has been two years since the Security Council was
briefed on horrific allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse by peacekeepers in the Central African
Republic. The Security Council recognized the need to
take action in response to these violations and adopted
resolution 2272 (2016), the first resolution to address
the need to hold peacekeepers accountable for sexual
exploitation and abuse.
But two years later, we are still waiting for justice
for the victims in Dekoa. We supported the SecretaryGeneral in the repatriation of troops and police who
display a pattern of abusive behaviour. Some critical
steps have been taken and we applaud them, but we
have an obligation to ensure that more is done. The
United Nations own public reporting shows that several
peacekeeping units have faced repeated allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse, but those same
allegations have remained pending for years. The
perpetrators have gone unpunished and, unbelievably,
some accused troops remain in United Nations missions,
able to continue the abuse and to wield the power that
they have — the power that we have given them. What
message does that give to other peacekeepers?
The United States acknowledges and appreciates
the step that the Secretary-General has taken to
address this crisis, and Member States have responded
to the Secretary-General’s leadership by supporting
United Nations initiatives to prevent and report sexual
exploitation and abuse. The United States shares the
Secretary-General’s commitment to peacekeeping
performance across the board. The ongoing struggle
to make progress in solving the problem has shown
the need for clear, objective standards of performance
and accountability. We need to create a culture of
performance in United Nations peacekeeping.
People such as the mother of seven I quoted earlier
deserve to know that when the Blue Helmets arrive,
they are not a threat but there to perform their duties
in service of peace and security. The United States
has introduced a new draft resolution to empower
the Secretariat and accelerate progress on improving
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8349

peacekeeping performance. Our draft advances three
simple but critical peacekeeper performance priorities.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

First, it mandates a timely and transparent process
for reporting performance failures to the Security
Council and to the Member States concerned. We
cannot fix what we do not know. Better information
will help the Council, the Secretariat, troop- and
police-contributing countries and donors work together
to recruit, field and retain the most qualified and
capable peacekeepers.

I shall now give the floor to Council members who
wish to make statements.

Secondly, we create accountability measures
for failures of performance and concrete incentives
for stronger performance. Accountability is not a
dirty word. We must ensure that our peacekeepers
are capable, professional and willing to carry out the
critical mandates with which they have been tasked. At
the same time, we need to do a better job of recognizing,
rewarding and replicating good performance. This draft
resolution puts the force of the Security Council behind
that too.

I would like to thank Mr. Jean Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
briefing on the progress made in the implementation of
resolution 2378 (2017), and Ms. Sarah Blakemore for
her enlightening and poignant briefing.

And thirdly, our draft resolution recognizes the role
of data in improving troop performance by matching
the right troops and police to the right roles. Training
and operational readiness, not politics, should be our
criteria for deploying troop and police units. In the
days ahead, I urge my colleagues to work with us on
the draft resolution. They should bring their best ideas
of how to incentivize better performance and hold all
peacekeepers, in particular those in the positions of
leadership, to the highest possible standards. Of course,
we owe it to the victims of abuse and neglect, but we
also owe it to the peacekeepers themselves. Their safety
and security is directly linked to their performance.
The men and women we send into harm’s way need
to know that they are always serving alongside other
peacekeepers who can be counted on to do their duty
and not abuse their power.
The people of the United States support the United
Nations when it lives up to the ideals of its founding
because we share those ideals. We ask Council members
to help us show that such support is not misplaced and
join us in the effort to ensure that the men and women
who represent the United Nations to the world have the
training, professionalism and character to match their
high mission. Many vulnerable people in the world
depend on us. They give us their trust. We owe them
our protection.

Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I make this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council — Côte d’Ivoire,
Ethiopia and Equatorial Guinea. The three countries
align themselves with the statement to be delivered by
the observer of the African Union later today.

Resolution 2378 (2017) was the first resolution to
comprehensively address the issue of the reform of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, following
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (HIPPO) (see S/2015/446), and it
was adopted against the backdrop of the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to reform the United Nations
peace and security architecture on the basis of the
recommendations of the HIPPO report. We are pleased
to note the outcome of the discussions in the various
Committees of the General Assembly on restructuring
the peace and security pillar. We hope that the current
momentum will enable the United Nations to become
better organized when responding to conflict and crisis
situations, by adopting an approach that covers all
pillars and political and operational responsibilities.
We believe that it is important to continue to reform
peacekeeping operations in order to implement the
plans and vision of the United Nations international
peace and security architecture to enable it to respond
to the many challenges brought about by current crises.
The issue of the reform of peacekeeping operations
has sparked growing interest among all stakeholders
since the high-level open debate convened in
March under the presidency of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands (see S/PV.8218). That debate provided a
good opportunity to discuss the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. By the end of
the debate, it was clear to us that, as underscored by
the initiative, peacekeeping is above all a shared
responsibility. Peacekeeping is not exclusive to troopcontributing countries, and effective reform efforts
cannot focus solely on those countries. It is a collective

18-283359/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

endeavour that involves the States Members of the
United Nations, the Security Council, host countries,
troop-contributing countries, financial contributors
and regional partners. Effective reform efforts require
ongoing coordination among all key peacekeeping
actors. That is why we welcome the notion of shared
responsibility, highlighted in the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which was developed following a series of
consultations among all Member States. We welcome
the ever-increasing number of countries that are signing
onto the Declaration as a sign of their commitment to
supporting the reform efforts under way. We welcome
the wealth of information that will be shared during the
high-level event to be chaired by the Secretary-General
on 25 September, on the sidelines of the general debate
of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session.
Resolution 2378 (2017) underscored the importance
of the proper implementation and follow-up of United
Nations peacekeeping reform, in accordance with
existing mandates and procedures. In that regard,
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
which Côte d’Ivoire now chairs, has been tasked with
reviewing reform initiatives, in close cooperation with
all the relevant stakeholders. Over the past year, the
Working Group has facilitated important discussions
on peacekeeping reform, enhanced triangular
cooperation, the protection of civilians, the role of
women in peacekeeping, strategic force generation
and capacity-building. The Group is vital in that it
fosters discussions on various aspects of the reform and
supports implementation and follow-up.
With regard to strategic force generation and efforts
to bridge existing gaps, important discussions took
place in December 2017 under the Japanese presidency
of the Security Council (see S/PV.8150), based on the
quarterly report of the Secretary-General. We welcome
the fact that the Secretariat has already taken important
steps to improve United Nations force-generation
processes and capacity-building. The outcome of
the Vancouver Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
conference and pledges made at that event attest to the
shared commitment of Members States. It is important
that we honour the promises made at the conference. It
is our view that progress on the issue requires ongoing
efforts and political support from Member States. We
look forward to the upcoming defence ministerial
meeting, scheduled to take place in spring 2019.
10/42

12/09/2018

Improving the performance and effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping operations is also
an important issue highlighted in resolution 2378
(2017), and we note the ongoing efforts in that regard.
It is essential to monitor the training and capacity of
peacekeeping operations, in particular their military,
police and civilian components, in order to enhance
performance in important areas, such as the protection
of civilians and the promotion of human rights. It is also
vital that we all remain objective with regard to issues
relating to the performance of peacekeeping operations.
We must understand that the effective implementation
of peacekeeping mandates is a responsibility shared by
all stakeholders and that it depends on several critical
factors. It is also imperative that we make every effort
to ensure that civilian and uniformed personnel have the
skills and training required in an increasingly complex
operational environment. Without the right resources
and skills to match their operational environment, it is
difficult for contingents to discharge their mandated
tasks. We cannot ask for more to be done with less.
The Security Council must also shoulder its
responsibility, in particular with regard to solving
problems posed by “Christmas-tree” mandates,
according to the term used by the Secretary-General.
Its inability to formulate mandates defining realistic
and achievable goals has been one the principal
factors contributing to the difficulties that have been
encountered in implementing them. The issue of
performance should therefore be considered in the light
of this problem if we are to make progress on it.
One of the important pillars of the ongoing
reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations is
the strengthening of partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, particularly the African
Union. The African countries that are members of the
Security Council are pleased with the progress that
has been made in the framework of the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union,
with closer collaboration, more regular exchanges of
information, more thorough consultations and bettercoordinated action. In that regard, we look forward
to the comprehensive integrated performance policy
framework that the Secretariat is working on at the
request of the Special Committee on peacekeeping
Operations. It is also important to ensure that
peacekeeping operations take account of the gender
aspect, in accordance with resolutions 1325 (2000) and
2242 (2015).
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We all recognize the importance of improving
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
funding for African peace operations authorized by
the Security Council. In resolution 2378 (2017), the
Council expressed its intention to consider the practical
arrangements that can be made and the conditions
necessary for establishing a mechanism by which
African peace operations authorized by the Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
can be partly financed through statutory contributions
on a case-by-case basis. To that end, considerable
efforts have been made to strengthen the mechanisms
for the establishment of mandates and the management,
control and accountability of African peace operations,
as well as to finalize frameworks regarding respect
for human rights, conduct and discipline. These
are all requirements that can help to achieve the
objectives of accountability, transparency and respect
for international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, in accordance with United Nations
standards for conduct and discipline.
These concerns are fully reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report, issued in July (S/2018/678). We
therefore believe it is time that the Council translated
into concrete action its expressed intention to fund
African peace operations on a case-by-case basis. We
will continue to advocate for achieving this important
goal, which we believe is vital to strengthening the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union in the context of collective security.
We will work closely with all members of the Council
in the next few months to advance the discussions,
building on the positive momentum generated in recent
years by resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017). We
hope that this dynamic will be further consolidated in
the coming months under the Ivorian and Equatorial
Guinean presidencies of the Security Council, where
we hope to have the support of all the member States of
the Council for the adoption of two resolutions on the
financing of African peace operations and the African
Union’s Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing and appreciate his views. We also
thank Ms. Blakemore for her briefing and her
emotional testimony.
Peacebuilding is unquestionably one of the main
pillars of the United Nations, and peacekeeping

S/PV. 8349

operations are an irreplaceable part of the maintenance
of international peace and security through conflict
resolution. That is why issues related to improving
peacekeeping missions and increasing the efficiency and
security of Blue Helmets are always a focus of attention
for Member States and the Secretariat. We appreciate
the Secretary-General’s initiative and personal efforts
in this area, including his proposal for a Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. Many of the provisions of this document
deserve support. We have endorsed it, but with
reservations. For example, we do not support equating
the tasks of monitoring human rights and protecting
civilians, since the latter could involve the use of force
by peacekeepers. Nevertheless, it is important that close
attention be paid to peacekeeping’s effectiveness, which
means ultimately that Member States, with the help of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(C-34), should be able to reach a consensus solution.
One of the issues that should be resolved is that of
increasing the effectiveness of the work of peacekeepers
and civilian personnel and strengthening discipline.
We believe that requires a complex and comprehensive
approach, based on cooperation between the Security
Council, the troop-contributing countries, the host
countries and the Secretariat. It is important not only to
have an honest, constructive conversation, but to ensure
that all the links in the chain fulfil their obligations in
good faith.
Needless to say, where improving the overall
effectiveness of peacekeeping efforts is concerned, only
extremely clear and well-defined mission mandates,
with an emphasis on political solutions, can help to
achieve substantive results. During strategic reviews
of missions their mandates should be systematically
purged and their peripheral human rights, humanitarian
and social tasks handed over to their host Governments.
Of course, the effectiveness of the Blue Helmets
depends directly on transparent, comprehensible
work by the Secretariat. Training aids, concepts and
guidelines should correspond fully with the parameters
defined by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and should make implementation clear
and understandable. Unfortunately, not everything is
perfect in that regard. One of the most vivid examples
of disregard for Member States’ decisions is the
collection and analysis of information, or so-called
intelligence in peacebuilding. The first version of
the concept document contradicted States’ decisions.

18-2833511/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

And as we understand, it is proposed that the second,
reworked version be implemented without the C-34’s
full consideration and approval. Needless to say, we do
not share this approach to such a sensitive issue.
With regard to performance standards, they
should include an assessment of the performance of
all the components of peacekeeping missions, as well
as of the Secretariat in New York. The corresponding
methodology should be based on clear and precise
benchmarks and should therefore exclude any possibility
of a biased or subjective approach to determining
whether contingents are ineffective.
There is another tough issue that I cannot avoid.
Unfortunately, the statistics on sexual crimes are not
a cause for optimism. The problem deserves close
attention, and we heard emotional evidence to that effect
today from Ms. Blakemore. But the notion of entire
contingents’ collective responsibility for individual,
though inexcusable crimes raises reasonable questions.
However, this is not just about crimes where the accused
are Blue Helmets. The zero-tolerance policy should
apply equally to non-United Nations peacekeepers and
representatives of non-governmental organizations
accredited to the United Nations.
In general, we assume that the parameters for
reform of United Nations peacekeeping activities
should be determined in a format organized among
States. That is how it has been established in the reports
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
that the General Assembly approves by consensus
every year. And the implementation of initiatives
should also be carried out with full consideration for
the opinions and concerns of Member States. However,
unconditional compliance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic principles of peacekeeping — the
consent of the parties, impartiality, refraining from
the use of force except in self-defence and protection
of the mandate — is central to these reform processes.
Any flexible interpretation of them, even for the most
benign reasons, is unacceptable.
These basic principles should govern every aspect
of missions’ work, including the protection of civilians
where that is enshrined in the mandate. There can be
no possibility that peacekeepers can suddenly draw
their swords and become aggressors in a conflict,
let alone use force against host Governments, which
have the primary responsibility for the security of
their populations. And we also have questions about
12/42

12/09/2018

the proposals to transform peacekeeping into a tool for
the use of force or discussions about introducing Blue
Helmets into offensive or counter-terrorist operations.
That approach would turn them into targets. We should
pay attention to the fact that the rising numbers of
deaths among peacekeepers in the past few years
has been taking place just when the mandates of
certain missions have been being strengthened. At the
same time, we fully concur with the importance of
increasing peacekeepers’ safety, which could be done
by improving their professional equipment and material
and technical training.
In conclusion, I would like to comment on the
proposal of the United States on the draft Security
Council document on peacekeeping performance.
During the discussion on it we will of course be guided
by the approaches I have just described. However, with
regard to the general nature of the issue, we believe
that whatever the decisions we make, it is important
that they have the full support not only of Council
members but also of the troop-contributing countries.
The Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations is
best suited for that, as it provides an effective platform
for this kind of trilateral cooperation format. We do
not believe that the Council should try to bypass the
C-34 and get involved in micromanagement, although
it will unquestionably be important to send a political
signal about the importance of improving peacekeeping
performance. That can be done in a separate
presidential statement.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the United
States presidency for drawing attention to the issue
of peacekeeping’s successful performance and
effectiveness. We thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and Ms. Blakemore for their comprehensive
and informative briefings.
Kazakhstan is fully committed to strengthening and
improving United Nations peacekeeping capabilities
through well-defined, clear and achievable mandates,
the appointment of highly qualified and competent
personnel from various disciplines and the provision
of adequate equipment and funding resources. My
delegation would like to make some observations and
recommendations on some key points.
Today we are at a crossroads, facing unprecedented
challenges that demand transformative changes
involving reforms, innovative approaches and, most
of all, new yardsticks for measuring performance
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in every sector of United Nations peacekeeping. The
effectiveness of peacekeeping is being questioned,
particularly with regard to the many problems that
it is encountering, and which teach many important
lessons with regard to decisions on how and when
to deploy peacekeepers and the kind of structures
and streamlining that are required to support United
Nations peacekeeping. It is in that regard that the road
maps outlined in the reports of the Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations (see S/2000/809) and the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), on the peacebuilding architecture,
together with resolution 1325 (2000) and the SecretaryGeneral’s plan of action, deserve full consideration.
Effectiveness can also be measured not just
in its ability to bring conflicts to an end but also in
how it sets the stage for lasting peace and sustainable
development. It is in that regard that Kazakhstan has
proposed an innovative threefold strategy for preventing
and addressing conflicts, which combines a securitydevelopment nexus with revamped regional and
whole-of-system approaches to enhancing efficiency
and accountability.
Where mandates are concerned, it can be difficult
to assess performance because of the expansive scope
of the objectives that some mandates encompass.
Some of the tasks involved are defined differently by
different Member States and the mandates of individual
peace operations often make demands that go beyond
reasonable expectations. More realistic goals would
help to improve the effectiveness of United Nations
missions, reduce human suffering, prevent violent
conflict beyond States’ borders and promote conflict
resolution. Another factor is the evolution of situations
over time, which requires ongoing monitoring
throughout the peacekeeping cycle so that policies can
be modified, strategies adapted and exits planned.
In addition, the success of peacekeeping missions’
operations can be measured by mandate performance,
and the degree to which they facilitate the resolution
and containment of conflict and limit casualties. Results
can also be evaluated at the strategic level in terms of
political stability rather than the implementation of
purely operational and tactical measures. Performance
assessment should also include the use of technology
to enhance mandate implementation, including the
protection of civilians, interoperability as a prerequisite
for effective operations, information sharing, medical
support, camp and installation security and mobile

S/PV. 8349

communications and information platforms. We must
also strive for effects-based and performance-focused
standards if we are to have measurable, indicatordriven reporting. Investigations into any kind of
malpractice should be transparent and available to all.
The potential of the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness
System, which is a valuable tool with a unique database
of Member States’ peacekeeping capabilities and
deficiencies, should be fully employed.
There are several stakeholders in peace operations.
Different actors have different goals or assign different
priorities to shared goals, which is why the two need
to be able to converge. Police-contributing countries
and troop-contributing countries (TCCs) also face the
dilemma of simultaneously balancing the safety of
their own United Nations personnel with the protection
of civilians.
Improving the accountability of United Nations
peacekeepers is an ongoing challenge. While most give
heroic service, some in the field lack equipment or have
exhibited poor performance and blatant misconduct,
especially where sexual exploitation and abuse
are concerned. Such deficiencies require stringent
organizational accountability measures aimed at
ending all impunity. In order to make peacekeepers
more effective, the whole United Nations system must
be accountable.
The United Nations should also strengthen
its cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations through a comprehensive strategy for
conflict prevention and resolution, with investments
in development, as we mentioned in connection to our
threefold strategy. We fully support building new and
comprehensive partnerships with the African Union, the
European Union, the Organization of American States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the League of
Arab States, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and
other structures and groups of countries for resolving
regional and country-specific conflicts with a view to
enhancing peacekeeping performance.
We are confident that the active involvement
and engagement of new countries in United Nations
peacekeeping, including through co-deployments, can
bring fresh vigour, new blood and greater efficiency
to peace operations. Kazakhstan is committed
to increasing its contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping operations by co-deploying its unit

18-2833513/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

with that of India to the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and deploying more officers to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We are also working
on certification by the United Nations of the courses
of the KAZCENT peacekeeping training centre,
which has been recognized for reaching the highest
international standards. Furthermore, bringing new
TCCs into United Nations peacekeeping enhances the
credibility and effectiveness of United Nations missions
and promotes cooperation and collective responsibility
among countries, regional organizations and the world
community as a whole.
Lastly, Kazakhstan stands ready to work on
increasing the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
through a concerted multilateral effort.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Madam President,
for holding today’s meeting. We also thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and Ms. Blakemore for their
valuable briefings.
Despite the fact that the Charter of the United
Nations does not address peacekeeping operations in
any of its articles, they are currently the Organization’s
most costly and important activities, as well the most
important tool that the Security Council has at its
disposal for the maintenance of international peace
and security. I will address three aspects of this
topic — first, pathways for reform; secondly, rewards
and accountability; and thirdly, dealing with problems.
First, with regard to pathways to reform, political
solutions and the Security Council’s responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security take
priority when we discuss peacekeeping operations.
In discussing implementing or reviewing reforms, we
should always keep in mind the importance of respect
for States’ sovereignty and for the three principles of
peacekeeping — the consent of the States concerned,
impartiality and refraining from the use of force except
in self-defence and defence of the mandate.
Reforms start with the definition of clear and
meaningful mandates that support an existing political
process, followed by the development of specific,
measurable tasks and subsequently a review of the
collective efforts of the Secretariat, the Security Council
and the troop-contributing countries (TCCs) with the
aim of establishing shortcomings and achievements.
Resolution 2378 (2017) is an important point of reference
that guides the Security Council in its deliberations. The
14/42

12/09/2018

Council is currently discussing reform at various levels,
including the Secretary-General’s initiatives, which
we support, in its resolutions or through its subsidiary
bodies. Our debate focuses on our ultimate common goal
of achieving sustainable peace by providing elements
of success in the area of peacekeeping, such as trained
personnel at the operational, theoretical and linguistic
levels; ensuring the necessary equipment; defining
clear policies; and carrying out detailed reviews.
In that regard, I reaffirm that we stand ready to
cooperate with the United States and other States
Members of the Security Council with regard to adopting
a draft resolution in the coming days to support various
aspects of reform and develop peacekeeping operations
based on previous understandings that would eventually
contribute to the development of peacekeeping both
at Headquarters and in the field, and then move it to
higher levels.
Secondly, concerning rewards and accountability,
we have long discussed and even sometimes disagreed
on the issue of accountability in cases of failure. We also
must consider the many achievements of peacekeeping
operations. The past 70 years of peacekeeping have
seen myriad examples of success stories in which
peacekeeping operations implemented their mandates
as required, with minimum casualties and loss of
life and money. The United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission, which ran from 1991 to 2003, is
but one example of such success stories.
The efforts of the Secretariat this month, led
by the Secretary-General, deserve support and
commendation. These include the announcement of
the shared commitments and the Secretariat action
plan regarding the report of retired Lieutenant General
Santos Cruz, entitled Improving Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers, in addition to earlier reports
and plans. In that regard, the efforts of the Secretariat
include policies to establish the values of accountability,
discipline and excellence, while respecting States’
sovereignty when dealing with situations pertaining to
their uniformed personnel.
Six months ago, the Secretary-General listed the
elements of an initiative concerning peacekeeping,
of which performance is an essential elements. We
look forward to working with the Secretariat in
order to develop an informed and integrated plan for
peacekeeping operations and their reviews.
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

That leads me to my third aspect, which concerns
addressing negative phenomena, including sexual
exploitation and abuse. That requires concerted efforts
on our part to eliminate them. In that regard, we must
support the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy.
We also appreciate the rapid and firm response of TCCs
to cases in which discipline is violated.
As for the protection of civilians, which is at the core
of the majority of peacekeeping troops, it is achieved
only when civilians feel safe from all threats regardless
of their source. Such threats against civilians constitute
a red line and are totally unacceptable, whether at the
level of the mission, the United Nations with all its
organs, or United Nations membership.
In conclusion, we pay tribute to the sacrifices made
by peacekeepers over more than 70 years of protecting
civilian lives. We commend the participation of Member
States in peacekeeping, be it by contributing troops,
providing materiel and equipment and training, or
sharing expertise, which are necessary for the success
of peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We very much welcome this
annual debate on peacekeeping and the implementation
of resolution 2378 (2017), which takes place within
the context of our collective efforts to strengthen
peacekeeping and move from words to action in making
peace operations fit for the twenty-first century. I want
to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing and Ms. Sarah Blakemore for sharing her very
important perspective and the important work that she
and her organization do.
I believe that this is an appropriate occasion to pay
tribute to the thousands of women and men peacekeepers
who do a tremendously important and courageous job
every day in implementing decisions by the Security
Council, often in complex and dangerous circumstances.
Sweden aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later today by the observer of the
European Union.
We stand firmly behind the Secretary-General’s
reform agenda, while putting prevention and sustaining
peace at the heart of our efforts. We also strongly support
the Secretary-General’s action plan for peacekeeping
initiative to strengthen global partnerships. Its
holistic approach, in which performance together with
peacebuilding, partnerships, people and politics form
the basis, will make United Nations delivery more

S/PV. 8349

effective and efficient on the ground, but that requires
that the United Nations as a whole be able to engage
flexibly and effectively throughout the conflict cycle,
from prevention to transition. Peacekeeping is one of
the most effective instruments available in that regard
and a crucial means to protect civilians and create
conditions for successful political processes. It is also
our most costly and exposed instrument, and it will
be truly effective only if all other parts of the system
fall into place. Today, I will focus on three aspects
that we find particularly important to the discussion
on peacekeeping and performance, namely, situational
awareness, strong leadership and accountability of
our peacekeepers.
First, for the Council to be able to engage effectively
in conflict prevention, management and resolution,
access to candid and timely information and analysis
is critical. That is also crucial for ensuring the safety
and security of both peacekeepers and civilians. We
therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts to
streamline and coordinate information and situational
awareness within the Secretariat and encourage
the continued implementation of the new policy on
peacekeeping intelligence.
Secondly, the Secretary-General’s reform agenda
foresees a greater delegation of authority to the field.
That, together with the multidimensional nature
of peace operations, requires well-prepared and
cohesive leadership on the ground. Crisis management
situations also require clearly defined roles and chains
of command.
Thirdly, making peacekeeping more effective and
efficient is a shared responsibility between troop- and
police-contributing countries, Member States, the
United Nations and host States. It also requires a broad
approach to performance encompassing military, police
and civilian personnel. We welcome the development of
a comprehensive performance policy on peacekeeping.
Harmonized and integrated standards and guidelines
are crucial in the field. In addition, enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, not least of which the African Union, is
important for increased effectiveness. Uniformed units
must have the right training, skills and equipment to
be able to protect civilians as well as themselves and
to deliver on mandates. We need to hold troop- and
police-contributing countries accountable in that regard
but also support predeployment training, including
in human rights and international humanitarian law.

18-2833515/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Sweden, as a contributing country, will continue to
take full responsibility for its units so that they are
fully trained and equipped to meet the challenges that
they face in their peacekeeping missions. We also
commit to continue our support to other troop- and
police-contributing countries through training and
capacity-building.
Experience clearly shows that women’s participation
in peacekeeping missions increases operational
effectiveness and performance. Women’s participation
and active engagement in peace processes and
peacebuilding are also crucial for achieving sustainable
peace. We must all step up our efforts and deliver on
promises to include more women in those processes
and in our missions. We also stress the importance
of the full implementation of the human rights due
diligence policy, the human rights screening policy and
the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse. Those are all important measures for preventing
violence and abuse in connection to peacekeeping, and,
as such, they contribute to strengthening the legitimacy
of United Nations operations. Cases of abuse, such as
those we heard during Sarah Blakemore’s testimony
here today, are unacceptable and must be followed up
both for the victims and to ensure accountability for
individual perpetrators.
Lastly, in two weeks’ time the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations will be adopted. We will endorse the
Declaration and call on others to do the same. We
believe that the performance of peacekeeping can be
improved if we all live up to our joint commitments and
the implementation of the Declaration.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important debate
today. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General and
Ms. Blakemore for their briefings.
I believe that there has been a huge amount of
progress and important successful outcomes concerning
the peacekeeping agenda over the past 10 years. At the
same time, Sarah Blakemore’s testimony reminds us
that there is a long way to go, but I believe that it would
be right to begin by joining my Swedish colleague in
commending the 100,000 United Nations uniformed
peacekeepers and the 14,000 civilian peacekeepers
and their commitment to delivering international
peace and security. The vast majority of these men and
women are courageous and they operate in incredibly
16/42

12/09/2018

challenging conditions. As the Under-SecretaryGeneral mentioned, 138 lost their lives last year. We
pay tribute to their sacrifice and we thank their families
for allowing them to carry out the very difficult jobs
they do.
We, the Council, are responsible for their
deployment. We need to do our utmost to improve the
safety and security of all peacekeepers and to make
sure that peacekeeping is as effective and efficient
as possible. That means having high-performing
peacekeeping missions. We need to get the best possible
impact from the $7 billion we spend annual on United
Nations peacekeeping, but I also want to say that we
need to have multidimensional peacekeeping. I do not
agree that missions should not look at human rights
and humanitarian factors. These are conflict drivers;
they are root causes; they need to be fixed. We cannot
turn the clock back, so we need military, political and
development solutions.
The Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative provides the basis for making a reality of
getting more impact for our money. We are proud to have
endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping and we encourage other
Member States to join. I would like to highlight four
particular areas where I think we should concentrate
our efforts to have peacekeeping be more effective.
First, we must get it right from the start. That involves
planning. The Council has an important role to play in
improving performance. That starts with the mandates
we authorize, which need to be realistic, achievable
and developed on the basis of frank advice from the
Secretariat, as well as robust debate by the Council. In
turn, we look to the Secretariat to use our peacekeeping
resources effectively and to match capabilities to
requirements. We often talk about the United Nations
breaking down silos. I would just recall that in Darfur,
there are some 27 different United Nations entities on
the ground. That requires coordination, planning, a
comparative advantage approach and a United Nationswide approach.
Secondly, we must make sure that it works. A
number of speakers this morning have drawn attention
to the critical importance of performance. Peacekeepers
on the ground need to be equipped, capable and willing
to do the job we ask of them. That means we need to
strengthen training, both before deployment and as
troops are in the field. We need the light coordination
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

mechanism on training to be made operational as
quickly as possible. That mechanism needs to enable
better matching-up of those that can provide capacitybuilding and equipment with those that need support.
As the Under-Secretary-General mentioned, we
need to do more than pay lip service to the role of
women. We should make this a priority. At the London
Defence Ministerial, some 63 countries, including
many represented in this Chamber, called for the
doubling of the number of women in military and peace
contingents by 2020. I hope that we can all play a part
in making that a reality. For the United Kingdom’s
part, we have launched the Women, Peace and Security
Chiefs of Defence Staff Network, and we hope that it
will promote ways to integrate gender perspectives
into military planning and operations, and thereby
improve numbers.
Third is the feedback loop. Checking that we know
what works and continuous improvement requires a
robust and objective evaluation of mission performance.
As you said, Madam President, processes must be
transparent and we need better accountability. Between
us, we have huge amounts of knowledge to draw on, and
I hope that the Secretariat will be able to speed up the
development of a comprehensive performance policy.
Fourthly, we must recognize when we get it wrong.
The failure to be transparent and maintain a culture
of accountability can lead to shocking abuses, as
Ms. Blakemore was able to outline today. We strongly
support the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance
policy and we look to its implementation. The United
Kingdom has provided about $3 million to support the
Secretary-General’s efforts, and our voluntary funding
has improved system-wide coordination and enabled
robust vetting and mandatory predeployment training.
It is also important that we have good communication
so that we can focus on providing redress for victims.
In conclusion, we need to be confident that our
peacekeeping missions are fulfilling their mandates to
protect civilians and we need to be equally confident
that they are fulfilling their duty to protect our own
mission personnel. We therefore need to fulfil our own
duty to ensure that these missions are supported and
given the necessary resources so they can do their jobs.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this debate and Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Ms. Sarah Blakemore for their important briefings.

S/PV. 8349

This meeting is particularly timely in view of the
draft resolution on the performance of peacekeeping
operations that we have been considering and the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, which Peru supports and
hopes to adopt in the General Assembly.
As troop contributors, we wish to emphasize the
importance of coordination and cooperation among
contributing countries, the Security Council and the
Secretariat. We welcome the reforms being promoted in
that regard by Secretary-General António Guterres and
his Action for Peacekeeping initiative. It is important
to implement and evaluate the mandates of the Council
more consistently, efficiently and effectively in support
of specific political processes and the protection of
civilians, following an inclusive and operationally
complementary approach. To that end, we recall that
resolution 2378 (2017) stipulates that data related to
the performance of peacekeeping operations should be
centralized by the Secretariat in order to improve the
corresponding analysis and evaluation, on the basis of
clear and well-identified parameters.
In that regard, we believe that support for a given
political process should follow a comprehensive
strategy coordinated with relevant actors, including
regional actors. The performance of a mission should
be evaluated in terms of the actual capacities that
exist to fulfil its mandates. That includes, among
other measures and as appropriate, the development
of operational intelligence capabilities and of exit
strategies aimed at sustained peace, coordinated with
the Government and other national actors concerned,
such as the Peacebuilding Commission and the United
Nations country team.
Peacekeeping operations must also be properly
trained to fulfil the primary responsibility to protect
civilians, and in particular the most vulnerable. That
requires a minimum training for Blue Helmets in
international humanitarian law and human rights,
including a gender approach to preventing and dealing
with sexual violence. Peru adheres to the policy of zero
tolerance for cases of sexual exploitation and abuse.
We have signed the voluntary compact proposed by
the Secretary-General, and we wish to express our
recognition and support for his leadership and action
in that area.
Additionally, we stress that the necessary interaction
with the civilian population and the promotion of

18-2833517/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

preventive and inclusive approaches also require the
fuller participation of women in peace operations and
in the respective political processes. We have also
been increasing the participation of women in the six
missions in which we participate. Women represent
nearly 15 per cent of our deployed personnel and we are
working to continue to increase that number.
Peru recognizes the need for minimum performance
standards for troop contributors. To that end, a thorough
and updated knowledge of the expectations, challenges
and requirements of the respective mission is required,
as well as the corresponding operational capabilities
and training.
In view of the increasing complexity of mandates,
we underscore the need to improve mission planning
and to follow through with pledges of specialized
capabilities. We also stress the need for performance
evaluations, rather than being punitive, to be oriented
towards remedying any shortcomings detected in the
training phase and in the execution of the mandate.
In order to do so and in line with resolution 2378
(2017), we stress the importance of ensuring dynamic
and flexible support for activities on the ground by
encouraging innovation to improve implementation
and results with a view to strengthening the overall
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. From that
perspective, we believe it necessary to rethink the
current format of interaction between the Secretariat
and troop contributors with a view to generating a
more dynamic and in-depth dialogue on performance
standards, objectives and indicators.
We conclude by reaffirming our commitment to
peacekeeping operations, which, in the words of the
Secretary-General, represent a minimal investment
in the face of global military expenditure that has
the potential to multiply growth and prosperity in the
host countries.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this important debate and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, for his particularly enlightening briefing, as
well as Ms. Blakemore for her valuable testimony.
Peacekeeping reform is a central issue for the
future of the United Nations. The Blue Helmets are the
most visible face of the Organization. Every day, under
difficult conditions, they contribute to safeguarding
ceasefires, protecting civilian populations from abuses
18/42

12/09/2018

and maintaining a fragile peace that, without their
presence, would very quickly collapse. Therefore, not
only must we pay tribute to them, but we also owe it to
them to do everything possible to enable them to work
effectively in the service of peace.
Much has been accomplished in recent years, but
more remains to be done. That is why France fully
supports the Secretary-General in his undertaking
to reform the peace and security pillar of the
United Nations. For their part, more than 50 States,
including France, have already endorsed the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative that we will adopt at the
summit on 25 September. It is an important success for
the Secretary-General, the United Nations and all of us.
Among the elements of that reform, the question of the
performance of peacekeeping operations is essential
to the credibility of the action of peacekeeping forces.
The report authored by retired Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers, which was
commissioned by the Secretary-General, proposed
many improvements that the Secretariat has begun
to energetically implement. That is a good thing, and
France encourages the Secretariat to continue on
that path.
To contribute to improving the performance of
those operations, there are three key components that I
would like to underscore.
First, I will address training both before and during
missions, which includes of course basic military
operational training and linguistic training. As everyone
knows, France is working in both of those areas. The
Blue Helmets deployed in the field must benefit from
that training so as to deliver their best performance,
particularly in the event of a change in mandate. To that
end, triangular cooperation offers many advantages
and benefits both for troop-contributing countries
and for third countries. France plays a leading role in
such cooperation by supporting the training of nearly
30,000 French-speaking African soldiers each year,
and intends to continue its efforts in that regard.
Secondly, it is necessary to improve force generation.
Better mobilization of the armed forces and police,
improving their projection capabilities and mobility
and increasing the ratio of women within contingents
are key elements of peacekeeping performance. There
is still work to be done there, but we are confident that
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the Action for Peacekeeping initiative will make great
strides in that regard.
Thirdly, it is essential that a proper performance
assessment be put in place and that cases of
underperformance be addressed. A frank and open
exchange must take place between the Secretariat and
the troop- and police-contributing countries in the event
of proven underperformance in order to better identify
the various pitfalls that have led to those situations
and to rectify them, even if, in the event of failure
and especially in the case of abuses, we will need to
consider repatriating the troops concerned. That is
crucial to the effectiveness of missions, the security of
other contingents and the successful implementation of
mandates, particularly with respect to the protection
of civilians. In the same vein, it is important that the
quality of the work of the most efficient contingents be
recognized and acknowledged.
But the performance of peacekeeping operations
is not limited to the military and police aspects of the
operations concerned. The performance of civilian
elements and the quality of mission organization must
also be assessed. Some structural flaws can have very
concrete consequences. To cite but one example, France
is very concerned about the lack of real progress on
the coherence and responsiveness of the health-care
chain of command, the shortcomings of which could
endanger the lives of the Blue Helmets on the ground.
Finally, there must be zero tolerance towards
peacekeepers and civilian personnel who are guilty of
sexual assault. It is not possible to overemphasize the
crucial importance for the Blue Helmets and civilian
peacekeepers to exhibit exemplary and responsible
behaviour, especially at a time when the actions I
have referred to can undermine the credibility of our
work and the trust of the civilian population in the
United Nations.
Our goal is to create a real culture of performance
backed by clear, accountability and incentive
mechanisms. That is the best way for us to collectively
respond to professional United Nations bashers, who
will always find themselves repudiated by France.
Performance cannot be judged out of context, however.
Blue Helmets and civilian members of missions work
within the specific framework of their mandate. I take
this opportunity to reiterate the urgent need for those
operations to have a clear, sequenced and prioritized
mandate in the service of well-defined and transparent

S/PV. 8349

political objectives. That imperative must guide our
daily work. To that end, France is working on all the
mandates for which we are responsible in our capacity
as penholder.
It is also key to ensure that operations have
the necessary resources. Indeed, without funding
commensurate with mandates, the entire functioning
of a mission is weakened, along with the safety and
security of United Nations personnel. That essential
point also falls under our collective responsibility.
I cannot conclude without reiterating the importance
of proper coordination and cooperation of peacekeeping
operations with the various local and regional actors
on the ground. In that regard, I fully share the opinion
expressed by my colleague and friend from Côte
d’Ivoire on behalf of the three African countries on the
Council. Regional organizations play an increasingly
important role in the promotion of peace and security.
That is the case with the European Union, but also
and above all of the African Union and the continent’s
subregional organizations. Their operations add
irreplaceable value and are in full complement of those
conducted under the auspices of the United Nations.
That is why strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union is a top priority
of our work, and why we must effectuate United
Nations support for African peace operations as soon
as possible, which is one of France’s strategic priorities.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First of all, I should
like to thank the United States presidency for holding
this debate ahead of the upcoming high-level meeting
on action for peacekeeping. Let me also express my
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and Ms. Sarah Blakemore for their remarks and
valuable inputs during today’s discussion.
Poland would approach performance in United
Nations peacekeeping operations from a holistic
perspective, as a collective effort that is well integrated
into the wider context of the engagement of the whole
of the United Nations system to improve peacekeeping
and as an endeavour of the entire international
community, rather than that of only isolated incidents
involving the actions of inefficient peacekeepers. Thus
we need to address all stakeholders, including members
of the Security Council, and ask how our declarations
and words translate into real action.
Let me focus on three points today.

18-2833519/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

I should like to begin with one of the key elements in
building an effective and efficient performance culture
in the Organization: information-sharing. We see
information and data-driven analysis as the founding
principle of and entry point to improved peacekeeping.
It serves the efforts of all stakeholders in strengthening
missions’ effectiveness and efficiency.
Better situational awareness improves planning and
makes it possible to identify clear and well-understood
benchmarks. Subsequently, realistic plans serve as
precise guides for troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
in their pre-deployment training. This chain reaction is
what leads to the effective implementation of a mandate
and is indispensable in missions’ ultimate goal of
protecting civilians and United Nations personnel.
Poland is also a strong believer in tailored
pre-deployment training and the provision of adequate
equipment to our troops. Such mission-specific
preparations are possible only when TCCs are provided
with the full operational, political, geographical
and security picture. Thus we would underline the
importance and necessity of implementing and
integrating peacekeeping intelligence capabilities as
part of the information culture in the field and at United
Nations Headquarters.
The second point I would like to touch upon
today is communication. The role of the Secretariat,
the Security Council and TCCs in this process must
be underscored. In this regard, Poland welcomes the
openness and transparency that characterized the
consultations on the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
This approach should be adopted as a regular procedure
in discussions on such vital topics as peacekeeping.
Additionally, we should not overlook the power
of communication in the process of putting political
pressure on key stakeholders or the need to include host
nations as they play a pivotal role in and take ownership
of the national political process.
While we all agree on the primacy of politics in
conflict resolution and the leading role of host States
in political processes and the protection of their own
citizens, the process poses a challenge: how to address
the issue of unsatisfactory progress and engagement
by the host State, and how should we, the international
community, address such shortfalls when they become
evident? I believe that the best answer is for the Security
Council to speak in unison, followed by collective and
orchestrated action.
20/42

12/09/2018

My third point focuses on the steps that should be
taken to ensure the effective involvement of women in
peacekeeping operations.
Education in the basics should be provided so as
to create and develop adequate capacity among women
and girls, which is essential for them to be recruited
for leadership positions. Moreover, as the United
Nations military force depends on Member States’
contributions, it is crucial to focus on the challenges
that women face within individual States’ military
recruitment processes.
Women, as they are the main victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse, should have an active role in
the system for monitoring such exploitation and abuse,
including direct access to and full participation in
determining the scope of a perpetrator’s punishment.
Poland strongly supports establishing monitoring units
on sexual exploitation and abuse, with the highest
ranks or positions therein reserved for women, as
the best providers of solutions. The special report on
safeguarding children prepared by Keeping Children
Safe highlights current initiatives such as the e-learning
training programme on sexual exploitation and abuse
for personnel deployed on missions. It is strongly
advised that such actions be implemented as a tool for
further reducing the number of related complaints.
In conclusion, I should like to emphasize the
wider context of peacekeeping that is reflected in the
Secretary-General’s reform of the security pillar. The
reform process should create a supportive environment
both in the Secretariat and in the missions. Efforts
to improve the performance of the reformed security
pillar should take into account the interconnectivity of
all of the elements of and stakeholders participating in
United Nations peacekeeping.
I should like to underscore Poland’s strong support
for the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. Poland was among the very first countries
to endorse the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I wish warmly
to thank you, Madam President, for putting the key issue
of improving the performance of peacekeepers on our
agenda. It is one of the three priorities for the Kingdom of
the Netherlands during our membership in the Council.
I also thank Mr. Lacroix and Ms. Blakemore for their
briefings. May I add that I was deeply impressed by
Ms. Blakemore’s testimony on the criminal abuse of
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

children by peacekeepers. This is simply unacceptable,
and I think that she has strengthened our common
resolve to end such crimes.
To quote the Secretary-General,
“At its best, United Nations peacekeeping is a
remarkable enterprise of multilateralism and
international solidarity.” (S/PV.8218, p. 2)
But peacekeeping has its dark chapters, and we in
the Netherlands know that all too well from our own
history. Today United Nations peacekeeping faces
serious challenges, so let me first pay tribute to and
commemorate the brave Blue Helmets, women and
men, who have given their lives for a safer world.
We were honoured that the Secretary-General
launched his Action for Peacekeeping initiative during
the Dutch presidency of the Council, in March, in the
presence of our Prime Minister, Mark Rutte, and that
of the Minister of Defence of Côte d’Ivoire, on behalf
of President Ouattara (see S/PV.8218). We were pleased
to play a role in co-facilitating, together with other
members of the Council, the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, and we salute the leadership
of Côte d’Ivoire as Chair of the Council’s Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and our cooperation
on the presidential statement we adopted on 14 May
(S/PRST/2018/10).
We look forward to the high-level event on
peacekeeping, to be held in two weeks, and we
are heartened to see so many countries recommit
themselves the great enterprise of peacekeeping in such
a short time. We encourage those countries that have
not yet signed on to the Declaration to do so; indeed, I
see that the representatives of some of those countries
are present here today.

S/PV. 8349

on Peacekeeping Operations stated in its 2017 report,
the meaningful participation of women at all levels
and in all pillars of a mission is key to the operational
effectiveness, the success and sustainability of peace
processes and peacebuilding efforts. Therefore, we
look forward to the furhter development of a gendersensitive force- and police-generation strategy by the
Secretariat. We welcome the development of female
engagement teams and efforts to institutionalize such
teams in deployments by troop-contributing countries.
We also support initiatives by Member States and the
United Nations, such as the Elsie initiative and the UNWomen female military officers course. We try to do
our part. Together with Spain, we organize a yearly
female peacekeepers course.
Secondly, with regard to performance and
accountability, we need a comprehensive and integrated
performance policy with clear standards as an important
basis to provide guidance and improve accountability.
The same holds true for scrutiny in vetting and
transparent evaluation standards. Adherence to a
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
demands our continuous attention. Part of the moral
compass of peacekeepers should be a very simple
rule — there is no such thing as an equal and consensual
relationship between peacekeepers and residents of
local communities. It simply does not exist. In our view,
the Secretariat and missions can further improve dataand intelligence-based analysis and decision-making. It
is obvious that being aware of the context and security
situation, in real time, in their area of operations is
vital to missions and to the safety of peacekeepers. In
asymmetrical environments, peacekeeping intelligence
is even more crucial. Therefore, we strongly support
the development of that concept.

Today we will focus on performance, which
is a key element of the reform of United Nations
peacekeeping. In that light, I will focus on three issues:
first, women in peacekeeping; secondly, performance
and accountability; and, thirdly, training and effective
force generation. Of course, I align myself with the
statement to be made later today by the observer of the
European Union.

Excellence in duties and leadership should be
rewarded. We must continue to learn from positive and
negative lessons We welcome the use of independent
strategic reviews in that regard. We call on the
Secretariat to continue to further enhance measures
to inform the Council of the planning and outcomes
of such reviews. We welcome your initiative, Madam
President, for a draft resolution on peacekeeping and
we will continue to work closely with you and your
team to ensure its maximum impact.

First, increasing the number of uniformed
women in peace operations is essential. I welcome
Mr. Lacroix’s personal commitment, which he has
just expressed, to the issue. As the Special Committee

Thirdly, on the issue of training and force
generation, the report prepared by Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving
Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, stated that

18-2833521/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

United Nations mission leadership and contributing
countries must change their mindset. They must be
willing to take risks and show willingness to adapt to
the new realities United Nations peacekeeping faces.
We fully agree. It is essential that missions possess
well-trained and equipped personnel. Missions must
have the right capabilities to implement the tasks
mandated by the Council. The United Nations must
continue to refine and further develop training so that
peacekeepers can perform their tasks with confidence
and decisiveness. The training should include special
leadership modules. The United Nations and its Member
States should do more to better coordinate training
and address specific training needs. There are more
ways to strengthen the impact of peacekeeping, such
as innovative force generation, smart pledging and the
use of annual rotation schemes. We welcome initiatives
from Member States and the Secretariat to identify
good practices and further improve force generation.
The Council has a specific responsibility. We need
to provide more tailor-made solutions for the challenges
faced by the men and women who risk their lives
serving in peacekeeping missions to protect others.
We must do everything in our power to avoid sending
Blue Helmets on impossible missions. As Lieutenant
General Santos Cruz stated, “We need to change the
way we are doing business”. That is a key challenge for
us all in order to bring safety and security to civilians
in areas where Blue Helmets are active. We owe it to the
civilians involved, to the Blue Helmets and to the brave
men and women who gave their lives under United
Nations command for a safer world.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Ms. Sarah Blakemore for their
briefings. Ms. Blakemore’s statement brought the
voices of the victims of abuse and sexual exploitation
into the Chamber. Such testimonies cast a shadow over
peacekeeping operations — one of the most important
tools of the Organization in its quest for stability, peace
and security.
The regrettable actions of some individuals should
not prevent us from highlighting the key role played
by the military and police contingents, observers
and civilian personnel in the various missions. They
are the ones on the ground risking their lives every
day in an attempt to fulfil the tasks mandated by the
Security Council.
22/42

12/09/2018

The persistent threats to international peace and
security posed by terrorist groups and transnational
crime have served to highlight the urgent need for a
major structural reform of peacekeeping operations to
enable them to provide a more efficient and effective
response to their respective environments to overcome
threats. In that regard, we believe that we should
consider the efficiency of each peacekeeping operation.
It is vital that each mission be supported by the country
or countries in which it is deployed. We reiterate that
it is impossible to think about a positive or favourable
outcome or that missions will fulfil their mandates if
they do not have the full consent of the Government
of the host State. In addition, for missions to enjoy
legitimacy, it is indispensable that they fulfil the
purposes for which they were conceived and comply
with the principles of peacekeeping operations. In
that regard, they must be impartial and serve only to
help build lasting peace. At no time should they be
seen or used as an intervention force. In all cases,
peacekeeping operations must respect the rule of law,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
each of the countries in which they operate. Similarly,
missions must always have a clear, measurable and
attainable mandate. To that end, the monitoring and
evaluation tools at our disposal should be used to verify
that mandate objectives are reached. For one reason or
another, those missions not meeting their objectives
must be evaluated and their mandates reconfigured. It
is not possible to continue with missions that extend
over several decades.
We believe that the performance of mission
personnel is an important element of mission success.
As we all know, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations has requested the Secretary-General to
develop an integrated performance policy framework,
which should include a methodology for measuring and
managing the performance of peacekeeping forces. That
in turn will serve to improve the planning and evaluation
of all missions, while emphasizing accountability,
encouraging performance and recognizing outstanding
performance. In that regard, it is important to take into
account the multidimensional aspect of performance,
which is developed through the interaction of military,
police and civilian personnel.
The effective and adequate provision of economic,
human and material resources for missions requires
technical, logistical and, above all, realistic analysis.
We emphasize the fact that improving institutional
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

agility in deploying troops is a priority. Similarly,
international standards established by the Organization
must be respected. In addition, it is important to select
the best qualified and most specialized personnel to
respond to the asymmetrical and high-risk contexts
faced by missions, without exception. We also again
stress that providing adequate and proper equipment
and training for troops is not just the responsibility of
troop-contributing countries, but of the United Nations
as a whole.
Furthermore, we believe that cooperation with
regional and subregional partners should continue to
take place within an institutional framework in order to
strengthen the exchange of information, consultations,
coordination in early warning services, conflict analysis
and common strategies, as well as joint interventions
that take into account the needs of each region on the
basis of comparative advantages.
Last, but certainly not least, we believe that we
cannot expect to achieve certain objectives with budget
cuts that are not commensurate with the reality on the
ground and without consultations with the host country
and troop-contributing countries. That is especially
true considering that the mandates of most missions
include the protection of civilians and that, in most
cases, those countries with the capacity to contribute
more also have a historical debt to those countries in
which the missions are deployed.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting,
and I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing. I also listened carefully to the statement of
Ms. Sarah Blakemore,
United Nations peacekeeping operations are an
effective means of defusing and easing regional conflicts
and defending collective security and have been
making important contributions to the maintenance of
international peace and security. At present the context
in which United Nations peacekeeping operations
are deployed and the tasks they have to perform are
increasingly complex. United Nations peacekeeping
operations should keep improving in response to the
evolving peacekeeping landscape.
In September 2017, the Council adopted 2378 (2017),
which requested the Secretary-General to submit to the
Council on an annual basis a comprehensive briefing
on the progress of United Nations peacekeeping reform.
China commends the Secretariat for taking measures to

S/PV. 8349

implement the resolution and update the Council with
comprehensive information. The Secretary-General
launched the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and
will convene a high-level meeting during the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-third
session. China commends the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and is keen to see the initiative contribute to
high efficiency and the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. With regard to the reform of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, I would like
to share the following points.
My first point concerns the need to uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic principles of peacekeeping
operations — the consent of the parties, impartiality
and the non-use of force except in self-defence and
defence of the mandate. Those are the very cornerstone
of peacekeeping operations and a sine qua non and
assurance with which peacekeeping operations
can win the trust of Member States and function
properly. Peacekeeping operations should fully
respect the sovereignty of host countries, strengthen
communication with them and help them to develop
their own capacities in the area of peace and security in
the light of their specific needs.
Secondly, there is a need to maintain the primacy
of the political track. The purpose of peacekeeping
operations is to help host countries establish and
maintain a sustainable peaceful environment and
create enabling conditions for putting an end to conflict
politically. A realistic achievable mandate with welldefined objectives and highlighted priorities should be
developed for each mission focusing on peacekeeping,
which is the core mission of peacekeeping operations.
The mandate can be adjusted in the light of dynamic
needs, with the core agenda reconfigured phase by
phase to be more effective in maintaining the stability
of the host country and helping it move the political
process forward.
Thirdly, we must build a peacekeeping partnership.
It is necessary to motivate all stakeholders, including
host countries, troop-contributing countries (TCCs),
financial contributors and the Secretariat, and to ensure
sufficient resources for peacekeeping operations and
streamline the use of resources. It is necessary to
strengthen cooperation with regional organizations.
The United Nations should fully leverage the advantages
of the African Union in peacekeeping operations in
Africa, carry out capacity-building activities in various

18-2833523/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

fields according to its wishes and needs and assist the
African Union in forming a standing army and rapid
response force as soon as possible. We must strengthen
communication among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries, and we
must give the TCCs more say in peacekeeping matters.
Fourthly, better peacekeeping performance
requires the Secretariat and the military, police and
civilian components of missions to work together. The
Secretariat and the civilian component of each mission
must provide peacekeeping forces with more efficient,
high quality support and services for the implementation
of their mandates. It is necessary to ensure the safety
of, and medical support for, peacekeeping missions
and personnel and ensure the availability of funds and
supplies required and enhance emergency response
capabilities. We must pay close attention to the actual
needs of troop-contributing countries, especially the
developing countries among them, and help strengthen
the peacekeeping capacity building. It is necessary to
review and improve existing peacekeeping performance
evaluation system on an ongoing basis. Any work in that
area should benefit from the full participation of TCCs.
China is an active player in, and major contributor
to, United Nations peacekeeping operations. China is
an important TCC and financial contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Currently, more
than 2,500 Chinese peacekeepers are serving in eight
mission locations, including Mali, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and Lebanon.
His Excellency Mr. Xi Jinping of China pledged
to further support United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and the implementation of various
commitments agreed to under that pledge is now under
way. We have established a peacekeeping standby
force of 8,000 troops and two permanent peacekeeping
police units, and have completed their registration
in the United Nations Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System. The China-United Nations Peace
and Development Fund has prioritized peacekeeping
capacity-building, through which it aims to assist the
United Nations in enhancing the safety and security of
peacekeepers and supporting developing countries in
building their peacekeeping capacities.
At the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation in early September, China announced the
establishment of the China-Africa Peace and Security
Fund, through which we will continue to provide gratis
24/42

12/09/2018

military assistance to the African Union and facilitate
the implementation of 50 security assistance projects in
the area of peace and security, including peacekeeping
operations under the framework of the United Nations.
We shall continue to play an active role in United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa and mobilize
the international community to increase its support for
the development of the African standby force and the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises.
China stands ready to continue working with the
wider United Nations membership to further improve
the peacekeeping system in the interests of international
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
Ms. Mohammed: I am honoured to have this
opportunity to make a contribution during this debate
on peacekeeping operations. I wish to congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and for your leadership
since you took over. Allow me to also commend the
United States presidency for initiating this important
discussion of shared and critical interest to the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular
the African Union. Permit me to also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lacroix
and Ms. Sarah Blakemore, who just left us, for their
informative briefings.
Last year’s Security Council high-level debate
on peacekeeping reform (see S/PV.8044) and the
subsequent unanimous adoption of resolution 2378
(2017) served to underscore the fact that current
complex peace and security challenges are such that no
single organization can address them on its own.
We note with satisfaction the growing recognition
of the African Union’s (AU) comparative advantage in
providing immediate stability and protecting civilians.
In the same vein, we are pleased that the partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations
continues to achieve milestones as evidenced by
the Framework for Enhanced Partnership on Peace
and Security, signed in April 2017, by the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission. We also note with satisfaction the
progress made on the AU-European Union-United
Nations trilateral cooperation. In that regard, given
the evolving contemporary security challenges on the
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

continent, the AU’s objective is to seek the alignment of
current international peace-and-security frameworks.
That includes ensuring that predicable and sustainable
financing mechanisms are available to efficiently
respond to security challenges.
In line with that goal, the AU’s commitment — as
espoused in the decision of the twenty-fourth ordinary
session of the AU Assembly to fund 25 per cent of
the cost of its peace-and-security efforts, including
peace-support operations — serves as a demonstration
of its resolve to ensure that required responses to
conflict situations are timely and not constrained by
funding. Against that backdrop, allow me to reiterate
two critical areas of interest and concern for the AU.
First, there have been a number of developments
since the adoption of resolutions 2320 (2016) and
2378 (2017) that confirmed the readiness of the
Security Council to consider a cost-sharing structure
for the funding of peace-support operations. That
includes AU’s continuous efforts to operationalize
its revitalized Peace Fund, whose progress has been
shared as part of the Secretary-General’s update on the
implementation of those resolutions. In addition, the
AU High Representative for Financing of the Union and
the Peace Fund briefed the Council in July on progress
achieved so far, including the level of contributions
to the Fund — which stands at $47.7 million, the
highest since the establishment of the Peace Fund.
As part of that process, the AU continues to enhance
its compliance and accountability framework and
has finalized its policies on the prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse and on conduct and discipline
in AU peace-support operations. The AU has also
completed a comprehensive review of compliance-andaccountability practices in past and current AUauthorized and -mandated peace-support operations.
It has also developed a selection-and-screening
framework for AU peace-support personnel and has
worked towards the establishment of a misconduct
tracking system to further enhance its prevention,
monitoring and response measures.
A second critical area for the AU is the
implementation of the AU strategic partnership
on peacekeeping, particularly in ongoing conflict
situations such as Somalia, which has enhanced
greater cooperation and consultation between the
two institutions. Since 2013, the AU and the United
Nations have jointly facilitated the development of a
concept of operations, undertaken four joint AU-United

S/PV. 8349

Nations review-and-benchmarking exercises and just
completed a joint operational readiness assessment of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Those processes have allowed for greater joint analysis,
planning and cooperation between the two secretariats.
However, more needs to be done to enable both
informal and formal joint consultations between the
two Councils so as to bring about greater coherence and
convergence on the main issues and critical concerns of
both organizations.
The Somalia experience provides important
lessons for our strategic partnership at the operational,
strategic and political levels. For instance, while the
2018 AU-United Nations joint review report and its
recommendations covered and highlighted the critical
concerns of both organizations on the situation in
Somalia and on AMISOM, the Security Council, in
adopting resolution 2431 (2018), did not clearly and
explicitly recognize critical issues relating to the AU’s
political role in Somalia.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that,
notwithstanding the progress achieved thus far on AU’s
access to United Nations-assessed contributions, the
discussion tends to be focused on a conditions-based
approach, with repeated calls for enhancement of the
AU’s human rights and financial accountability systems.
However, that position by the Security Council should
move a step forward by adopting a substantive draft
resolution that settles this long-standing issue and sets
the pace for the operationalization of an international
framework to prevent and respond to instability and
conflict in a predictable and effective manner.
We believe that ongoing funding challenges faced
by current peace-support operations, including the
African Union Mission in Somalia, and the limited
impact of efforts to address such challenges, including
the work of the joint AU-United Nations Special Envoys
on the financing of AMISOM, should serve as impetus
for accelerated momentum on our collective efforts to
operationalize that cost-sharing structure.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I am honoured to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its 28 member States.
The following countries align themselves with my
statement, of which a longer version will be distributed

18-2833525/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in the Chamber: the candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Area country
Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia.
First, I would like to commend the United States
for holding this debate on peacekeeping and the
implementation of resolution 2378 (2017). Peacekeeping
operations continue to be a vital instrument in advancing
peace and security in the world, as our environment is
becoming more and more complex and challenging. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his first annual
briefing on the implementation of resolution 2378
(2017). We welcome the progress made over the past
year in making United Nations peacekeeping more
efficient and effective. The European Union and its
member States strongly support the Secretary-General’s
initiatives to make the United Nations delivery more
effective and efficient on the ground, especially the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which highlights the
need for a sharper focus on performance, among other
things. We also welcome the Secretary-General’s calls
for the primacy of politics, as peacekeeping operations
can be deployed only in support of political solutions,
not as a substitute.
All efforts at improving performance should
be integrated in the broader context of the United
Nations reform process, at Headquarters and in the
field. The latter constitutes an indispensable enabling
environment for peacekeeping reforms to have a real
impact. We underline the importance of reducing
the overall environmental impact of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. A lighter footprint would
allow for improved safety and security — both for
troops and for the civilians of host countries — cost
efficiencies and, eventually, better performance.
We underline the importance of the reform efforts
undertaken, in terms of management, logistics,
procurement, and human resources provided to peace
operations, which will hopefully provide additional
incentives for a culture of performance to thrive. We
understand, too, that the efforts made at reform need
to be accompanied by commitment and contribution
by all members. In demanding greater efficiency and
improved performance, it behooves all of us to look at
our own performance and support. Only by providing
26/42

12/09/2018

the adequate resources will our combined efforts
deliver on our expectations.
We welcome the development of a comprehensive
performance policy on peacekeeping. Such a policy
should tackle several key aspects — such as how to
forge consensus around the strategic objectives set
out in peacekeeping mandates; which peacekeeping
stakeholders will deliver the mandate; how to improve
mandates’ design, improve the prioritization of
tasks, and training; as well as sound monitoring of
achievements. The approach needs to be broad and
encompass all peacekeepers — civilian, military
and police. Harmonizing standards and evaluation
criteria so as to remove any ambiguities that could
lead peacekeepers to fail is a must. That can be
achieved by strengthening our working methods with
stronger leadership, accountability and transparency.
Moreover, we expect all stakeholders to play their part
in a renewed collective commitment to implementing
Security Council resolutions and the highest level
of peacekeeping performance. At the same time,
an approach aligned with the efforts of troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as a close
dialogue with the Secretariat, are required.
For us, relevant and appropriate training remains
the cornerstone of any performance policy, and the
condition to translate some of the aforementioned
reforms into practice. On the basis of consolidated
standards, such training should include predeployment
and in-mission training on integrating a gender
perspective, international humanitarian law and human
rights components, including child protection, and
combating sexual and gender-based violence, as well as
sexual exploitation and abuse.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s emphasis on
increased accountability and his efforts to strengthen
the system’s ability to deal with sexual exploitation
and abuse swiftly and decisively. The European Union
member States have consistently expressed their support
for the policy of zero tolerance of sexual exploitation
and abuse. The European troop- and police-contributing
countries will continue to support the Secretariat
in bringing both the capacity and the willingness to
create safer environments for communities under the
protection of peacekeepers.
In conclusion, in support of political solutions,
peacekeeping missions and outputs must also be
assessed through a more inclusive and people-centred
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

approach. We continue to underscore the importance of
the protection of civilians as a core task of peacekeeping.
In this regard, regular assessments constitute an
indispensable part of performance evaluation. They
ensure that the protection of civilians under threat of
physical violence is fulfilled in accordance with the
requirements of necessity and proportionality. The better
integration of modern technology and peacekeeping
intelligence capabilities into peace operations should
therefore continue to be pursued. We can all agree that
a data-driven analysis can help improve the situational
awareness of troops in real time, thereby contributing
to the implementation of the missions’ mandate, to the
protection of civilians and to the security of the United
Nations personnel on the ground.
The European Union welcomes efforts to
incentivize the deployment of greater numbers of
women in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
including for positions of leadership, and stands ready
to work with the Secretary-General on a revised strategy
to double the number of women in military and policy
contingents of United Nations peacekeeping operations
over the next five years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza: At the outset, I would like to
congratulate the United States and Ambassador Nikki
Haley on assuming the presidency of the Council for the
month of September. I assure the United States of my
delegation’s full support during its presidency. I would
also like to commend the United States in particular
for convening this important debate on United Nations
peacekeeping reform, with a focus on improving
peacekeeper performance.
Rwanda aligns its statement with those delivered
by the representative of Côte d’Ivoire, on behalf of the
three African members of the Security Council, and
by Ambassador Fatima Mohammed, on behalf of the
African Union
I also highly commend and thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Lacroix, and Ms. Blakemore for their briefings.
As a top troop- and police-contributing country,
Rwanda considerers today’s discussion and debate to
be of critical importance. I should like to focus my
remarks today on a few points.

S/PV. 8349

I will start by addressing some of the ways of
improving the peacekeeping performance of civilians
and uniformed personnel. I recall that, as rightly
outlined in the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the Security Council should
continue to encourage and support the Secretariat to
develop
“an integrated performance policy framework for
mandate implementation based on clear standards
for all relevant civilian and uniformed personnel
working in and supporting peacekeeping operations
in the Secretariat and missions” (A/72/19, para. 102)
This framework should contain well-thought-out
benchmarks that we can be used both to measure and to
monitor peacekeeping performance.
Secondly — and here, I should like to emphasise a
point that was made by Ambassador Haley earlier — the
Security Council should ensure that the Secretariat
underlines troop capabilities, operational readiness
and the performance record, including the willingness
to fully implement Security Council mandates, at
the core of which is the protection of civilians. The
performance record cannot be recognized only by
rewarding troops, as has been happening; it should also
be taken into account for future deployment. I think
we have reached a level of maturity in United Nations
peacekeeping where deployment can no longer be
dictated only and exclusively by considerations that are
not performance-related.
Here, I would like to further develop the idea of
operational performance. We have, with a number of
other Members, put together a robust set of guidelines
in the Kigali Principles that, when implemented,
effectively enhance peacekeeping performance
while providing for accountability. For example, the
Principles seek to enhance performance by encouraging
high levels of training, ensuring that peacekeepers are
well prepared to protect, consistent with the mandate,
and to take disciplinary action against personnel if
and when they fail to act to protect civilians, and
when circumstances so warrant. We are encouraged
that countries contributing more than 50 per cent of
peacekeeping troops and that those funding more than
50 per cent of peacekeeping have endorsed the Kigali
Principles. We encourage all Members to endorse the
Principles and use them for their intended purpose as
simple operational guidelines for our peacekeepers and
commanders in the field.

18-2833527/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The Principles are informed by Rwanda’s
experience. We know from experience what the lasting
impact on peace and security can be when there is a
failure of peacekeeping. We have experienced both the
worst and the best of peacekeeping, and we know that
peacekeeping can make a major difference.
With respect to accountability, we should ensure
that personnel in the field and at Headquarters are held
accountable when it comes to peacekeeping. Here,
we would agree with the very practical and pertinent
proposals that were presented this morning by UnderSecretary-General Lacroix.
Finally, we would like to emphasise the need for
effective and greater delegation of authority to field
commanders. It is our sense that the Secretariat has the
authority required to do so, so we believe that we do
not need a specific, additional resolution in that regard.
We think that the Secretariat should be able to use the
authority it has.
Still under accountability, I will not underline
points that were underlined earlier by previous
speakers. However, please allow me to emphasize
one point that is dear to all troop-contributing
countries — the caveats. We will once again call on
all troop-contributing countries to remove all caveats
that impede performance. As was well noted by one of
my colleagues, the caveats of some contingents are an
unbearable tax on other contingents.
At this point, allow me to move onto another element
that is dear to Rwanda, which concerns increasing the
number of women in peacekeeping. We were very happy
in July to be able to deploy a police unit that was in full
parity — 50 per cent male and 50 per cent female. This
shows that it is possible. We worked very closely on this
with the Secretariat; however the key element here in in
being able to do so is really leadership — both political
and military. Of course, one needs to have well-trained
female police or military officers.
In conclusion, I will say that we have and have
had a range of interventions that are available to all
of us to strengthen peacekeepers’ performance. This
intervention will need the support, coordination and
cooperation of the Security Council, the Secretariat and
all Member States. I have outlined a few interventions
at the policy level in which the Security Council and the
Secretariat play a particularly important role.
28/42

12/09/2018

I have also mentioned the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians and what has informed
them. I have provided a few suggestions as to how
the Secretariat, the Security Council and troopcontributing countries can respond in cases of failure.
In short, I believe that, on this specific subject, we
know what needs to be done to improve performance.
We have the means to do so; we know the challenges. I
think that, at this stage — without intending to promote
a well-known company here — we need to just do it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow
me to start by thanking the United States for convening
this important debate. Let me also thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, and Ms. Sarah Blakemore, from
the non-governmental organization Keeping Children
Safe, for their thought-provoking interventions.
(spoke in English)
The success of peacekeeping operations depends
on the credibility, integrity and reputation of the
United Nations in the eyes of the local population. A
growing body of evidence shows that increasing the
meaningful participation of women at all levels in
peace operations can enhance effectiveness by bringing
valuable perspectives, helping build trust with local
communities and increasing situational awareness
by accessing a greater diversity of information about
conflict dynamics. Women bring irreplaceable assets to
United Nation peace operations and their contributions
support the safety and security of peacekeepers, as well
as the operational effectiveness of missions.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) 18
years ago, the United Nations has repeatedly set targets
for the increased deployment of women to uniformed
roles in peace operations. Unfortunately, we are not on
track to meet these targets. What will it take? We need
to demonstrate political commitment at the highest
level from a broad range of countries, including troopcontributing countries and host Governments.
Canada has work to do at home as well. Far too many
women in Canada continue to face discrimination and
gender-based violence. It is a priority for my Government
to meaningfully address these challenges. In the context
of peacekeeping, we are doing so by actively working
to recruit more women to the Canadian Armed Forces,
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

increase the number of Canadian women deployed to
multinational operations and better mainstream gender
considerations into how our Government works.
(spoke in French)
Through effective collaboration and the bold
leadership of troop-contributing countries, we can
recruit, train and deploy many more women to United
Nations operations. But deployment itself is not
sufficient; mission leadership must also leverage the
contributions and performance of uniformed women
deployed in their missions. Making this a reality
will require honest reflection at Headquarters, in
missions and contributing countries on the barriers
and biases that persist. Deploying more women to
peacekeeping operations — and mainstreaming gender
considerations — will make a tangible improvement to
peacekeeping performance.
(spoke in English)
Canada is contributing to these efforts as a matter
of national priority. Since 2014, Canadian police have
been at the forefront of a United Nations initiative to
provide pre-selection training to female United Nations
police peacekeeping candidates and we have partnered
with the United Nations to deliver the Female Senior
Police Command Development Course, preparing more
than 130 female police commanders for leadership roles
in United Nations police components.
In November, Canada launched the Elsie Initiative
for Women in Peace Operations because we believe
that a thoughtful combination of technical assistance,
training, financial incentives and research can help
catalyse transformational change and accelerate
progress to meet United Nations targets. Canada’s
Minister of Foreign Affairs looks forward to updating
Member States on the progress of the initiative at an
event on the margins of the high-level week of the
General Assembly later this month. Member States can
also be sure that we will remain an active proponent of
tangible progress on these issues should we be elected
to serve on the Security Council for the 2021-22 term.
Let me now address the issue of sexual exploitation
and abuse. I am glad that it has been included in this
debate on peacekeeping. It is clearly not only a conduct
and discipline issue, but also one of performance,
effectiveness and legitimacy. Instances of sexual
exploitation and abuse undermine the credibility of

S/PV. 8349

United Nations operations by breaking down the trust
between the mission and the communities they serve.
We must work together to end sexual exploitation
and abuse. Canada is a strong advocate of the full
implementation of the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy. Our efforts to make this policy real must span
the entirety of the United Nations system, as well as the
national frameworks of troop- and police-contributing
countries. Victims must be able to access a single,
integrated, responsive and compassionate system that
treats them with dignity, investigates claims and offers
a path to justice and restitution.
While the Secretary-General has been unequivocal
in his message that sexual exploitation and abuse are
unacceptable, this message has not yet translated into
concrete efforts across all United Nations operations.
Only solid leadership can overcome this. The goal
is clear — a comprehensive response consistently
implemented across the United Nations system to
prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and abuse
and to assist victims. Similarly, more needs to be done
to clarify the role of the Victims’ Rights Advocate and,
more broadly, how a victim-centred approach should be
articulated in policy and in practice.
The Secretary-General’s strategy relies upon the
successful functioning of key mechanisms, including
the Office of the Special Coordinator, the Office of
the Victims’ Rights Advocate and the Trust Fund in
Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
These Offices should be sufficiently resourced to tackle
a task of this scale, yet much more needs to be done to
ensure accountability and fundamentally reconfigure
our collective approach to make responses victimcentred. At the end of the day, victims should feel
safe in coming forward. It is up to all of us to make it
happen; the system needs to be geared towards making
it happen.
(spoke in French)
At the Vancouver Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
conference last year, Canada hosted 80 Member States
and five international organizations to consider how we
can better undertake peace operations. It is imperative
that troop- and police-contributing countries work
together to ensure the reliable and predictable
availability of capabilities to meet the critical needs of
United Nations operations. It is equally important that
we work together to develop new ways to meet those
needs that make best use of scarce resources.

18-2833529/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

(spoke in English)
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
improving peacekeeping performance is a complex
task. Increasing the meaningful participation of women
and tackling sexual exploitation and abuse are essential
components of this effort. As I said earlier, part of this
effort starts at home. We each need to work with our
own national institutions and we need to help and learn
from each other. Council members may rest assured
that Canada will be looking to the Council, as well as
to other Member States, civil society and experts, for
advice on what works. We all need to encourage, push
and support the United Nations to reach its own goals.
We all benefit from a safer world; we need to work
together to make this a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Dieng (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of
the United States on assuming the Security Council
presidency for this month and for organizing this
debate on such an important issue as the reform of
peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Ms. Sarah Blakemore, Chief Executive Officer and
Director of the non-governmental organization Keeping
Children Safe, for their most enlightening contributions.
I also welcome and support the statement made
by the representative of Côte d’Ivoire on behalf of
the African members of the Council and to endorse
the statement made by the Permanent Observer of the
African Union.
As a major player in peacekeeping operations,
Senegal wishes to reaffirm the special interest it
attaches to the question of reforming these missions.
That is why my delegation welcomes the Security
Council’s ongoing focus on this issue, particularly in
the framework of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, which Senegal had the honour of chairing
during our time as a member of the Security Council.
I recall that, in October 2017, Senegal and the United
States of America jointly organized a triangular
dialogue on this important issue in keeping with the
spirit of resolution 2378 (2017).
The recurrence of these deliberations reflects the
constant concern to allow peacekeeping operations to
30/42

12/09/2018

be more efficient and more responsive to pressing needs
and challenges — both current and future — against a
constantly changing backdrop. We therefore believe that
the urgency of peacekeeping operations reform must
be viewed in the light of new and evolving challenges
to international peace and security. In this respect,
the recommendations made by eminent personalities
in their various reports, as well as those adopted by
the General Assembly, contain ambitious measures in
terms of both the modernization of equipment and of
improving funding for peacekeeping operations.
The effective implementation of these measures
should allow peacekeeping operations to take a further
step in the accomplishment of their missions through
ongoing dialogue, including in terms of the definition
and content of their mandates. Among the various
stakeholders, I wish to highlight troop-contributing
countries, such as Senegal, donor countries, the
Security Council and the Secretariat. In this spirit of
triangular dialogue extended to all actors, we must
pursue and even accelerate the process of reform in
order to better adapt peacekeeping operations to the
needs and challenges that arise.
We must recognize today that there is a need to adapt
peacekeeping operations to the specific challenges
faced by each theatre of operation if we want to achieve
a better performance. In Mali, for example, where
our troops operate in a sensitive environment marked
by targeted attacks on Blue Helmets, United Nations
personnel, civilian populations and infrastructure,
appropriate equipment is required in order to work
effectively and, above all, safely. That is why Senegal
deployed two armoured units within each of our
contingents, allowing us to ensure the escort of convoys
between Gao and the northern sector without loss of
human life for two years.
However, if we are to have a greater impact on the
ground, particularly in the context of anticipating needs
for the protection of civilians and infrastructures, we
must strengthen our missions in terms of equipment
and operational capacity by considering greater use of
new and modern technologies. Indeed, better access to
detection technology and risk-mitigation programmes
related to improvised explosive devices, data collection
and the enhancement of resilience through capacity
development in such areas as mobility and medical
support could enable peacekeeping operations to
function more safely and effectively.
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In any event, the experiences we have drawn
from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, which are now endowed
with improved military capabilities and modern
technologies, have shown that the responsible use of
these tools leads to multiple benefits.
Strengthening training for troops is also crucial
to the effectiveness and success of peacekeeping
operations, which have become multidimensional and
now cover many areas, such as humanitarian assistance,
the protection of human rights, assistance for displaced
persons and refugees, participation in political
processes, the reform of judicial systems, training
police forces, the disarmament, demobilization and the
reintegration of former combatants, mine clearance and
peacebuilding, to name but a few.
For its part, Senegal has built a training centre that
meets United Nations standards. Contingents there
undergo predeployment training that takes experience
into account but also and above all sensitizes them to
the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse, specifically
through a dedicated module. Under the leadership
of President Macky Sall, a member of the Circle of
Leadership on the prevention of and response to sexual
exploitation and abuse, Senegal fully supports the zerotolerance policy on this issue.
In this same spirit and in line with resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, my country
supports the greater involvement of women in conflict
prevention, management and resolution. Senegal has
also put in place a national policy for the integration of
women in the defence and security forces. It is in this
framework that Dakar hosted a seminar organized by
the United Nations Police Division all-female selection
assistance and assessment team in 2017. My delegation
reiterates the importance of implementing the identical
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262, on sustaining peace.
It is equally essential to give priority to political
issues, ensuring that missions are based on a clear
political strategy and that they have clear, realistic and
achievable targeted mandates. Missions must work as
hard as possible to establish and maintain a relationship
of trust with States and host populations. That is why,

S/PV. 8349

beyond consent, it is the cooperation of the host State
that we must seek to secure as the best way to overcome
some of the obstacles faced by peacekeeping operations.
In the same vein, the Council will also have to
ensure greater cooperation with neighbouring States and
regional and subregional organizations, in particular
the African Union. That is all the more necessary as
these organizations have not only displayed their
ambitions in this area, but have also demonstrated their
effectiveness in finding political solutions to conflicts,
giving priority to prevention and mediation. With the
African Union in particular, we invite the Council to
continue discussions on the issue of predictable and
sustainable funding for African Union peace support
operations, in accordance with resolution 2320 (2016),
a the joint initiative of Senegal and the United States.
I will conclude by highlighting that Senegal has
just endorsed the Secretary-General’s Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. Senegal also reaffirms its unwavering
commitment to continuing to contribute to peacekeeping
operations in the hope that the men and women whom
we deploy on increasingly volatile and unpredictable
environments will have access to and benefit from
adequate tools adapted to sufficiently clear and robust
mandates, with a view to properly executing their
increasingly complex and dangerous tasks.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia would like
to thank the United States for convening this very
important debate. We also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix, along with the other briefers, for their
valuable comments.
Let me begin by quoting from Article I of the
Charter of the United Nations:
“The Purposes of the United Nations are: To
maintain international peace and security, and to
that end: to take effective collective measures for
the prevention and removal of threats to the peace”.
Now, even though United Nations peacekeeping is
not present in the Charter in letters and words, it has
become an indispensable tool for enabling international
peace. It has become the flagship of the United Nations.
We should be mindful that, since United Nations
peacekeeping is a collective undertaking, it best
achieves its aims when all stakeholders — the Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries, the

18-2833531/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

host Government and the Secretariat — are on the
same page.
Today I am accompanied by Police Brigadier
General Krishna Murti, who sits behind me. He is
the Head of the Bureau of International Missions of
the Indonesian National Police. He is in charge of the
deployment of police peacekeepers and also served
in the United Nations Transitional Administration for
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium and
in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. I am also accompanied by Army Brigadier
General Fulad, who also served in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.
The point is simple. Sometimes we tend to speak
in this Chamber without knowing what is happening
on the ground. With these two people, and those that
have been serving in various missions, we could have
a clearer picture of what is happening and what the
problems are. I have not brought these two gentlemen
here to showcase them; it is to help them understand
what we are talking about here in the Chamber so that
they can transpose this information back to the troops
as to what should and should not be done. That will
provide a clear linkage between those that are serving
bravely as Blue Helmets on the ground and us sitting in
this nice air-conditioned and well-furnished Chamber.
I start with this very important point simply to
stress once again that I will not simply repeat that
which has been stated by my colleagues before me, but
I shall highlight several pertinent points that we deem
necessary. This is an opportune moment and I believe
our time to make a real contribution to peacekeeping
is now.
Considering the dangerous security environment
for many peacekeeping missions in recent years, we
in Indonesia commend the Secretary-General for his
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We were involved
in that because we believe that what we are doing is
something that should be done correctly. We would
also like to highlight that all clusters under Action for
Peacekeeping are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
In that context, we would like to present a few points.
First, since the mandate of a peacekeeping mission
is the logical basis for setting its key performance
indicators, the mandate can no longer be a Christmas
tree. Peacekeeping missions cannot be a substitute for
United Nations special political missions and other
peacebuilding work. The primacy of politics and the
32/42

12/09/2018

realization of credible peace agreements on the ground
must be among the priorities in designing mandates.
There should be clear, focused, sequenced, prioritized,
realistic and achievable mandates that should be
backed up with required resources. I think many of
us have elaborated on this. The Secretariat will also
need to propose robust parameters for sequencing and
prioritizing mandates in close consultation with troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs).
Secondly, the necessary capabilities must be
deployed so that peacekeepers can protect themselves
and the local population. We need to better train, prepare
and equip peacekeepers, including through triangular
partnerships and co-deployments. We need to utilize
peacekeeping centres with the ability to adequately
train peacekeepers in keeping with the flavour of the
region. I am not trying to promote our peacekeeping
centres — we have centres in Indonesia that have
been doing quite well, with more than 30 countries
involved — but the point is that we must share all this
knowledge with all other peacekeeping centres around
the world so that we all have the same understanding
and feeling of what should be done.
Thirdly, all United Nations peacekeeping
components should be up to the mark. In this respect,
we thank the Secretary-General for his commitment
to developing an integrated performance policy
framework based on common parameters and clear
standards for all actors. As one of the largest troopand police-contributing countries in United Nations
peacekeeping, we would like to appeal to the Council
not to design a performance system that will create
competition for TCCs and PCCs. Peacekeeping is
supposedly a platform on which nations can work hand
in hand in contributing to international peace and
security, not the other way around.
One prevailing example is regarding repatriation
due to underperformance, It would be more efficient
and less costly if the United Nations or other Member
States could help the underperforming contingent with
the necessary capabilities and in-mission training,
rather than having them repatriated and getting a fresh
contingent to replace them. That is the most costeffective way, as the new selection process will only
cost us time and money.
Finally, Indonesia stresses the meaningful
participation of women in peacekeeping. A recent research
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

study noted that involving women — be it as witnesses,
signatories, mediators or negotiators — increases the
probability of achieving successful peace agreements
that will last at least two years by 20 per cent. That figure
has risen over time, with a 35 per cent increase in the
probability of achieving successful peace agreements
that last for more than 15 years. It is also evident that
the involvement of female peacekeepers in missions
has been effective in preventing and combating sexual
exploitation and abuse.
We are pleased to say that Indonesia is taking direct
action; we are walking the walk and talking the talk.
We have embedded 40 brave women into our recent
rapidly deployable battalion for deployment to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and our formed
police unit to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic later this year. Another 40 women will be
deployed under the wing of my Brigadier General,
and I have his assurance here that he will fulfil his
promise. This will add to our total of more than 3,600
peacekeepers on the ground, making Indonesia the
seventh highest-ranking troop-contributing country.
Let me conclude by reiterating the fundamental
importance of strengthening the United Nations
peacekeeping partnership as a genuinely cooperative,
well-supported and collective undertaking, with
realistic expectations and clear benchmarks. For its
part, Indonesia will always support initiatives that
bolster United Nations peacekeeping substantively
for its ultimate aim of helping to spawn a nationally
owned endeavour to build and sustain long-term peace
and development.
I would like to echo my dear sister, the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, who spoke a few moments
before me, who said simply “just do it”. I would like to
that add that we should not only just do it, but that we
must do it much better this time.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): I thank the
United States delegation for convening this debate.
The role of peacekeeping operations has evolved
dramatically over the years. High expectations, coupled
with greater resource constraints, have accentuated
the difficulties that missions face and have sometimes
created frustration regarding the ability of peacekeeping
operations to achieve their objectives.

S/PV. 8349

Brazil continues to believe in the capacity of
United Nations peacekeeping operations to contribute
significantly to the successful resolution of conflicts.
However, changes are required in several aspects of
peacekeeping operations, including the manner in
which we deal with the performance of the mission
as a whole. We therefore welcome the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, launched by the SecretaryGeneral, to renew the commitment of Member States to
peacekeeping operations. We look forward to working
in the year to come to transform the commitments of
the declaration into reality. I am pleased to announce
on this occasion that Brazil endorses the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. We particularly welcome the
inclusiveness of the initiative, which recognizes that
peacekeeping is a collective endeavour that depends
upon the partnership among the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Secretariat, troop and police
contributors and host Governments.
Brazil welcomes the Secretary-General’s efforts
to address the increasing number of fatalities in
peacekeeping operations. We also take note of the
recommendations of the report prepared by Lieutenant
General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled
Improving Security of United Nations Peacekeepers”,
and of its conclusion that a sense of shared responsibility
is required in the field. Civilian leadership and personnel
also need to play a more active role in taking the
necessary preventive measures to avoid casualties. The
safety and security of peacekeepers must be placed at the
top of the list of United Nations priorities. Peacekeepers
must be provided with adequate resources, equipment
and training. Moreover, providing United Nations
peacekeeping personnel with intensive and extensive
predeployment and in-mission training is instrumental
to addressing sexual abuse and exploitation, and
enhancing performance. The United Nations zerotolerance-policy must combine preventive and punitive
measures, and be provided with the appropriate funding
and tailor-made training to suit the realities faced by
troop-contributing countries and every mission. At the
same time, it is essential to underline that the issue of
casualties cannot be considered in isolation. It relates
to the specific political conditions of every individual
mission and to the political decisions embodied in
individual mandates crafted by the Security Council.
Brazil has a long and distinguished history
of contributing to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, having taken part in more than 40 missions

18-2833533/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

since 1947. Currently, Brazil leads the Maritime Task
Force of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
while the military component of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is led by a Brazilian Lieutenant
General. The Brazilian perception of improving the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations is informed
in particular by our experience as the main troop
contributor to the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the work of which was crucial
to the stabilization of Haiti and the establishment of a
safer and more secure environment. That successful
experience was made possible in particular by a focus
on mission effectiveness at all stages, from troop
selection and training to providing adequate equipment
and materiel, as well as effective logistical support. It
also included sharing lessons learned and the constant
development of mission doctrine. But improvements to
any mission’s effectiveness cannot be pursued through
military and operational approaches alone. For any
peacekeeping mission to succeed, it is essential to build
and maintain the trust of local communities.
In addition, it must be borne in mind that, in most
conflict situations, political dialogue and economic
development are a necessary condition for peacebuilding.
The experience of MINUSTAH once again comes to
mind. The implementation of quick-impact projects
proved to be an essential tool for the stabilization
process and acted as a bridge for medium- and long-term
development efforts. Protecting civilians in conflict
situations does not equate with blanket mandates
with regard to the use of force. Rather, that ultimately
requires the primacy of politics and a people-centred
approach, including through engagement with local
actors and those affected by conflict. More robust and
flexible mandates can often prove counterproductive to
achieving a mission’s objectives and compromise the
United Nations credibility in the eyes of local society.
In our effort to improve peacekeeping, we must not
fail to recognize the important results achieved through
such a tool. The recent downsizing and closing of
missions, such as in the cases of Haiti, Côte d’Ivoire and
Liberia, where missions created conditions conducive to
peace and security, show the positive effect that United
Nations operations continue to have, while bringing
hope for a better future to millions of people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
34/42

12/09/2018

Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Sir, for convening this debate and for giving us an
opportunity to speak. We thank Mr. Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
comprehensive briefing.
As a lead troop- and police-contributing country,
Bangladesh takes pride in its value-driven contribution
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, with its
current presence in eleven missions. Our commitment
is further validated by our engagement at the
mission-leadership level, with one force commander,
one deputy force commander and three sector
commanders serving at present.
Our delegation has endorsed the call for developing
an integrated performance analysis framework for
all peacekeeping components, and has stressed the
importance of a consultative process in that regard. The
exercise so far has highlighted that there is a plethora
of policies and standards available across the system
that nevertheless fall short of building a cohesive and
transparent narrative on performance. We therefore
expect to have a data- and evidence-based performance
evaluation and analysis framework above and beyond
the mere compilation of existing polices and standards.
In order to have a culture of performance instituted
throughout United Nations peacekeeping operations,
it should be required to move away from a businessas-usual approach towards a more performance- and
results-oriented approach based on impact evaluation.
It remains crucial for our policymakers at the national
level to understand the exact performance gaps and
shortfalls so as to make the necessary investments
and improvements. The integrated performance
analysis framework should give consideration to
institutionalizing the feedback loop.
The mandates authorized by the Security Council
need to be clear, realistic and achievable in order for
those on the ground to deliver on them effectively. In
complex, multidimensional peacekeeping contexts,
prioritized and sequenced mandates have been
generally recommended as the pragmatic approach to
adopt. In that regard, we reiterate the importance of
triangular consultations among the Council, troopand police-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
Such consultations should take place in both formal and
informal settings and move beyond a routine exercise
immediately preceding the Council’s consideration
of a given draft resolution. The question of adequate
resources and personnel for peacekeeping operations
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

is inextricably linked with performance. Without the
necessary capabilities at their disposal, peacekeepers
often find themselves in compromising situations. Such
evident gaps expose them to increasing threats posed
by non-State actors, mostly acting in an environment
of impunity.
It remains critical to rise above extraneous
factors and considerations in deploying forces on
the ground. Priority should be given to troop- and
police-contributing countries that have invested in
fulfilling the requirements under the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System. Furthermore, troopand police-contributing countries that commit to
deployment without caveats should not be considered
in the same light as those that resort to caveats on a
range of issues. As a troop- and police-contributing
country, Bangladesh has generally shown its readiness
to adapt to systemic and operational changes and work
in partnership with others on enhancing capabilities
and training. We have also taken proactive measures to
invest in critical enablers that we consider essential in
certain contexts for the protection of civilians and the
safety and security of our peacekeepers. In conformity
with the agreed principles of peacekeeping operations,
host countries and troop- and police-contributing
countries should take a pragmatic approach to taking
advantage of evolving technologies.
A culture of performance should be predicated
on transparency and accountability on the part of all
concerned. The Secretariat may draw on its recent
positive experiences of sharing certain investigations
and review reports with the Council and, in some cases,
with the wider membership. There needs to be a free
exchange of information on the role and performance
of regional and subregional forces endorsed by the
Organization and those endorsed by non-United
Nations forces, and on their respective impact on the
performance and safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers. The Council, the Member States and the
Secretariat should cooperate on strategic communication
with the media and civil society in order to share their
challenges and promote their common interests.
The issue of training evaluations should be an
integral part of performance assessment and analysis.
In Bangladesh, we initiate mission-specific training
for our contingents at least six months ahead of their
deployment. Our premier peacekeeping training
institute complies with the relevant United Nations
standards and is ready to offer a range of United

S/PV. 8349

Nations-specific courses next year with participation
from abroad. It may be relevant here to state that a
United Nations-led seminar is being organized later this
year, in cooperation with United States Indo-Pacific
Command, for troop-contributing countries in the
region on contingent preparation and the deployment
process. We are steadily working on increasing women’s
participation in peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, Bangladesh remains committed to
enhancing peacekeeping performance, in cooperation
with all stakeholders concerned, in order to ensure a
demonstrable and constructive cultural shift in the
United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the presidency of the United
States for organizing this debate on a topic of particular
importance to the Organization and to which my
country has been firmly committed for more than 60
years. I also thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
detailed briefing and his proposals on actions to pursue,
and Ms. Sarah Blakemore for her impassioned briefing,
which has made an impression on our hearts and minds
because, at the end of the day, we are responsible for the
behaviour our personnel.
Since the adoption of resolution 2278 (2016),
we have observed a number of developments that
we believe are already having a clear impact on
peacekeeping operations. I will mention but a few, such
as the Secretary-General’s proposal for restructuring
the peace and security pillar and reforming the
management of the Organization; the discussions in
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
on the security of peacekeepers, the performance of
missions and the protection of civilians; the setting
out in the Fifth Committee of the annual budget for
peacekeeping operations; Secretariat initiatives, in
consultation with Member States, for the development
of an integrated policy framework on the execution of
mandates based on clear rules for all personnels — an
integrated performance policy framework, which will
make it possible to quantify and monitor the results
of peacekeeping operations; and the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, launched by the SecretaryGeneral and supported by several Member States,
including my country, and its Declaration of Shared

18-2833535/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which identifies future courses of action.
Today’s debate focuses on one of the most critical
aspects of peacekeeping operation reform, namely,
the performance of peacekeepers. For Uruguay, it is
clear that ensuring the good performance of peace
missions is the collective and shared responsibility of
all those involved and depends upon numerous critical
factors, such as well-defined, realistic and achievable
mandates; political will, leadership and performance
and accountability at all levels; sufficient resources
and equipment; and guidelines and training on policies,
planning and implementation. It is essential that all
actors shoulder, rather than shirk, their responsibilities
by working together. That is the very spirit of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative.
Uruguay attaches particular importance to the
responsibilities of troop- and police-contributing
countries, with the understanding that they are the ones
who act on the ground and must discharge the mandates.
In that regard, the training of personnel deployed in
peace missions is essential. They must be trained to
carry out the complex tasks necessary to fulfil the
entire mandate. We stress in particular the centrality of
the protection of civilians in peace operations. In that
regard, I would like to emphasize the contribution of
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians to
the reform process.
We also recognize that ensuring the effective
participation of women in peacekeeping operations
at all levels is essential to improving operational
effectiveness and enhancing the performance
of missions. Uruguay is working to increase the
proportion of women in its personnel. We currently
have 96 women in peacekeeping missions, only 7 per
cent of our country’s total deployed personnel, but we
will continue to work diligently to change that.
Peacekeepers must be properly trained and
equipped, but they must also behave in a manner that
safeguards the credibility, impartiality and integrity of
the United Nations. Any misconduct by peacekeepers,
including allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse,
undermines the credibility, effectiveness and reputation
of the Organization. In that connection, I would like to
acknowledge the enormous efforts that the SecretaryGeneral and his team, as well as Member States, are
making to combat the scourge of sexual exploitation
and abuse.
36/42

12/09/2018

Uruguay actively supports all the efforts being
made, having signed the voluntary compact against
sexual exploitation and abuse, and participating
through our President, Mr. Tabaré Vázquez, in the
Secretary-General’s leadership circle. Uruguay also
works closely with the Conduct and Discipline Unit to
facilitate access to justice for alleged victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse.
The security of deployed personnel is another
central aspect that affects the performance of peace
operationas. In that regard, I wish to highlight three
key elements.
First, the procurement of the necessary equipment
for each mission cannot depend solely upon the
financial situation of each troop-contributing country.
Greater cooperation must be fostered among troopand police-contributing countries, the Secretariat
and donor countries. Many of the new technologies
required for adequately equippping a mission come at
an exceedingly high cost, and hence the need to find
alternative ways to obtain them.
Secondly, all the necessary measures and protocols
must be considered to adequately deal with instances of
deliberate attacks against United Nations personnel and
facilities. Those who choose to attack United Nations
contingents must know that they will be forcefully
repelled by an equal or superior force. We must make
every effort to provide the different contingents with
as many tools as possible to deal with new realities,
be they passive defence measures, enhanced rules of
engagement, or assurances that the appropriate bodies
will hold the perpetrators accountable for their crimes.
Thirdly, it is necessary to ensure that the State
hosting peacekeeping operations cooperates with
them. Any violation of the status-of-forces agreement
by either party can pose serious risks to the security
of peacekeepers. We must remember that the statusof-forces are documents that ensure the protection of
the personnel that a country voluntarily contributes
to peacekeeping operations. Therefore, the entry of
personnel or equipment into a country and the free
movement of the same within the country must not
be hindered, especially when it comes to medical
evacuation and the evacuation of victims.
In conclusion, I pledge Uruguay’s commitment to
continuing to work on the process of reforming United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8349

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.

to all troop-contributing countries and ensure that
national prosecution practices lead to similar results.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I thank you, Mr. President, for giving us the
floor in this important debate. I would also like to thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his first annual briefing on
peacekeeping reform.

The Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, prepared this
summer, includes commitments that could effectively
lead to the improved performance of peacekeeping
operations. We welcome the balanced nature of that
document. Belgium has already endorsed it and
hopes that many other troop-contributors, financial
contributors, host countries and organizations will
do the same. In particular, we welcome the absolute
priority given to the protection of civilians, as well
as the central role given to performance, including
in planning.

We are all aware of the challenges to peacekeeping
operations in recent years. We welcome the energetic
efforts taken over the past 12 months, namely, the
findings of the report prepared by former United
Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General Alberto
dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers, the action plan to implement
its recommendations, the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, a presidential statement of the Security
Council in support of the Secretary-General’s initiative
(S/PRST/2018/10), as well as the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, which reached a consensual
outcome on crucial issues, such as performance, which
we are addressing today. We also welcome the integrated
performance policy framework recently presented
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
Member States.
Furthermore, the reforms approved in recent
months, at the request of the Secretary-General, are all
steps towards more effective peacekeeping, including
the reform of the peace and security architecture to
increase coherency and the reform of management
to increase effectiveness on the ground. All those
processes contribute to improving the performance of
all peacekeeping stakeholders. But while those projects
are now nearing completion, there are others that
require even broader support from Member States.
As Ms. Blakemore illustrated, that is the case
for conduct and discipline issues, and in particular
sexual abuse and exploitation. The vast majority of
the 100,000 men and women who serve the Blue Flag
do so with conviction, a sense of honour and respect
for local populations. That is why it is in the interests
of all, and in particular those who honour the United
Nations flag, that those who commit crimes do not go
unpunished. We welcome the important work done in
recent years in that area, including the establishment
of compacts between the United Nations and Member
States that include reciprocal commitments. We now
believe that it is necessary to extend those compacts

Lastly, what more can be done, beyond reforms and
the implementation of mutual commitments? There are
some areas that we believe could be prioritized.
First, improving the effectiveness of missions
requires a better understanding of the challenges. That
is why we believe that the findings of the strategic
reviews should be made available to Council members
and key troop-contributors.
Secondly, we welcome the special investigations
held following major incidents. Their observations
can be usefully shared with the parties directly
concerned. It would also be useful to take stock — a
few months or a year later — of the implementation of
the recommendations, the improvements made and, if
necessary, the mechanisms for prosecuting those who
bear criminal liability.
Thirdly, beyond the primary responsibility of
the country of origin, there are many initiatives to
train staff. We commend the important work of the
Secretariat and the mobilization of Member States in
that regard. But that work remains incomplete if we do
not improve the mapping of those initiatives, as well as
follow up with the trained staff.
Moreover, we must be realistic. What is the point of
adopting a mandate if the human, logistical and financial
resources do not follow? Matching up those resources
with the mandate should be a concern shared by all of
us, at all times. Those resources include intelligence,
which is a crucial tool for the safety and security
of our peacekeepers and the protection of civilian
populations. Integrating the various components of
the missions must continue. Lessons must be learned
from pilot initiatives, such as joint patrols, and positive

18-2833537/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

12/09/2018

experiences must be replicated, especially if that will
help to better connect missions with local populations.

however, been without cost — 156 of our bravest made
the ultimate sacrifice while serving the cause of peace.

Our experience in Mali has also shown how
much we can increase the effectiveness of an entire
mission when the various national contingents are
more integrated and complementary. Let us increase
the number of those initiatives and work on them even
before the deployment of staff.

Performance has also been the focus of our
discussions in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations this year. As a major troop-contributing
country (TCC), with a proud history of professionalism,
competence and honour, we welcome the focus on
performance. Improved performance would lead to
better results and improve the safety and security
of peacekeepers, which is of prime importance to
my country. Let me make six key observations on
performance. They may be useful to consider in
setting up the new mechanisms that the Secretariat
is developing.

Finally, as stipulated in resolution 2423 (2018), on
Mali, would it not be useful in some cases to reach a
political pact with the national authorities — a pact that
would make it possible to agree on common objectives
and lay the foundation for fruitful cooperation with
all stakeholders?

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.

First, at the time of creating and updating the
mandates of missions, the Security Council must base
its decisions on practical analysis by the Secretariat
of resource requirements. Mandates must be precise,
unambiguous and appropriately resourced. When
mandates and capabilities are out of sync, efficiency
and effectiveness inevitably suffer.

Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me begin by expressing
our gratitude to the United States presidency for
organizing this important debate. We also appreciate
the insights provided by the briefers.

Secondly, there is a need for the rationalization and
prioritization of mandated tasks. The United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, for instance, is burdened with
209 tasks.

Blue Helmets are recognized and respected all
over the world. They symbolize the United Nations
commitment to regional and international peace,
security and stability. They are emblematic of the
collective will and endeavour of all Member States to
make the world a peaceful and stable one. Enduring
conflicts mean lives lost, families broken, people in
camps and women and children left to languish in
extreme vulnerability. United Nations peacekeeping
has saved and protected millions of lives. It helps
shattered communities and neighbourhoods rebuild
themselves. It replaces strife with harmony and turns
despair into hope.

Thirdly, professionalism in peacekeeping ensures
excellence in service delivery. Pre-deployment
training, including common and standardized training,
is vital for all mission components. We have developed
peacekeeping training modules that form part of the
curriculums of our mandatory courses. We are willing
to share this expertise with other TCCs and with
the Secretariat.

As can noted, there is no shortage of ideas. I believe
that there is positive momentum right now to increase
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, and by
the same token make them safer.

Peacekeeping, as we would all surely agree, has
been the United Nations most successful enterprise.
The recent closure of missions in Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Cote d’Ivoire is evidence of that success. It is a
humbling for us that Pakistani peacekeepers were
deployed in three of those missions ,They accomplished
their tasks, fulfilled their mandates and, above all, they
were able to win hearts and minds. Since the 1960s,
my country has contributed over 200,000 troops to
48 missions. Our contribution to peacekeeping has not,
38/42

Fourthly, transparency, especially between the
TCCs concerned and the Secretariat, to improve
delivery will provide better results than a publicized
name-and-shame approach.
Fifthly, the application of the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System must extend to routine
deployments rather than being limited to emergent
deployments alone. If trained peacekeepers are
in readiness, there should not be any hesitation in
using them.
And sixthly, national caveats hinder performance.
They provide one TCC leverage to refuse to perform in
a given situation while expecting another that does not
hide behind such caveats to perform in the very same
18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

situation. This creates a disproportionate set of both
responsibilities and expectations. A level playing field
is a prerequisite for a fair assessment of performance.
As one of the top performers, Pakistan will never
shy away from any discussion on performance or from
supporting the establishment of an effective system
to enhance it. We believe that we are all stakeholders
in this endeavour and have a shared responsibility.
Responsiveness to the realities on the ground and
feedback from TCCs, as well as meaningful triangular
cooperation, is the key to developing synergies vital to
the success of peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I should like first to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to wish
you and your team every success. Allow me also to
commend the United States for holding this debate; I
am confident that under your presidency, the Security
Council will continue to build on this important topic.
Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Peacekeeping is one of the most effective tools
available to the United Nations and a symbol of
international solidarity in the promotion of international
peace and security. Considering the many challenges
that our world is facing today, we believe that, in order
to adapt and deliver a quick and effective response in the
process of advancing peace and security, peacekeeping
reform should go beyond the level of debate. We
therefore need to focus our efforts on mobilizing
greater support for the development of high standards,
imposing real accountability and ensuring that we
have well-equipped and trained forces in the field.
Despite Member States’ efforts to provide personnel,
equipment and financial support, peacekeeping still
faces a number of difficulties that undermine its ability
to deliver on its mandates.
Romania strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, launched in order to
respond to these challenges, to renew mutual political
commitment and mobilize partners.
The Secretary-General acknowledges that action by
the Secretariat alone is not enough to meet the challenges
we face. We therefore underline the importance of a

S/PV. 8349

collective approach in relation to all mission components
and all peacekeeping stakeholders, from personnel on
the ground and at Headquarters to the Security Council
and troop- and police-contributing countries.
Romania firmly supports the policy of zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse and is
fully committed to the Secretary-General’s strategy
to prevent and end this type of misconduct on the part
of United Nations personnel. We need coordinated
implementation of policies to prevent the occurrence
of sexual exploitation and abuse across the United
Nations system, as we need to ensure accountability
for perpetrators.
The President of Romania, His Excellency Mr. Klaus
Iohannis, is a member of the Secretary-General’s Circle
of Leadership on the prevention of and response to sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations operations. In
addition, last year Romania signed the United Nations
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse, and all Romanian personnel
participating in United Nations operations are trained
before deployment on topics regarding United Nations
principles on stopping sexual exploitation and abuse.
My country has been a consistent contributor to
peacekeeping operations since 1991. We endorse the
efforts of the Strategic Force Generation and Capability
Planning Cell to strengthen information-sharing, and
we welcome the establishment of the Strategic Planning
and Monitoring Unit in the Executive Office of the
Secretary-General.
Romania also welcomes the innovative approach to
force generation and appreciates the new initiatives for
“smart pledges”, co-deployment and contributions to
multinational rotations.
We commend the enhancement of efficiency and
transparency in the field of the selection, recruitment
and deployment of police officers, matching this
process to the Strategic Guidance Framework.
Following the external review of the Police Division,
Romania supports the proposal mentioned in the latest
report of the Secretary-General on United Nations
police (S/2016/952) that deploying trained, wellequipped and fit police officers with the necessary skill
sets to United Nations operations at the right time is
essential. We therefore encourage the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support to continue exploring potential new models of

18-2833539/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

cooperation in training development and delivery, in
close consultation with the troop-contributing countries
and in cooperation with other relevant partners.
Peacekeeping reform can start with a comprehensive
vision and an inclusive policy that set new standards
to ensure staff evaluation, performance improvement
and real accountability. This set of principles is the
foundation of Romania’s vision for peacekeeping
reform, based on our experience as an active contributor
for nearly three decades.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): First of all, let me thank the
Council for this opportunity to address the members
of the Security Council. This is the first time in our
40-year history of United Nations peacekeeping that we
have been given an opportunity to address the members
of the Council. My sincere appreciation goes to the
United States presidency for opening these discussions
to troop-contributing countries.
I take this opportunity also to thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Ms. Sarah
Blakemore of Keeping Children Safe for their insightful
briefings this morning.
This year the United Nations celebrated its
seventieth year of peacekeeping. Fiji, which has
been an independent country for 48 years, is
commemorating its fortieth year of United Nations
peacekeeping. Throughout those 40 years, we have
consistently contributed to this most noble ideal and
mission of the United Nations. It is through United
Nations peacekeeping that Fiji has chosen to serve the
world community, and we are proud of our service. We
have contributed more than 30,000 troops to United
Nations peacekeeping missions and have participated
in such missions in the Middle East, the Pacific
region and Africa. We have lost 60 of our soldiers in
peacekeeping missions.
We take our international obligations most seriously
and have a solemn pact to support global peacekeeping
efforts. Our peacekeeping efforts cost us around
$10 million annually — a large contribution for a small
State. We have not shied away from this obligation for a
single day or night over the 40 years of our engagement.
Several members have asked why peacekeeping
missions take so long; what we can do better and

40/42

12/09/2018

differently in order to reduce the duration and cost
of such missions; and what we can do in the area of
peacekeeping so that missions can deliver speedier
and more enduring results. These are absolutely the
right questions to ask. Conflicts have become more
complex. No two conflicts are the same. Conflicts
are increasing in number, and where they emerge,
they internationationalize very quickly. Conflicts
internationalize must faster than trade does. The
lightening pace of the internationalization of conflicts
serves to underscore the importance and centrality of
the United Nations to the resolution of conflicts. We are
reminded of that every day.
In a more integrated world, the United Nations,
together with its Security Council, remains the
uniquely placed Organization to resolve conflicts and
build and sustain peace. Fiji welcomes and supports
the reforms that the Secretary-General has initiated. Of
all the existing multilateral international institutions,
without a doubt, it is the United Nations that possesses
the centralized capability to design peacekeeping
interventions and secure political support, mandates
and financial commitment to sustain peacekeeping
efforts, long enough for politics and development to
take over.
When the United Nations does peacekeeping well,
we save lives, promote development and demonstrate
progress across the relevant Sustainable Development
Goals. When we do peacekeeping poorly, too many lives
are lost, human development regresses, communities
are worse off and politics and development fail their
communities. When peacekeepers fall short of the high
standards expected of them, they fail both the people and
communities that they have been mandated to protect.
They weaken the chances of success of missions.
Fiji is making consistent efforts to improve
performance and standards. We will continue to
do that. In peacekeeping, it is also necessary to be
measured in our expectations. The United Nations is
dealing with conflicts in some of the poorest regions
of the world. It takes time for institutions, resources,
capacity and politics to kick in to achieve sustainable
human development outcomes, even in the best of our
countries, and secure peace. At best, the goal of United
Nations peacekeeping is to create spaces for politics to
work — where leaders, men and women representing
communities involved in conflict, can take measured
risks. It takes time for markets and institutions that

18-28335

12/09/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

protect civilians to kick in. A good peacekeeping
mission at its core is about broadening such spaces
in and among communities. It involves hundreds or
thousands of peacekeepers interacting with men,
women and children who need their protection.
As a small but significant troop-contributing
country, we have an obligation to do much more to lift
performance and discharge duties and obligations to
the highest standards expected by the Council. Such
standards are our standards. When performance falls
short, missions will fail to broaden spaces or create the
opportunities for peace that are so critical. Crucially,
peacekeeping is about soft skills — the ability to
understand cultures and values, see how women and
children become exceptionally disadvantaged in
conflict and read signs of individual and group stress.
Fiji pays significant attention to strengthening the soft
skills of its peacekeepers. We recognize that, when
communities have a positive rapport with peacekeepers,
it contributes immensely to improving dialogue and
reconciliation. That openness may help institutions and
politics work better and sooner. A good peacekeeping
mission can help reduce the timelines for institutions,
markets and politics by years and decades. However, it
is unreasonable to expect communities to work through
their politics and resolve deeply embedded conflicts
within the span of a few years. Applying excessive
pressure to shorten the duration of missions may in fact
achieve the opposite effect. We must be realistic about
time frames.
Fiji supports the Secretary-General’s efforts to
reform and strengthen the security and peacebuilding
architecture. We heard from Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix earlier today that such efforts have gained
significant momentum, which we welcome. In his 2018
briefing, the Secretary-General asked for a revitalization
of United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The Security Council paid considerable attention last
week to the role of mediation. They are not different
phases of a conflict cycle; they are interrelated and
overlap with development, humanitarian assistance and
peacebuilding. For the United Nations to improve its
coherence, the reform of the United Nations development
system needs to complement peacekeeping reforms and
assist in providing access to resources, capacity and
opportunities for communities involved in conflict.
When peacekeeping works well, it creates spaces
for women to contribute to peacebuilding; boys

S/PV. 8349

and girls to be educated safely; markets to work and
for political action to be taken. Time and money are
important, as is the high-quality design of peacekeeping
interventions. If missions are over-designed, agility and
flexibility will be undermined. If missions are underdesigned, they will fail. Getting that art right requires
capabilities and resources within the Secretariat. The
Secretary-General’s efforts need to be fully supported.
Without doubt, the United Nations must have access to
global cutting-edge knowledge, data, and analytics on
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and conflict prevention.
Its importance cannot be overstated. The United
Nations is on the right track.
We cannot under-emphasize the tools with which
our peacekeepers work in difficult circumstances. They
protect United Nations and international staff involved
in development and humanitarian work. They keep
armed groups away from the communities they protect.
They protect themselves. They protect humanitarian
missions and allow food, medicine and warmth to reach
communities, families, women and girls. They are
aware that, when humanitarian support is compromised
or hijacked and when the human rights of those who
they protect are violated, the chances for peace are
gradually destroyed. We have witnessed countries slide
back into conflict. Good peacekeeping must morph into
development in the shortest time possible. However,
if it is done too soon, the chance for a fresh conflict
will increase.
The Secretary-General has asked that peacekeeping
missions not create silos. When United Nations
institutions
inadvertently
create
development,
humanitarian and peacekeeping silos, it is more
likely that we will fail across the board. The Resident
Coordinator and United Nations development system
reforms must complement, reinforce and strengthen
peacekeeping reforms. The United Nations also
needs to become more ambitious in determining how
international development assistance for fragile and
conflict-affected countries can better help finance well
integrated peacekeeping and development missions.
Innovation and creativity are needed.
Fiji is working with all of the permanent
members of the Security Council to strengthen its
peacekeeping capabilities, preparedness and skills. I
take this opportunity to thank the United Kingdom,
Russia, China, the United States and France for their
considerable support to Fiji. We are very grateful.

18-2833541/42

S/PV.8349

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Fiji is also thankful to Australia, New Zealand, India,
Indonesia and our other partners for assisting us in
strengthening our peacekeeping capabilities. We
welcome this opportunity to restate our support to
strengthening peacekeeping missions. Fiji’s Prime

42/42

12/09/2018

Minister has given his personal assurance to the
Secretary-General that Fiji will commit to improving
its peacekeeping capabilities. We are making sustained
and solid progress in that regard.
The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

18-28335
