United Nations

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4422nd meeting
Tuesday, 20 November 2001, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Miss Durrant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Jamaica)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Doutriaux
Mr. Corr
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Jingree
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Gatilov
Ms. Lee
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Krokhmal
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2001/852)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-64953 (E)

*0164953*

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.20 p.m.
Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important
meeting here today on children and armed conflict. My
delegation would also like both to thank the SecretaryGeneral and to commend Special Representative
Otunnu and Executive Director Bellamy for their work
in this area and for their statements here today. We
would also like to thank Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for the
eloquent statement he made this morning about his
experiences.
Later in this debate, Belgium, which holds the
presidency of the European Union, will be making a
statement with which Ireland fully associates itself.
The Secretary-General’s report on children and
armed conflict presents a compelling case for the
integration of child-related perspectives into our work.
Overall, my delegation sees our task in the Council as
twofold. We need to publicly reiterate the primary
obligations of the normative framework, including the
Geneva Conventions, the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocol to
the Convention. We also need to reassert the
importance of resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1314 (2001)
in terms of the agenda of the Council.
The second aspect of our work is to now move
decisively towards what the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative have called the era of
application.
Let me make eight general points concerning
Ireland’s position. First, we consider it essential for all
States to comply strictly with their obligations towards
children under international law. As Executive Director
Bellamy said in last year’s meeting, all those who
violate children’s rights or who collude in such
violations — whether Governments or rebel groups,
manufacturers of or dealers in weapons of war, or
unscrupulous business people — must be made to feel
the power of the Council’s word.
Secondly, my delegation considers that the
Security Council has a clear responsibility on the issue
of the child protection, including in respect of conflict
situations and peace processes. So, of course, do
others. National Governments, the rest of the United
Nations system and the wider international community
must also assume their obligations.

2

Ireland believes that the Council must fully
integrate concerns in respect of war-affected children
into our work. As a Council, we have to keep the issue
of children — the severe impact that armed conflict has
on them and the particular difficulties they face in postconflict resettlement — strongly in mind when we
approach the tasks of peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peace-building.
Thirdly, Ireland believes that we must move
systematically to underpin basic standards of
humanitarian behaviour in war by armed forces and
non-State forces alike, and confront the question of
child soldiers.
Fourthly, my delegation fully endorses the
Secretary-General’s call for the prosecution of sexual
violence against women and children as a war crime.
We urge the speedy ratification of the Rome Statute
establishing an International Criminal Court, which
recognizes sexual violence as war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
Fifthly, my delegation strongly supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that the mandates
of peace operations explicitly include provisions for
monitoring the rights of children and the
recommendation that accurate and current information
about the protection of child rights in conflict
situations — from a variety of sources, including
United Nations peace operations, country teams,
special
rapporteurs
and
non-governmental
organizations — be made available to the Security
Council and to Member States. My delegation attaches
particular importance to the recommendations on
integrating child protection into both United Nations
peacemaking and peacekeeping processes, including
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes.
As a sixth point, my delegation attaches great
importance to the work of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations with regard to children’s
rights and protection. We commend the recent proposal
made by Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for the
establishment of an informal inter-agency working
group on the integration of child-protection concerns
into peacemaking and peacekeeping processes.
My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
cooperation between the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in incorporating human

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

rights monitoring into peacekeeping operations,
including through child rights officers in the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

focuses on basic needs and the more vulnerable sectors
of the population, with particular focus on women and
children, who tend to be most at risk in conflict
situations and in areas where protracted conflict is an
ongoing obstacle to longer-term development.

We believe that there is a strong argument for
including child protection officers in appropriate
peacekeeping operations to focus on children’s issues
and to assist in monitoring compliance with
commitments entered into in respect of children.
Special Representative Otunnu has done excellent work
in securing 59 commitments from parties to armed
conflict. But the parties must have their actions
watched closely. They must be made to understand that
such commitments are not in their gift, but reflect the
demands of the international community.

The Secretary-General, in his remarks today, as
well as Special Representative Otunnu and Executive
Director Bellamy, quite rightly treated the issue of
Afghanistan at some length. Ireland has expressed its
concern in the Council about the use of very young
children on the part of all Afghan sides engaged in the
conflict. We will wish to ensure that the future
administration of Afghanistan includes a strong human
rights and justice component, and that particular
attention is paid to the position of children.

As a seventh point of emphasis, my delegation
wholeheartedly subscribes to the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the illicit exploitation of natural
resources not only prolongs conflict, but also diverts
societies’ resources away from educational and social
infrastructure. Accordingly, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s suggestion that the Council consider targeted
measures against parties to armed conflict, including
complicit neighbours, whose actions are contributing to
the illegal exploitation of natural resources and the
fuelling of violent conflict.
Finally, Ireland considers that the corporate sector
also has particular responsibilities, and my delegation
believes that active consideration should be given to
the idea — referred to earlier by the SecretaryGeneral — that multilateral development banks and the
international corporate sector could conduct childimpact assessments, where feasible, with regard to
particular investments and projects that they may be
funding in or near zones of conflict.
On a national level, the issue of children in armed
conflict is of particular concern to the Irish
Government,
and
Ireland
strongly
supports
international efforts to strengthen the level of
protection available to children affected by armed
conflict. We are actively supporting the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and are pleased to be a
member of the Group of Friends of the Special
Representative. Ireland’s support for the United
Nations Children’s Fund is increasing rapidly and has
doubled over the past two years. Our aid programme

The Secretary-General’s report brings together
cogently and clearly the normative framework of
international law as well as child-centred perspectives
on a number of key issues, including conflict
prevention, protection of civilians in armed conflict,
the illicit exploitation of natural resources, HIV/AIDS
and the illicit spread of small and light weapons.
Today’s meeting is a good opportunity to reflect on
many common elements in these issues and the need to
work now on common and effective responses from the
Council. We strongly support the draft resolution which
is before us, and also join in thanking France for its
work in coordinating it.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Children and
armed conflict is an issue in the limelight. Much of the
credit for this is owed to the eye-opening report by
Graça Machel published five years ago. Also, during
the decade that has elapsed since the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
international community has come a long way in
addressing the plight of the most helpless victims of
conflict. We have identified areas where we — national
authorities as well as non-State actors — must take
steps. We have raised awareness and strengthened the
international legal standards for child protection. We
have decided on actions to help children overcome
trauma during the war and to assist them during the
period of post-conflict peace-building.
We were heartened to see the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict obtain the
required number of ratifications during the treaty
action event last week. Bangladesh ratified the Protocol

3

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

early and is happy that it will come into effect on 12
February 2002. Further progress in consolidating the
normative framework is expected during the scheduled
special session of the General Assembly next spring.
These achievements did not come easily.
Sustained efforts were required. We should like to put
on record our appreciation to the United Nations for its
system-wide response to the needs of war-affected
children. In particular, we would like to express
appreciation to Special Representative Olara Otunnu
and to Executive Director Carol Bellamy of the United
Nations Children’s Fund for their efforts, and their
statements this morning, in this regard.
Thanks to concerted efforts by many actors, there
is “commendable progress on many fronts”
(S/2001/852, para. 5), as the Secretary-General
reported. We thank him for his remarks this morning,
as well as for his useful report and also for his
recommendations. We are pleased that this year’s
Security Council resolution, to be adopted at the end of
this meeting, will be approving a number of
recommendations proposed in the report. We applaud
the role of the delegation of France in contributing to
this work.
Still, the progress that has been made is
insufficient. For over 300,000 child soldiers around the
world, armed conflict is a way of life. These children,
exploited particularly by armed insurgent groups, are
affected physically and mentally. They commit, often
under duress, atrocities of great magnitude. Their
experience fills their minds with horrific memories that
last a long, long time.
Child soldiers are only the tip of the iceberg.
Entire generations growing up in conflict areas are
permanently scarred by the brutalities of war. Girl
children are particularly vulnerable to violence and
sexual exploitation. For these children living under the
gun, the future holds very little hope or optimism and
few prospects.
And yet the children do not give up their dreams.
From conflict situation to conflict situation, we hear of
children longing to return to their homes, to rejoin their
families, to go to school and learn, to play and share,
and to care for each other. Today, we have heard the
poignant story of a child from Sierra Leone. There are
many more like him. As Graça Machel has said, the
impact of armed conflict on children is everyone’s
responsibility and must be everyone’s concern. We

4

must not only hear them but also listen to them. We
must take their views into our work. Then and only
then can we make a difference.
Bangladesh believes that the Security Council
needs to focus on five areas to address the situation of
war-affected children.
First, what the Secretary-General has called “an
era of application” (ibid.) of international child
protection standards must be launched. The Council
must urge Governments and non-State actors to respect
and uphold these standards. The Optional Protocol, the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
International Labour Organization Convention 182 and
the Ottawa Convention on landmines are all relevant in
the context of such an era.
Secondly,
while
mandating
peacekeeping
missions, necessary child protection and monitoring
elements must be established. Various peacekeeping
operations — in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Sierra Leone, for example, and in Afghanistan to
follow — should have child protection elements. There
is a need to strengthen existing elements and to keep in
mind the necessity of including such elements while
mandating future operations. Peacekeeping personnel
have to be appropriately trained in international human
rights, humanitarian and refugee law.
Thirdly, the Security Council must make it clear
that there will be no impunity for perpetrators of
atrocities. In order to ensure that, international truthand justice- seeking efforts have to be buttressed and
adequately funded. Justice delayed on account of
insufficient funding could very well turn out to be
justice denied. The Council should seek to ensure that
the truth- and justice-seeking processes pay attention to
the full range of children’s wartime experiences and
aim at long-term interventions to ensure their
reintegration into society.
Fourthly, while implementing the post-conflict
response, it is important to encourage the United
Nations agencies and international financial institutions
to devote particular attention to the rehabilitation and
reintegration of children and their access to basic
services like education, health care and housing. Quick
impact projects have proved to be a useful tool.
Involving local communities in these efforts is crucial
for imparting a sense of ownership and long-term
sustainability in respect of these efforts. High priority
must be accorded to the special needs, and particularly

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

to the vulnerabilities, of girls affected by armed
conflict, including those who are heading households,
orphaned, sexually exploited or used as combatants.
Technical and financial assistance has to be provided to
countries and regional and subregional organizations
engaged in post-conflict peace-building.
Finally, we have to avoid the perpetuation of the
cycle of violence. To prevent today’s victims from
becoming tomorrow’s perpetrators, the values of a
culture of peace must be inculcated in every child. We
are happy that there is agreement in the Security
Council on lending support to efforts to promote a
culture of peace, including through peace education
programmes and other non-violent approaches to
conflict prevention and resolution. Robust pursuit of
these goals may change the course of history, and will
most certainly change the future of the child today and
thereby of the man and woman of tomorrow.
Let me repeat my thanks to you, Madam
President, for your work, particularly the work that you
did in the preparatory process for the special session on
children. Consideration of this topic that is so
important to us had to be postponed for two months
due to the events that took place in September.
I also want to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and Mr. Olara Otunnu, Ms. Carol Bellamy and
the young Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for their interesting
contributions in this debate.
As we stated in the General Assembly, the
medium- and long-term vision guiding Colombia’s
commitment to and in favour of children is based on
recognition of the central role of boys and girls in
society and of their role as citizens and as the potential
builders and subjects of their own development. In my
country, we are making great political and financial
efforts to remove children from armed conflict, and we
work tirelessly in that conviction.
Today, we will be adopting a resolution
contemplating a set of Security Council directives on
children in armed conflicts. It will recognize the
specific responsibilities of a number of relevant actors,
including, in particular, the parties to a conflict, States,
the Secretary-General, agencies, United Nations funds
and programmes, international and regional institutions
for finance and development, and regional
organizations.

We consider this action as an effort to ensure that
the coordination and harmonization of policies between
intergovernmental organs of the United Nations
produce tangible results on the ground that
substantially improve the living conditions of children.
The challenge of coordination and harmonization is
particularly relevant in those situations under
consideration by the Security Council.
If effect, when defining the Council’s role in
situations such as those of Guinea Bissau, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola, it is of
fundamental importance that we adequately consider
the efforts to help children that other actors in those
countries carry out. I want to mention an example. The
country notes agreed on by the Governments of those
countries and the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) are usually approved by the Executive
Board without adequately considering the Council’s
role. Nor does the Council consider the information
contained in these notes, despite the fact that they are
politically relevant. It is important to put an end to this
practice in order to generate processes that allow the
intergovernmental organs in New York to complement
each other’s work, with the goal of maximizing its
benefits for children.
The resolution that we will adopt today is the
third — counting resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1314
(2000) — to be considered by the Council on the topic
of children and armed conflicts. We welcome the
degree of attention this topic has received in this organ
of the United Nations. However, we would like to
invite reflection on the need to avoid in the future
emulating the General Assembly in adopting annual
resolutions that do not necessarily add value to the
consideration of an item. That is a risk for all generic
resolutions that do not address a concrete situation on
the Security Council’s agenda.
We suggest that we start to examine in greater
detail the situation of children in specific cases. The
situation in Afghanistan offers us a challenge of
enormous dimensions, but also a great opportunity. The
Security Council, the Secretary-General, the agencies,
United Nations funds and programmes, international
and regional institutions for finance and development,
and regional groups and organizations can demonstrate
that they can make a real difference in the lives of the
children of Afghanistan.

5

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

In relation to Afghanistan, it would perhaps be
appropriate to look at the possibility of issuing a
decision allowing for the achievement of two goals. On
the one hand would be the goal of facilitating the
access of humanitarian aid to children, incorporating
this question into the work programme of the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and creating
sustained, funded programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of children. On the
other hand would be the goal of coordinating the
Council’s response with the activities already
undertaken by UNICEF and other agencies of the
system operating on the ground.
I will conclude by reiterating to the Council and
the international community the importance of the
question of small arms in the consideration of the
problem of children and armed conflict, as was
reflected
in
the
Presidential
Statement
(S/PRST/2001/21) of 31 August 2001. We affirm once
again that arms-producing countries must exercise the
highest degree of responsibility since the technological
advances that have enabled the production of lighter
arms have also enabled armed groups and terrorists to
incorporate child combatants in their ranks.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I would first like to thank you for scheduling
this meeting of the Council on this crucial issue of
great importance today. I would also like to convey my
delegation’s encouragement to Mr. Otunnu for his
commitment to the cause of children. His presentation
just now and the report of the Secretary-General
lucidly indicate practical recommendations for
adopting concrete measures for protecting children
during armed conflicts. I will also take this opportunity
to thank Ms. Bellamy, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and convey
to her my delegation’s appreciation for her agency’s
work.
This morning we heard the moving testimony of
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh. Yes, he was a child soldier, but
we must not forget that it was the war commanders
who made him a child soldier against his will. How
many children are there in the world who have been
robbed of their childhood by wars and conflicts of all
types? So many children in Palestine have never had a
childhood, have known only insecurity and have
witnessed the death of their parents or of other
children. The same has happened to children in Liberia,

6

the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Burundi and Afghanistan. I also see the children of
Iraq, whose childhood — and even life — continues to
be severely affected by one of the harshest sanctions
regimes. Even here in the United States, what will
happen to the children who lost their parents on 11
September, having done nothing to deserve to become
orphans? All these children and so many others
demand our attention. There are so many in the world!
The question of children in armed conflict has
become a priority concern for the international
community. Children today are either targets of
violence or the perpetrators of it; in every instance,
they are at the very heart of the conflict. They are
among the first to fall victim to the deterioration of
humanitarian situations, and they become an essential
part of any peace-building operation. The destruction
of the social fabric, the increase in infant mortality and
the gradual erosion of the family structure because of
the displacement of populations create complex
problems to which we have to find an answer.
The report of the Secretary-General takes up all
of these aspects relating to the situation of children and
armed conflict. He has put forward a coherent and
ambitious strategy to protect these children. My
delegation subscribes to the Secretary-General’s
recommendations and believes that it is important to
start implementing them. We welcome the fact that the
question of children in armed conflict has already been
given particular attention by the Security Council.
Many Security Council documents have referred with
disquiet to the fate of these children and have devoted
specific provisions in resolutions or in presidential
statements to this issue. These provisions have been
followed up in the field. This trend should be
strengthened in any matter that is brought before the
Security Council.
Nevertheless, we believe that protecting children
in wartime depends to a large extent on the behaviour
of the parties to armed conflicts. It is therefore up to
the international community, and more specifically the
Security Council, to send a strong and clear signal to
all that they must strictly respect obligations and
commitments regarding the protection of children. To
this end, it is of prime importance to consolidate the
legal framework and to encourage States to sign legal
instruments relating to the protection of children.
Respect for commitments entered into under these
instruments, as well as verifying their implementation,

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

is an essential aspect of what needs to be done in order
to better protect these children.
The protection of children affected by armed
conflict is a constant concern throughout the process of
a peacekeeping operation. The mandates of such
operations must contain explicit provisions that will
ensure respect for the rights of children. The Security
Council resolutions on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the situation in Sierra
Leone were important steps in this respect. The
inclusion of concern about the protection of children in
the mandates of peacekeeping operations facilitates
their demobilization and focuses attention on the
seriousness of the issue. Furthermore, this makes it
possible to monitor the parties to the conflict to prevent
any further recruitment of children.
Protecting children affected by armed conflict
during peacekeeping operations further requires
appropriate training for military, civil and police
personnel involved in operations on the ground. In this
connection, the initiative of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of establishing an informal
working group to train peacekeeping personnel in child
protection is something that deserves to be fully
encouraged.
It is also important that peace agreements take
account of protecting child soldiers. This should be an
integral part of any negotiation on a settlement of a
conflict. The demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers has the advantage of putting an end to the
spiral of violence that has taken place in certain parts
of the world and makes it possible for children to fully
recover their dignity. The support of international and
regional organizations and the mobilization of internal
resources are necessary to successfully carry out such a
programme. In this connection, we believe that the
international community should initiate new strategies
and targeted programmes for the benefit of girl
children whose rehabilitation is even more difficult.
We believe that it is necessary to strengthen
cooperation among all the actors in the field, not only
among the United Nations agencies but also with nongovernmental organizations. We believe that this
approach deserves great consideration.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to thank
the French delegation for coordinating the work on the
draft resolution, to which we subscribe. We believe that
this is indeed an ambitious draft that will have a

favourable impact on the protection of children
affected by armed conflict. It will, in a very timely
manner, strengthen the juridical arsenal in this area.
Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): The
European Union will be speaking on our behalf later
on. However, I would like to say a few words in our
national capacity. First of all, I would like to tell you,
Madam President, how pleased we are that this debate
is taking place during your term of office. Your
commitment to the cause of children is known by each
and every one of us, and I am pleased that you have
taken the symbolic decision to hold this discussion on
20 November, the anniversary of the adoption by the
General Assembly of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. The importance that we all attach to this
question is confirmed by the presence of the SecretaryGeneral at our meeting this morning, as well as that of
his Special Representative, Mr. Otunnu, and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Bellamy.
I do not wish to dwell on the topical relevance of
the question of children in armed conflict. I can only
endorse what has been said by most of the previous
speakers. The particularly moving testimony this
morning of a young child soldier enabled the Council
to comprehend the magnitude and seriousness of the
problem. In the strongest possible way, it demonstrates
the urgency incumbent upon us, the Council — indeed,
our moral responsibility — to take up a challenge that,
under the Charter, constitutes a threat to peace and
security.
When the Council decided in September to
respond to the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s most recent report, we set
particularly ambitious goals for ourselves. The Council
was to organize a debate at the highest possible
level — that of heads of State and Government — to
deal with this question. The draft resolution was
designed as a true plan of action for all actors and was
to be formally adopted by the heads of State and
Government. The postponement of the General
Assembly’s special session changed the format of our
debate; however, it has not lessened our determination
to produce a document that can meet the challenge, as
the Secretary-General said this morning.
The draft resolution that we are about to adopt
marks an important stage in protecting children in war.
Let me give me a broad outline of the essential

7

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

elements. First of all, there are two goals: to build on
what has been accomplished, to streamline and to
reorganize commitments made by the Council in
previous resolutions; and at the same time to sketch out
new areas of action by precisely codifying what could
be achieved by all actors concerned. This approach
underlies the distinctive structure of the draft
resolution, which outlines, for the first time, the
responsibilities of all — the Council first and foremost,
the belligerents themselves, the Member States, United
Nations funds, programmes and agencies, international
financial institutions, regional development banks,
regional organizations and non-State actors such as
private enterprise — and presents them in a sort of
global road map. Those are the goals.
Now, turning to the subject of ways and means,
according to the draft resolution, the Council should
have more effective tools, in relation both to
monitoring the fulfilment of commitments and
obligations by parties to conflicts, and to mobilizing
resources for supporting activities to help the child
victims. The Council will continue to give high priority
to the situation of children when it considers each of
the issues before it. It will ensure that enforcement
measures that could be adopted under Article 41 of the
Charter take into account the particular vulnerability of
civilian populations and that of children in particular.
Finally, we ought to emphasize a new mechanism
that would also be set up by this Council draft
resolution. Paragraph 16 requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit an annual list of parties to armed
conflicts that recruit or use children in violation of
international obligations applicable to them. That list,
submitted to the Council, could be seen as an initial
step towards establishing a more effective monitoring
and follow-up system for all of the commitments that
appear in the text of the draft resolution. The list
should also make it possible to measure the progress
made on an annual basis. There is no doubt that this
could serve to orient the principal donors,
Governments and international institutions in the
provision of technical and financial assistance and in
their contributions to the rehabilitation programmes for
children who are victims of conflict.
Year after year, the international community has
increasingly mobilized itself to protect children in
armed conflict. The publication, in 1996, of the report
by Ms. Graça Machel probably marked a significant
stage in the raising of consciousness. The response of

8

the Security Council thereafter did not fall behind. In
September 1997 it named Mr. Olara Otunnu as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General; the
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has prosecuted those
responsible for rape and sexual violence during times
of civil war; special provisions were made for children
in the Lomé peace agreements on Sierra Leone; and,
finally, the Council adopted numerous resolutions
devoted to the protection of children.
It is my hope that the draft resolution to be
adopted by the Council today can also be ascribed to
our efforts in this direction. I also hope that it will
enshrine our determination to end barbaric practices
against children and, in the end, against humankind.
Ms. Lee (Singapore): In an essay entitled
“Children as Killers”, writer Corinne Dufka describes
the following scene in Liberia:
“I came upon a group of five NPFL [National
Patriotic Front of Liberia] child soldiers, the
eldest, not more than 12, playing soccer on one of
the most heavily contested corners of the urban
war. I saw their rifles discarded on the street
below a rain-soaked Liberian flag, and only then
did it become clear that the white ball they
maneuvered was a human skull. The decaying
body lay some 20 meters away. They kicked the
ball over the debris of wall, spent cartridges, old
wallets, clothes dropped by fleeing civilians and
old photographs, and squealed with delight as it
entered the goal post marked by two rusting
sardine cans.”
Kicking a skull around as a football must be a
brutalizing experience. It diminishes our humanity. Yet
these children are also trying to behave like normal
children playing football. Our challenge here is to
ensure that children like these can experience a normal
childhood and not be scarred for life. We are therefore
pleased that the Security Council is proceeding with
this debate despite the postponement of the special
session on children.
One year is a long period in the life of a child.
The sooner we try to rescue children from armed
conflict, the more of their childhood we will give to
them. Unfortunately, childhood, once lost, can never be
returned or replaced. The statement we heard this
morning from Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, delivered with
honest and moving eloquence, was nonetheless a brutal
and devastating reminder of how tragic the loss of

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

childhood can be. His statement has also highlighted
the importance of post-conflict programmes for
children who are scarred by armed conflict.

deliberate victimization. There are few further
depths to which humanity can sink.” (A/51/306,
section I.A, para. 3)

Even as we speak, Afghan children are suffering
from the war that is raging in their country. In an
Agence France Presse report of 16 November, last
week, it was reported that

Against that backdrop, we clearly need to inject a
greater sense of urgency in our work on this subject.
The Secretary-General’s excellent report on children
and armed conflict of 7 September 2001 spells out
comprehensively what we have to do. Both Ms. Carol
Bellamy and Mr. Olara Otunnu have also done
excellent work in this field, and can provide the
Council with clear guidance. Mr. Otunnu deserves
special commendation for eliciting 59 specific
commitments from Governments and representatives of
armed groups in several zones of conflict where
children have suffered immensely. It is one thing for
the Council to issue declarations, it is more heartening
to see their real impact on the ground.

“Some of those affected will never fully recover
physically and psychologically. Seth Mohammed,
11 years of age, will go through life without his
right leg, which was blown off when a bomb
landed close to a group of children playing near
the southern city of Kandahar. Twelve days after
he was admitted to hospital in shock and caked in
dried blood and mud, he is struggling to come to
terms with what has happened.”
Ms. Bellamy and several other speakers have also
highlighted the potential devastating effect of winter to
Afghan children.
The problem of children in armed conflict is not
new. For millennia, children have been marched off to
war as drummer boys, porters, servants and
messengers. The ill-fated Children’s Crusade of 1212
involved thousands of doomed children. Hoards of
French children died of hunger and disease during their
march, while thousands of German youngsters froze in
the Alps or plummeted down the mountainsides.
During the American Civil War the youngest known
soldier, Avery Brown, was enlisted in the Union
infantry just shy of his ninth birthday, after claiming to
be age 12 on his enlistment papers. More recently, an
estimated 250,000 children, even as young as age 5,
have been reportedly conscripted to serve as soldiers in
dozens of armed conflicts around the world, some with
armed insurgencies and some in regular armies.
The problem of child soldiers is just one part of
the grim canvas of children in armed conflict. The
broader picture was first sketched out in the groundbreaking and comprehensive 1996 report entitled
“Impact of armed conflict on children”, by Ms. Graça
Machel. Her report noted that
“more and more of the world is being sucked into
a … space in which children are slaughtered,
raped, and maimed; a space in which children are
exploited as soldiers; a space in which children
are starved and exposed to extreme brutality.
Such unregulated terror and violence speak of

The five-point programme of actions that
Mr. Otunnu persuaded all the parties in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to accept is a significant
breakthrough. So too is his success in persuading the
Government of Rwanda to enact legislation that
enables girls, including tens of thousands who became
heads of households after the 1994 genocide, to inherit
farms and other properties crucial to their survival.
The question for us in the Council is how to build
on that good work. One way is to endorse the report,
especially the action points. We will do that when we
adopt our draft resolution later. But in endorsing a long
report, it is sometimes useful to spell out some
priorities that deserve immediate attention. We would
like to suggest four areas.
First, effective, continuous monitoring is a key
feature to successful implementation.
Secondly, those who violate the basic rights of
children must pay. Amnesty should be withheld from
adults who abduct, recruit or use child soldiers in
combat. Those individuals should receive no impunity
and no sympathy.
Thirdly, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration (DRR) are the only viable long-term
solutions for child soldiers. We should also give weight
to the reports of the child-protection advisers operating
within the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) and the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), and ensure that similar advisers are sent to

9

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

Afghanistan when the United Nations establishes itself
there.

children can do this. Without such a commitment, our
progress will remain only as words on paper.

Finally, we need to continually refine and
improve our approach. The Secretary-General has
proposed the launch of an international research
network on children and armed conflict. This deserves
serious consideration. The network could become an
invaluable source of information and recommendations
for child-protection issues.

Mr. Jingree (Mauritius): My delegation joins
previous speakers in thanking the Secretary-General,
Special Representative Otunnu and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), Ms. Bellamy, for the important statements
they made this morning.

Our work on children and armed conflict cannot
be separated from the work we are doing on conflict
prevention. One of the operational weaknesses of the
Council is that it looks on each issue or theme as
belonging to different compartments. But the
compartments are not separate; indeed, they are more
like cabins on the same boat. All issues touching on
armed conflict have to be handled together. We
therefore have to remind ourselves of the commitment
we made when we endorsed, in resolution 1366 (2001),
the Secretary-General’s comprehensive report on the
prevention of armed conflict of 7 June 2001. That
report spelled out 10 principles to enable the United
Nations to move from a culture of reaction to a culture
of prevention. It is worth recalling in particular the
fifth principle, which pointed out that:
“The primary focus of preventive action
should be in addressing the deep-rooted socioeconomic, cultural, environmental, institutional,
political and other structural causes that often
underlie the immediate symptoms of conflicts.”
(S/2001/574, para. 169)
Let me recall also the sixth principle, which
outlined the components of an effective preventive
strategy, and noted that a strong focus was required on
gender equality and the situation of children.
Similarly, the debate we are having here today
cannot be divorced from the discussion that the
General
Assembly
had
yesterday
on
the
implementation
of
the
Millennium
Summit
Declaration. This is one reason why we should, when
we complete our discussion here, report in full all of
the progress made to the special session on children,
which will be held in May next year.
But there is another, more important reason to do
this. The Security Council, which represents only 15
States, cannot deliver the political commitment of the
international community. The special session on

10

We commend the Special Representative for his
relentless efforts and commitment in dealing with
children affected by armed conflict. We welcome his
perseverance in trying to elicit specific commitments
from Governments and from representatives of armed
groups in several zones of conflict where children have
suffered
immensely.
He
deserves
our
full
encouragement in his important endeavour.
This morning we were deeply touched by the
extremely revealing testimony of Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh, who gave us an unimaginable insight into the
despicable conditions of a child soldier’s day-to-day
life. He is among the few lucky ones; he has been able
to demobilize and reintegrate into society. The Council
should realize that there are still more than 300,000 of
these child soldiers, mostly in Africa, who are still,
even as we speak, holding weapons and being forced to
fight.
The report of the Secretary-General has clearly
shown that existing normative standards can contribute
positively to the development of standards of
acceptable conduct for parties to armed conflict in
respect of children. While we note the efforts made by
Member States, the United Nations and regional
organizations in protecting and promoting the rights of
children in armed conflict, it is clear that a lot more
needs to be done to ensure that children are fully
protected in conflict situations. This meeting gives us
the opportunity to assess the implementation of
resolution 1314 (2000) and to come forward with
innovative ideas.
Children and women represent one of the most, if
not the most, vulnerable segment of society in any
conflict situation. All kinds of atrocities are committed
against them, especially in time of war. It is indeed
regrettable that not enough attention is paid to the
plight of this category of the population.
Conflicts and wars are not new events in our
world. Two world wars have been fought, yet in the

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

past children and women were always protected in one
way or another. Children were not allowed to become
directly involved in the fighting. This may have been
due to the fact that children were not physically strong
enough or mentally prepared to fight wars.
Today the situation has changed dramatically.
Children have, in fact, become one of most exploited
groups. There are various reasons for this, one of
which is the accessibility of small arms and light
weapons, which are extremely easy to manipulate.
While we welcome the important commitments
made by some countries in addressing the scourge of
the recruitment of child soldiers, we note with concern
that the Secretary-General continues to receive credible
reports of the recruitment of child soldiers by parties to
some of the ongoing conflicts.
The statistics are alarming. The primary
responsibility of protecting children in armed conflict
undeniably falls upon States. Greater efforts are
required by countries in conflict to provide protection
to children, so that they are not subjected to any kind
of atrocity and do not become easy prey for the
belligerents.
It is equally important that all parties respect
fully the norms of international law for the protection
of children in armed conflict. We strongly condemn the
recruitment of child soldiers and consider such acts to
be crimes against humanity, for which those
responsible should be brought to justice.
We note with satisfaction that the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict will
soon enter into force. We call on all Member States to
ratify the Protocol as early as possible.
My delegation believes that once dialogue starts
with parties to armed conflicts, one of the first
questions that needs to be tackled should concern the
plight of children and the elaboration of specific
programmes which would help monitor their protection
and eventual rehabilitation. The Secretary-General
should ensure that his envoys, peace emissaries and
special representatives take all aspects of the question
of children and armed conflict into consideration while
negotiating peace agreements and implementing their
mandates.
We welcome the decision of the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that all reports to the Council contain

specific information on the situation of children in the
country concerned.
Efforts to demobilize child soldiers in the midst
of conflicts and their rehabilitation and reintegration
into society are complex tasks, but they are crucial for
the prevention of re-recruitment or re-enlistment. It is
important that individual centres be given adequate and
sustained resources for long-term reintegration. In this
respect, we commend such agencies as UNICEF and its
partners that are involved in the rehabilitation of
children, particularly with respect to the counselling
and non-formal education that they are providing to
former child soldiers.
The Secretary-General had identified the lack of
basic information, one of the key characteristics of the
situation of children to be demobilized, as one of the
challenges for the agencies and donors attempting to
plan an appropriate child-soldier demobilization and
reintegration programme. We appeal to the
international community to extend its full cooperation
in the rehabilitation and reintegration process in order
to break the cycle of violence for children.
The linkages that exist between HIV, conflict and
children must also be addressed seriously. It is
inadmissible that children are the victims of sexual
violence perpetrated not only by the rebel forces, but
also by militias supported by government forces. These
inhuman acts widen the spread of HIV and put the
future of coming generations at risk. The rape of
women and children as young as 12 years of age is
often used, by both security and rebel forces, as a
weapon of terror among the civilian population. If
urgent steps are not taken to address this problem
today, the burden on countries emerging from conflict
will be even greater tomorrow.
In this respect, we fully concur with the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that sexual
violence against women and children should continue
to be prosecuted as a war crime.
The use of children by organized drug traffickers
and by those engaged in the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of countries is reported to have
gained prominence. The forcible dragging of children
into the drug-trafficking business and into involvement
in the illegal exploitation of natural resources must be
seriously addressed, and ways must be found to put an
end to such practices.

11

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

The rate at which children are being involved, in
one way or another, in armed conflict by organized
gangs is deplorable. The fact that a network is being
used to trade children to conflicts across borders makes
imperative cooperation at the regional and subregional
levels. We believe that regional and subregional
organizations, as well as Interpol, could play an
important role in tracking down this network. We
therefore appeal for greater cooperation by all of the
actors concerned in dismantling such networks.
Children are the custodians of the future and of
our world heritage. It is important that they be taught
the notions of peace, tolerance and respect for one
another. They should not be used to fight, nor should
they have forced upon them a culture of hatred,
violence and fighting as their only means of survival.
As members of the Security Council, we have an
important responsibility towards children and towards
ensuring a peaceful future for them.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Jamaica.
Earlier today, we heard a cry from the heart of a
child: a cry on behalf of millions of children around the
globe affected by armed conflict; a cry for a better life;
a cry for peace. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh’s vision must
guide the Security Council as it seeks to fulfil its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
has put a face on the report of the Secretary-General so
ably presented to us today by his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict; on
the work of the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), graphically described by its Executive
Director; and on the provisions of the resolutions that
the Security Council has adopted on specific conflict
situations.

number of innovative and practical initiatives,
strengthened the advocacy work of UNICEF and of the
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, and enhanced the ability of the United
Nations to implement programmes at the international
level and in affected countries and regions. As a result,
the issue has now been placed squarely on the
international peace and security agenda.
Nevertheless, despite the commitments made and
the actions taken, children are still being killed,
maimed, used as combatants, uprooted from home and
community and forced to live in conditions of extreme
deprivation. There is no doubt that armed conflict
exacerbates poverty, reduces progress in human
development and increases children’s vulnerability to
sexual abuse and physical exploitation. The challenge
before us is how to change that tragic reality.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2001/852)
presents us with a balance sheet on the implementation
of existing Security Council resolutions and identifies
areas where further action is still required. We must
commend the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the initiatives which have been
implemented since last year’s report. I wish to
highlight some issues which my delegation believes
must be taken account of in the pre-conflict and postconflict phases, and during conflicts, to address the
plight of children in a comprehensive and integrated
manner.
First, attention must be given to the prevention of
armed conflict, as the best way to reduce the harm done
to children is to prevent armed conflicts from breaking
out.
Second, addressing the root causes of conflict
must therefore be a matter of priority for the
international community.

Today’s debate, which is being held on Universal
Children’s Day, which we observe as a day of
worldwide fraternity and understanding among
children, and of activity promoting the welfare of the
world’s children, also reminds us of the important role
that States Members of the United Nations, individually
and collectively, must play if we are to reduce the gap
between norms and practice.

Third, the international community must also
encourage respect for human rights and encourage
specially designed post-conflict peace-building and
rehabilitation programmes that can reduce the
likelihood of the re-emergence of armed conflict. In
that regard, disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programmes must receive adequate
funding.

It is true that over the past five years greater
attention has been focused on the plight of children
affected by armed conflict. That has stimulated a

Fourth, the promotion of a culture of adherence to
humanitarian norms and standards is of critical
importance, especially in the light of increased

12

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

violations of humanitarian law in conflict situations. A
component of any effective strategy must be an end to
impunity through the prosecution of those who
deliberately violate the rights of children. Genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity and other
egregious crimes perpetrated against children must be
excluded from amnesty provisions contemplated during
peace negotiations. By the same token, child excombatants should be regarded primarily as victims
rather than as perpetrators, and should be exposed to
rehabilitative treatment.
Fifth, appropriate monitoring and reporting
mechanisms must be established to ensure the
compliance of armed groups and non-State actors.
Sixth, better and more effective cooperation and
coordination with regional and subregional bodies must
be developed. In that context, we wish to express
appreciation for the work of the non-governmental
organizations in the field.
Seventh, the impact on children of the illicit trade
in small arms and the illegal exploitation of and trade
in natural resources must be forcefully addressed.
Eighth, we must replicate successful initiatives to
protect children affected by war at the community
level, make education an essential component of
humanitarian assistance, and include information on
the security of children in all reports prepared for the
Security Council on conflict situations. In that regard, I
wish to highlight that we would wish to see these and
all other so-called generic resolutions mainstreamed.
Among the recommendations made in the
Secretary-General’s report, I wish to highlight the
launch of an international research network on children
and armed conflict as being most timely, because
appropriate responses can only be based on accurate
data. We also express appreciation to the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations for the initiatives taken on
the training of peacekeepers.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General is the
culmination of nearly a decade of work that began with
the seminal work of Ms. Graça Machel, to whom the
international community owes a debt of gratitude. The
provisions of the draft resolution to be adopted at the
end of this debate are addressed, inter alia, to parties to
armed conflict, Member States, the Secretary-General
and regional and subregional organizations. The draft
resolution also requests the Secretary-General, in his

next report, to list parties to armed conflict that recruit
or use children in violation of international obligations
applicable to them. It is important that this draft
resolution be used as a guide for reporting on conflict
situations.
In conclusion, let me first of all express my
delegation’s appreciation to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, to the Executive Director of
UNICEF and to their staffs for keeping the focus of the
international community on the children who are
victims of armed conflict: children whose lives are put
in jeopardy by actions beyond their control. We also
wish to express our appreciation to the delegation of
France for having so ably coordinated work on the
draft resolution before us. Our future actions will
determine whether we have heard the cry from the
heart of Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for peace and for a
better life.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker is the representative of
Belgium. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union — Bulgaria, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, the Czech Republic,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — the
associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the
European Free Trade Association country belonging to
the European Economic Area Liechtenstein align
themselves with this statement.
I want to begin by thanking Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), and Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for their important statements this
morning. We wish also to thank Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
for having, on behalf of the tens of thousands of
children who continue to experience the same tragic
tale, given the Council an account of a state of affairs
that we are firmly determined to combat.
We should like to thank the Secretary-General for
his very detailed and thorough report, the
recommendations of which should enable us to tackle
the problem of children and armed conflict head-on.

13

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

The Secretary-General’s report is also a reminder to us
of the tragic situation of children in armed conflict and
of the long way still to go to protect them from conflict
and its devastating consequences, direct and indirect.
Reading the report, we are struck by the number and
the variety of ways in which children are involved in
armed conflict: millions of children are the first
innocent victims of conflicts that destroy their future
and, at the same time, the future of their countries.
The Secretary-General’s recommendations are
rightly addressed to a number of actors. It is indeed the
international community as a whole that bears
responsibility for their implementation. In this
connection, we welcome the commitment shown by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu. We
reiterate our support for their work and for that of the
United Nations Children’s Fund, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Finally, we wish to stress that in
addition to these efforts, it is the Member States that
individually bear the responsibility for implementing
the agreed standards in this matter.
We are pleased that the Security Council is seized
of this matter, for that signals unequivocal recognition
that the protection to which children are entitled,
particularly under the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, is an essential factor in building peace and
lasting security. The European Union calls on the
Member States to implement Security Council
resolutions 1314 (2000) and 1261 (1999), on children
and armed conflict, and welcomes the adoption of a
new draft resolution by the Council. This draft
resolution, whose scope of action is greater than that of
its predecessors, in which the means envisaged are also
more ambitious, confirms the strong commitment of
the international community to this matter.
Since this complex issue is to be discussed in
depth at the special session of the General Assembly on
children to be held in May next year, I should like here
to expand on the aspects directly relating to the
responsibilities of the Council.
First, we welcome the special child-related
provisions that the Security Council has included in a
number of its recent resolutions, particularly resolution
1355 (2001), renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic

14

Republic of the Congo (MONUC), which contains a
specific paragraph on child protection. It is indeed vital
that these considerations be taken into account, first in
dialogues for peace and the ensuing peace agreements
and then in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping
operations
and
peace-building
programmes where appropriate. We are thinking
particularly of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for child combatants and of
the right of child refugees and internally displaced
children to assistance and protection. It is also worth
repeating that humanitarian personnel must have full,
safe and unhindered access to children affected by
armed conflict.
We warmly welcome the fact that child protection
advisers and child-focused human rights officers are,
where appropriate, to be part of the personnel of
peacekeeping operations. This additional expertise will
make for a deeper appreciation of the problems and,
not least, enable us to adapt our action to the particular
needs of each operation. In this context, we wish to
recall that the special needs of girls must receive
special attention.
Generally speaking, it is vital that all civilians
and all military and police forces involved in
peacekeeping operations receive training in children’s
rights, child protection and international humanitarian
law.
But to be truly effective, we must also become
involved in conflict prevention measures aimed
particularly at children. In that regard, there is an
urgent need to put a stop to the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflicts, in violation of international
law, including the obligations imposed by the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Allow me to remind the Council that that Protocol
prohibits the participation of children under the age of
18 in armed conflicts. We look forward to its entry into
force next February. I would also mention the Rome
Statute, which makes it a war crime to recruit children
under the age of 15.
As the Secretary-General’s report stresses, the
Security Council regularly deals with issues that
directly or indirectly involve children: child soldiers,
the question of small arms, HIV/AIDS and
peacekeeping operations, the illicit exploitation of
natural resources and conflict prevention. Wherever

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

necessary, the approach to all these problems must
include a “child” dimension.
In conclusion, I wish to say that no peace can be
lasting unless children are involved in its
consolidation. The special session of the General
Assembly on children is crucial in this respect. It
represents a unique opportunity for all of us to pool our
efforts to define a global strategy to promote and
protect the rights of the child. Peace is without doubt
the most precious possession that we can offer them,
and this requires our unconditional voluntary
commitment.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to express my delegation’s deep
appreciation to you and your friendly country, Madam
President, and to salute and thank Secretary-General
Kofi Annan and his Special Representative, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, for their tireless efforts and valuable
contribution to the promotion of the rights of the child
in armed conflict. I also wish to assure you of my
country’s full commitment in supporting all such
efforts.
Caring for children’s physical, mental and
psychological development is a duty, as well as a social
and economic necessity for all the countries of the
world, regardless of their cultures and civilizations and
of their level of economic growth and scientific
advances. I have no doubt that the success of the 1990
World Summit for Children in setting a number of
ambitious targets and objectives aimed at supporting
children and development, and the ratification of the
1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child by 191
countries, gave clear evidence that the international
community is committed and willing to respect the
rights, capabilities, dignity and welfare of the child.
However, despite all the important achievements
of the last decade, we have witnessed a number of
factors that have adversely affected children in many
areas of the world, such as economic crises, the
deepening of debt and the spread of epidemics and
diseases. The most dangerous of those factors is the
spread of armed conflicts and the radical changes
introduced to armed conflict in recent years, such as
open disregard for rules of international law,
particularly humanitarian law, and the permitting of all

forms of abuse against civilians. This change in the
nature of armed conflict has led to the aggravation of
problems affecting children in armed conflict,
regardless of the international efforts that have been
made to prevent recruitment of children, release child
soldiers and reunify them with their families, protect
them from organized crime and promote their
rehabilitation in and integration into their societies.
We, the people of the world, took it upon
ourselves in the Charter to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. But unfortunately, after more
than 50 years have passed, armed conflicts are still
killing, injuring and destroying children. Conflicts
continue to kill millions of children who have become
targets or tools of wars. We have witnessed the effects
of conflict and post-conflict on children in more than
50 countries. Many have been killed, abducted or
besieged, or maimed by anti-personnel landmines; the
number of children whose mental, physical and
psychological development has been impaired in wartorn societies continues to grow; and millions have lost
their homes and families, not to mention their
childhood, adolescence and school years. Some of
them have been in a continuous state of shock because
of the events they have witnessed.
While
human
rights
covenants
and
conventions — including the Convention of the Rights
of the Child and the 1949 Geneva Convention and its
two Protocols of 1977 — represent landmarks in the
protection of children in areas of armed conflict, the
gap between these rules and their implementation
continues to widen and grow in an unprecedented way.
Although we believe that the main responsibility for
bridging this gap and implementing international rules
aimed at protecting children in armed conflicts lies
above all with national Governments, we are also fully
convinced that the international community has an
important role to play in providing the necessary
technical and financial support to protect, reintegrate
and psychologically rehabilitate children.
In this regard, from this podium Egypt urges the
international community to make all necessary efforts
to carry out the following measures. First, it must
ensure that all parties at war are committed to
protecting children from exploitation, abuse, violence,
rape, displacement and murder. Secondly, it should
bring to justice all those who target children with
impunity and implement and comply with the Optional

15

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
Thirdly, the international community must strive
to implement the Programme of Action adopted by the
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as it has
positive effects on reducing conflicts and protecting
civilians, especially women and children. Fourthly, it
must mobilize and coordinate humanitarian relief
efforts and respond to the developmental needs of
children in the areas of education, health care and other
social services in post-conflict situations in order to
replace the culture of violence — in which children in
areas of armed conflict have been raised — with a
culture of peace and development. This should be done
while ensuring full coordination and cooperation with
the concerned countries and guaranteeing that the
rights of children are not used as a pretext to interfere
in a country’s internal affairs or to politicize a specific
crisis.
Finally, my delegation would like to affirm that
Egypt will untiringly stress the need to protect children
and promote their basic rights, including their right to
life and development in areas and territories under
foreign occupation. We wonder in this regard: is it not
high time to halt all military and violent actions
directed against civilians and children in the occupied
Palestinian territories? Is it not time to put an end to
the torture, tears and sorrow of Palestinian children,
whose innocent lives the Israeli forces continue to take,
without regard for moral, political or international
commitments, while disregarding and flouting the cries
for help and relief that they make? Today, as the
Security Council is considering, for the second or the
third time, the issue of protecting children in armed
conflict, the Palestinian child is still living in very
inhumane circumstances, which touches the conscience
of the international community.
We believe that our duty, as part of a civilized
world, and the role of the Security Council in the new
millennium, is not only to express regret and remorse
for the suffering and death of Palestinian children who
may have been killed by a stray bullet or have lost
those who once cared for them, or whose basic rights
have been violated, but also to protect their lives and
promote their rights, dignity and welfare.
Children are the future of our civilization and of
every community. Their development, their protection

16

and the promotion of their rights is a joint
responsibility for us all. Future generations will harvest
and reap the fruits of either war and violence or peace
and development.
Mr. Navarrete (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to tell you at the outset how very grateful
my delegation is to you, Madam, for having convened
this open debate on children in armed conflict. I would
also like to express our thanks for your outstanding
personal contribution to our consideration of items
related to children in the course of your work in the
Preparatory Committee for the Special Session of the
General Assembly on children.
In this connection, as previous speakers have
remarked, the situation is as devastating as it is
inadmissible. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict has
said that in the past decade 2 million children have died
in war. Six million have been seriously injured or
permanently handicapped. Twelve million are
homeless. More than 1 million children are orphans or
separated from their families and 10 million suffer
from profound psychological trauma.
For its part, the United Nations Children’s Fund
estimates that 300,000 minors have been recruited as
active combatants in armies and rebel groups involved
in more than 30 non-international conflicts and are
often captured as prisoners of war.
Anti-personnel landmines also pose a great
danger to the physical safety of children. Every month,
800 minors die or are mutilated by landmines. They are
marked for life by amputations, the consequences of
which affect their capacity to move about, work and
live a normal life. The moving words of Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh that we heard this morning provided a
personal perspective and put a human face on such
terrifying statistics.
In order to address such horrors, Mexico supports
the recommendations of the Secretary-General, which
consolidate and expand United Nations activities
related to the situation of children in armed conflict.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s assessment that
enhanced international cooperation and the political
will of nations are needed in order to help everyone to
meet their obligations to protect children in times of
war and in post-conflict situations.

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

My country is firmly committed to consolidating
international law in this sphere. On 30 June 2000, we
ratified Convention No. 182 of the International
Labour Organization on the worst forms of child
labour. On 7 September 2000, we signed the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. In the
general debate of the General Assembly in New York,
the President of Mexico announced that our ratification
of that instrument is currently under way.
Mexico agrees on the importance of the Security
Council’s continuing to study information provided by
humanitarian agencies on the situation of children in
various regions of the world and of its adopting
measures to ensure that parties to conflicts permit
secure and unrestricted access to United Nations
humanitarian personnel. Mexico also believes that it is
highly important that humanitarian assistance be
increased to children, that access to war-affected
children be guaranteed in all regions and that
prevention and support programmes be developed for
children affected by HIV/AIDS.
Mexico believes that activities of the Security
Council to protect children in armed conflict, together
with measures to be adopted by States in the context of
the commitments they will undertake at the special
session on children, will enable the international
community to meet the psychological, rehabilitation
and social reintegration needs of children and to ensure
their full enjoyment of their human rights.
One aspect to which Mexico attaches particular
importance is the demobilization and reintegration
programmes for child soldiers. Lessons learned in
warfare and post-conflict situations have underscored
the need to design specific programmes to address the
problems of boys and girls involved in armed conflict.
We support the Secretary-General’s recommendations
that Member States provide sustained and adequate
resources to implement such programmes.
It is also essential that we keep in mind strategies
to ensure the progress called for in this context in the
road map towards the implementation of the
Millennium Declaration. We must work towards the
suggested objectives and, in particular, towards
“securing state commitments to ending the use of
children
as
soldiers,
demobilizing
and
rehabilitating former child soldiers and taking

into account the special needs of women and
girls”. (A/56/326, para. 238)
I conclude by affirming, in reiteration of the
reference made by the representative of Colombia in
this connection, our support for the recommendation on
increasing restrictions on the transfer of small arms and
light weapons to conflict zones. In addressing this
problem, actions must be taken at the national, regional
and international levels, such as those included in the
Programme of Action on the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects, adopted in July by
the General Assembly. Its effective implementation by
Member States will have a significant impact on
improving the protection of children in armed conflict.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of the Republic of Korea. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea): I would like to
begin by expressing my gratitude to you, Madam, for
taking the initiative to bring this important issue before
the Security Council. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his informative report on
children and armed conflict, contained in document
S/2001/852. Recalling the Security Council’s landmark
resolutions 1261 (1999) of 25 August 1999 and 1314
(2000) of 11 August 2000, and considering the
upcoming special session of the General Assembly on
children, I am certain that the outcome of our
discussions here will add to the momentum generated
at the ongoing preparatory process and contribute to
the work of the special session.
Despite efforts to address the plight of children in
conflict situations, the current reality remains deeply
disturbing. In recent years, we have witnessed a surge
in the number of armed conflicts and innocent civilians
have been increasingly targeted. Among the many
victims are women, children and members of other
vulnerable groups. In this context, ensuring the
protection of children and of women is more important
than ever before.
Let me comment on some issues to which my
delegation attaches particular importance.
First, it is noteworthy that there have been some
encouraging developments in the effort to address the
effects of armed conflict on children. With the adoption
of resolution 1261 (1999), the issue of children in

17

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

armed conflict was placed on the peace and security
agenda. As a result, child protection advisers are now
deployed in peacekeeping operations and the roles of
both the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Children’s Fund have
been strengthened.
In this regard, we welcome the two discussions
on the issue of violence against children held by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, on 22 September
2000 and 28 September 2001. In particular, the
Committee’s recommendation that an in-depth study be
conducted on violence against children deserves our
close attention. The outcome of the workshop held last
July in Florence, Italy, entitled “Filling knowledge
gaps: a research agenda on the impact of armed conflict
on children”, could provide valuable guidelines for that
study.
Secondly, we are of the view that, as the most
universally accepted legal instrument, the Convention
on the Rights of the Child should constitute the
backbone of the legal framework for the protection and
promotion of children’s rights. We also welcome the
adoption of two Optional Protocols to further protect
children from armed conflict and prostitution. Through
the adoption of these legal instruments, the
international community has expressed its strong
conviction that, in the twenty-first century, violations
of the rights of children will not be tolerated.
Thirdly, despite these positive developments, the
tasks that still lie ahead are tremendous. As mentioned
in the report in document A/56/453, prepared by Mr.
Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, gaps persist
between international standards and the actual
protection of children in the field. Children in many
corners of the world continue to be killed, sexually
abused and recruited into armed forces.
In this regard, we need to make every effort to
finalize the outcome document for the special session
on children, which includes a section on the protection
of children in armed conflict. That section addresses a
range of critical issues, such as the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict; the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict; the
protection of refugee, unaccompanied and displaced
children; and effective and adequate assistance to
children affected by armed conflict.

18

Fourthly, particular attention should be paid to
the education of children in armed conflict.
International development and humanitarian agencies,
Governments, local authorities and civil society
organizations should make it a priority, during and after
periods of armed conflict, to ensure that children are
provided with educational materials and opportunities
at both the primary and secondary levels.
To enhance the effectiveness and sustainability of
this effort, it is imperative that local communities’
capacity-building be further developed. In this regard,
we appreciate the World Food Programme’s recent
participatory approach in adopting a food delivery
method that requires parents to send their children to
school in order to have food distributed to them.
Finally, we recognize that the primary
responsibility for the prosecution of violations rests
with national authorities. However, in cases where
there are gross violations of the rights of children, it is
important for Member States to collaborate in taking
concrete steps to investigate, prosecute and impose
sanctions upon individuals and groups involved in
illegal trafficking in currency, arms and natural
resources, which exacerbates armed conflict.
In closing, I would like to say that I am confident
that today’s debate will be fruitful and that all Member
States will demonstrate the necessary political
leadership and will to fight those who exploit children.
This is a cause that concerns all of us, for children
represent the hope and future of our world. The
Republic of Korea is committed to ending the suffering
inflicted on children in armed conflict and will support
the international endeavour to this end with all possible
means.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Slovenia. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Petrič (Slovenia): Let me first express my
sincere appreciation to you, Madam President, for
convening this open debate on a subject which is
especially dear to us, since Slovenia, as a nonpermanent member of the Security Council at the time,
had the privilege of contributing to the drafting, and of
participating in the adoption, of the important
resolution 1261 (1999), which recognized the
protection and well-being of war-affected children as
an important peace and security item.

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

We are pleased to see the significant progress that
has been achieved in the past two years. The Security
Council has played an active role in the protection of
children in armed conflict and has paid special
attention to children in its decision-making with regard
to peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building
operations. The Council also continued to play a
crucial role in calling on parties to implement existing
rules of international law that protect children in armed
conflict. We are pleased that the new draft resolution,
to be adopted today, takes into account action points
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General to
further improve the well-being of children affected by
armed conflict.
Slovenia associates itself with the statement
delivered by Belgium on behalf of the European Union,
and we fully endorse it. I would therefore like to
briefly highlight one particular point only.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict has stressed
one particular point on many occasions. He did so most
recently when referring to the situation in Afghanistan,
stating:
“No peace is likely to be sustainable unless
children and youth are provided with
rehabilitation and hope, so that they become a
constructive force in rebuilding their country.
Only by doing what is right for children today
can we build a solid foundation for peace and
security tomorrow.”
Following this idea, the Government of Slovenia,
together with a non-governmental organization,
Slovene Philanthropy, decided to launch an initiative
called “Together: the Regional Centre for the
Psychological Well-being of Children”. Thus we have
gone from worthy statements to real deeds.
By establishing and activating this centre,
Slovenia, a small United Nations Member with limited
resources, hopes to contribute to the well-being and
improve the mental health of war-affected children,
particularly in South-Eastern Europe. We believe that
long-term social conciliation in the region will depend
in particular on the psychological state of younger
generations. We wish to share our expertise in the area
of the mental health of children, as well as our
profound understanding of the situation in the region
and of the culture and traditions there. We would like
to make available our knowledge and resources for the

benefit of the children of the region. By establishing
the centre, Slovenia, in cooperation with other
interested countries and international and local
partners, hopes to create an efficient framework to
provide a comprehensive, continuous and organized
approach to providing protection and assistance to
traumatized children in South-Eastern Europe and,
possibly, elsewhere.
Let me also reiterate Slovenia’s recognition of
and strong support for the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu. I also wish to
express our recognition and strong support to the
United Nations Children’s Fund and to Ms. Bellamy
personally, and to other United Nations agencies and
organizations and non-governmental organizations
which contribute expertise, resources and operational
capacities for the well-being of children. Their
activities and cooperation are crucial for truly
ameliorating the plight of children. We also encourage
continuous and meaningful dialogue between the
Security Council, the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Last but not least, we hope that the General
Assembly’s special session on children, which had to
be postponed owing to the tragic events of 11
September, will resume in 2002 and will result in a
new and ambitious agenda for our children.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Motomura (Japan): My delegation is
grateful to the Security Council for providing us with
an opportunity to address the important issue of
children and armed conflict.
Children are our common treasures; they embody
our dreams and our hopes. This is why, at the
Millennium Summit last year, heads of State and
Government made a firm commitment to
“spare no effort to ensure that children ... that
suffer disproportionately the consequences of
natural disasters, genocide, armed conflicts and
other humanitarian emergencies are given every
assistance and protection so that they can resume
normal life as soon as possible.” (Resolution
55/2, para. 26)

19

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

Japan is deeply concerned that in recent armed
conflicts, increasing numbers of civilians, including
children, have been directly affected. In countless
cases, children have been hurt, killed, or uprooted from
their families and communities to become involved in
conflicts as soldiers. According to the SecretaryGeneral’s report “We the Children”, approximately
300,000 children are actively involved in armed
conflicts as soldiers at present. Children are also being
exploited, and we are particularly concerned about girls
who are sexually abused. These children consequently
suffer extreme trauma and psychosocial damage. In the
light of this reality, Japan wishes to stress the
importance
of
the
international
community’s
energetically tackling the issue in cooperation with
local non-governmental organizations.

community to provide former child soldiers with access
to basic and vocational education, and to establish a
social safety net for physically handicapped,
psychosocially traumatized or orphaned children. In
addition, special measures need to be taken for
sexually abused girl children in their communities.

I would like to share with the members of the
Security Council and the other participants in today’s
discussion some of the thoughts and initiatives of the
Government of Japan regarding this subject.

Thirdly, the issue of the sexual abuse and
exploitation of children in armed conflict, particularly
girls, indeed calls for a stronger response. In order to
strengthen the partnership in addressing the issue, it is
necessary to raise awareness and share information
among all the actors concerned. My delegation believes
that the Second World Congress against the
Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children, to be
held next month in Yokohama, Japan, will provide an
opportunity to realize this goal, as armed conflict is
one of the causes of the sexual abuse and exploitation
of children. The Government of Japan strongly calls for
high-level participation in the Congress by Member
States so that we can address the plight of children.

First, children must be protected from all
violence. The use of children as soldiers must be
ended, and in post-conflict situations such children
should be kept away from danger and cared for. The
following are examples of post-conflict activities in
which the Government of Japan has participated: a
project to reduce small arms in post-conflict areas,
such as Cambodia, as these weapons often create
tremendous obstacles to social and economic
development and are harmful to children; projects in
many parts of the world to eliminate anti-personnel
mines, which pose a great threat to children; and the
Reactivation of Quality Primary Education in Kosovo
project, which Japan has supported through the Trust
Fund for Human Security. At school, children receive
social rehabilitation attention, and trauma can be
alleviated. Support for a project to reintegrate former
child soldiers in Africa into society through the same
fund is now under consideration.

Before concluding, I cannot fail to touch upon the
situation of Afghan children. The Government of Japan
would like to reiterate its support for Security Council
resolution 1378 (2001), which calls upon all Afghan
forces to refrain from acts of reprisal and to adhere
strictly to their obligations under human rights
instruments and international humanitarian law. In this
connection, Japan welcomes the meeting to be held in
Berlin next week to discuss the transitional
administration to be established in Afghanistan in the
near future. It is the hope of my delegation that that
meeting, called for by Ambassador Brahimi, the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative
for
Afghanistan, will lead to the formation of a transitional
administration that will serve as the basis for a truly
broad-based Government conducive to the realization
of well-being for the Afghan people, including
children. We strongly call upon the Afghan parties to
act to achieve this end as soon as possible.

Secondly, former child soldiers must be socially
integrated. In this regard, in March this year, in
collaboration with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, the
Government of Japan conducted a survey on
reintegration of former child soldiers into society,
whose results made clear the significant role that the
community plays. Based on this survey, we believe that
more efforts should be made by the international

Furthermore, Japan would like to call for special
attention to be given to the situation of refugee and
internally displaced children in and around
Afghanistan, where the region’s severe winter is about
to begin. We must take action to ensure that
humanitarian aid reaches those children, and that
efforts for rehabilitation and reconstruction take fully
into account the plight of children. Japan, for its part,
will spare no effort to ensure that United Nations

20

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

agencies and non-governmental organizations are able
to carry out their work effectively.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
continuing commitment to working with the
international community to respond to the issue of
children and armed conflict, so that all children can
grow up in a family environment, in an atmosphere of
happiness, love and understanding.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of South Africa. I invite her to take a
seat at the Council table and to make her statement.
Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
your stewardship of the Council for the month of
November, and we wish to commend you for extending
the Secretary-General’s commitment to children by
holding this, our third open debate on children and
armed conflict. Once again, we are gathering to
consider urgent measures on how to deal with the
question of the exploitation of the world’s children in
situations of armed conflict.
The reports of the Secretary-General make key
recommendations in the face of numbing statistics of
child suffering, recruitment of child soldiers, child
abduction, internal displacement, loss of parents,
sexual abuse, particularly of girls, and the spread of
HIV/AIDS. Similarly, the data of the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) paint an horrific picture of
children killed in armed conflict, with millions more
injured, traumatized and orphaned.
We therefore commend the Security Council for
its continued debate on the issue and, in this regard,
refer to resolution 1314 (2000), adopted in August last
year, calling upon the international community to
condemn in the strongest possible terms the deliberate
targeting of children in situations of armed conflict.
The effective implementation of the resolution involves
a willingness to find solutions to the plight of waraffected children, and my delegation supports the
measures intended to protect them.
The consequences of war, acts of genocide, armed
conflicts, family violence, international terrorism,
organized crime, and trafficking in humans and drugs,
as well as weapons of mass destruction and the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, have
devastating consequences for children and a profound
impact on their lives and their communities.

Children are generally susceptible to all forms of
abuse and exploitation, the effects of which often shape
and define their personalities in adult life. To recruit
and lure children under false pretence to become
soldiers is an affront to civilized values but also a
fundamental
impediment
to
socio-economic
development.
The African continent has seen our children
suffer indescribable atrocities. Many are victims of
armed conflict or are forced to become soldiers. In
Burundi, Angola, Sierra Leone and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo children have been targets of
violence and even, unwillingly, perpetrators of
violence. Now, children in Afghanistan are facing the
world through war and human rights abuse. The
world’s children are in desperate need of protection.
South Africa ratified the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and supports its two Optional
Protocols on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and on the sale of children, child prostitution
and child pornography. We have also ratified the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
without any reservation.
The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict establishes 18 years as the minimum age
for participation in hostilities and prohibits recruitment
of persons under 18 years. In addition, the Protocol
bans all compulsory recruitment of children under
eighteen. South Africa amended its own legislation in
1999 when the Minister of Defence raised the age of
voluntary enlistment in the armed forces from 17 to 18
years. Currently, our Parliament is working towards
ensuring our speedy ratification of the Protocol.
We have also brought our voice into the
deliberations to finalize the draft outcome document
“A World Fit for Children” in preparation for the
special session of the General Assembly on children
due in May next year, in particular on the issue of
children in armed conflict. We hope that renewed
commitment at the highest political level during the
special session will ensure that many of the sentiments
of Security Council resolutions 1314 (2000) and 1261
(1999) will be fulfilled. We can no longer continue to
fail the children of the world.
Furthermore, South Africa supports the
provisions of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court and International Labour Organization

21

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

Convention No. 182, concerning the prohibition and
elimination of the worst forms of child labour. These
instruments deserve our full support because they offer
internationally recognized recourse to ensure the
protection of children in armed conflict. However,
formidable challenges remain. The impact of HIV/
AIDS will profoundly affect family structures.
International development targets for reducing infant
and under-five mortality rates in Africa remain illusive
goals. Chronic poverty, lack of affordable medical
interventions to reduce the risk factors associated with
the mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS, and
high levels of unemployment add to the problem.
The Government of South Africa remains
determined to address these problems and is eager to
work with other Governments, multilateral institutions
and the United Nations to ensure the effective
enforcement of the relevant United Nations instruments
with regard to the rights of the child. This includes our
intention to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and to
encourage other countries to ratify key international
treaties, conventions and protocols.
Commitments on paper and Security Council
debates remain a necessary but insufficient condition
for saving children from the scourge of armed conflict
and from being abused in order to further the war aims
of unscrupulous adults. While the consideration of this
important subject in the Council raises its political
profile, the Security Council needs to take a lead in
establishing the parameters of acceptable conduct with
regard to children in armed conflict situations.
The Council can act with a view to monitoring
and ensuring compliance with current Council
resolutions;
improving
communication
and
coordination with other United Nations organs and
authoritative bodies involved in the protection of
civilians, particularly children; ensuring that the postconflict environment nurtures the rights and needs of
children, including rehabilitation, which is integral to
future stability and development; and ensuring that the
it takes an integrated and interdisciplinary approach
and gives due consideration to the rights of children
when considering peacekeeping operations.
We should therefore remain constantly vigilant
for signs of abuse. We stand ready to exert pressure
where it is necessary. We should also encourage
recalcitrant parties to adhere to the letter and the spirit

22

of those international instruments that provide the most
basic and appropriate protection of the rights of the
child in situations of armed conflict.
Our children have a right to live in peaceful
situations in a world without wars. This should be our
legacy to their future. Children are the most universally
treasured gifts to parents in all societies, yet they are
the most vulnerable members of our modern and
conflict-ridden societies.
We appeal to all nations to nurture and protect
children so that they may be able to build a better
world for themselves and their own children. Children
in South Africa played a pivotal role in transforming
our country into a democratic order. It is just possible
that children, given the chance, will be the ones to
work the miracle of reconciliation in the world.
In closing, my delegation would like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for the
continued and committed efforts by Ms. Carol Bellamy
of UNICEF and Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, to
ensure that we all remain seized of the plight of
children caught up in conflict globally. We also thank
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for his moving personal account
of the life of a child soldier in Sierra Leone. We
welcome the Council’s intention to adopt a resolution
on children in armed conflict after this meeting.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Canada, whom I invite to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
First and foremost, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for having requested this public debate on
children and armed conflict. I know to what extent you
personally are interested in this matter. You and I both
witnessed the devastating consequences of armed
conflict on children in Sierra Leone.
The events of the last two months have reminded
us all how important it is to protect civilians, more
specifically, children, and they have also reminded us
that this task is highly relevant to the work of the
Council. Peace is only possible if we give priority to
human security.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his detailed and far-sighted report on children and
armed conflict. He emphasizes the fact that despite
laudable progress achieved, thanks to efforts made

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

recently, the task of the Council in this respect is far
from over.
(spoke in English)
Security Council resolutions 1261 (1999) and
1314 (2000) on children and armed conflict have
outlined the steps to be taken, the actors to be engaged
and the mechanisms to be used to increase the
protection of the rights of war-affected children and
their communities. We commend the Council for acting
on these guidelines with respect to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone. We need now
to focus more systematically on further implementation
of these provisions in the two landmark resolutions.
Doing so requires significant political will and
significant resources. The Secretary-General was right
to highlight this inescapable reality in his
recommendations throughout the report.
We welcome the adoption today by the Council of
this further, very significant resolution on this issue,
responding
to
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations and reaffirming the Council’s
commitment to protect children.
I would also like to congratulate Mr. Otunnu, the
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, and the United Nations Children’s Fund, in
partnership with non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and other United Nations agencies, for
integrating child protection into the peace and security
agenda. In particular, we encourage the United Nations
agencies to continue their efforts to improve training
on children’s rights for United Nations staff and to
evaluate the lessons learned from the incorporation of
child protection into peacekeeping operations despite
the meagre resources at their disposal to do so.
We need to continue to cooperate with NGOs on
the front lines of protecting children. In this regard, we
welcome the establishment of the NGO “watchlist” on
children and armed conflict. This initiative should
improve protection for the rights of children in specific
situations of armed conflict through better monitoring,
better reporting and better follow-up action before,
during and after conflicts.
In September 2000, Canada hosted in Winnipeg
an International Conference on War-Affected Children.
Many of you who are here today were present at that
Conference, and you will remember that it brought
together over 1,500 delegates — including

representatives of Governments, NGOs, United Nations
agencies and young people themselves — many of
whom have had first-hand experience with children in
armed conflict. The priorities for action outlined in
Winnipeg have had beneficial effects here. For
example, one of the promising outcomes of last
summer’s United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons was its
recognition of the devastating impact of small arms on
children.
Progress on child protection extends well beyond
the United Nations, of course. The Economic
Community of West African States has established a
child-protection unit within its secretariat; such
measures, I see, are called for in the resolution itself.
We believe that this is a potentially very important
initiative, and we hope it will serve as a model for
other regional organizations for integrating child
protection into their work.
It has been over a year since the Assembly
adopted the Optional Protocol to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Many States
have subsequently signed this new instrument, and 11
others have ratified it, moving us closer to a global ban
on the use of child soldiers. We encourage all
Governments present here to sign and ratify the
Protocol. Its universal ratification and implementation
are important steps for the protection of children.
One of the most pernicious violations of
children’s rights is the abduction, conscription and use
of children in armed conflict. Human Rights Watch
reports that earlier this month more than 100 primary
school students were abducted to serve as soldiers by
the Burundian rebel movement “Forces for the Defence
of Democracy”. Forces for the Defence of Democracy:
using child soldiers in its interpretation of democracy!
While several students escaped, dozens remain in rebel
hands. We call upon the perpetrators to release the
children, and we call upon the Council to condemn this
crime and to punish its authors.
Finally, a word about Graça Machel’s report,
“The Impact of Armed Conflict on Children”. The
Government of Canada, along with the Government of
Norway, helped commission the Machel review, an
update of Mrs. Machel’s ground-breaking 1996 study.
In it, she clearly reminds us all that there is still much
to be done to fulfil our promises to each other and to
the children.

23

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

Next spring’s special session on children will be
an important opportunity for us all to redeem those
promises. Let us together guarantee that the special
session will strengthen our commitment to children and
protect them. Let us progressively establish a new and
humane international norm of behaviour: no more child
soldiers.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Iraq, whom I invite to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of my delegation, Madam Chairman, I would like to
congratulate you on presiding over the work of the
Council this month. We are convinced that you will be
able to direct its work with the wisdom we know you
possess. My delegation would also like to thank you
for having convened this public meeting devoted to the
question of children and armed conflict. This is a
subject of paramount importance in today’s tumultuous
world.
We believe that your interest in children, your
experience and the fact that you presided over the
Preparatory Committee for the Special Session on
Children will make it possible to achieve concrete
results. Nor can I fail to thank Mr. Olara Otunnu, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for the presentation of
his report and for his efforts in this area. I very much
wish that, when he presented his report, he had referred
to the children of Palestine or of Iraq, particularly since
he quite correctly referred to the children of Africa,
particularly of Sierra Leone, and to the children of
Afghanistan. May I also thank the Executive Director
of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), who
has been making very sincere efforts. In fact, the
children of Iraq have witnessed the sincerity of her
efforts over the last 10 years.
Since we are taking up this important issue, it
should be noted that what we are trying to do here is to
carry out one of the most important tasks entrusted to
the United Nations. In fact, that task is referred to in
the Charter: “to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war”. As children are the most vulnerable
group in any society, it is quite natural that they should
be the first to be affected by armed conflict. Despite all
the efforts that have been made by the international
community for several decades to lay solid foundations
of international law to protect civilians in armed

24

conflict, and children in particular ─ efforts that have
led to a number of international instruments and
numerous declarations governing the conduct of
combatants and providing protection for the most
vulnerable members of society ─ we unfortunately
continue to see indifference towards children on the
part of certain people and even States. Children are
even being deliberately targeted, which is a flagrant
violation of international conventions and instruments,
as well as an undeniable international crime.
My delegation would like once again to
emphasize that the Security Council’s addressing this
matter is a very positive sign. However, this should not
prevent us from dealing with this issue in a broader and
more appropriate forum in which all States are
represented on an equal footing, namely, in the General
Assembly.
Because of the existing balance of power, the
Security Council has become incapable of dealing with
a number of cases of armed conflict. In fact, it has even
become the cause of a number of armed conflicts,
thereby subjecting children to suffering and daily
dislocation, starvation, bombings, killings and other
acts of aggression that have deprived them of the most
basic rights, particularly the right to life. The situation
of children in Iraq, Palestine and numerous other parts
of the world provides but a few striking examples of
this. Iraqi children were the first victims of the military
aggression by the United States and its allies against
Iraq in 1991. In the course of that aggression, over
88,000 tons of bombs were dropped, striking civilian
targets and our infrastructure: roads, bridges, hospitals,
schools, water purification plants, electric power
stations and so on.
All this has had a devastating impact on children,
both directly and indirectly; to say nothing of the use
of depleted uranium, which led to birth defects,
leukaemia and great suffering for children. At the time,
the United Nations simply stood by as a spectator of an
aggression that caused tens of thousands of child
victims and that continues to produce victims. Before
and after that aggression, the United States imposed an
unprecedentedly comprehensive sanctions regime on an
entire people in the name of the United Nations.
According to a UNICEF report published in
August 1999, those overall sanctions led to the deaths
of 500,000 Iraqi children under the age of 5 between
1991 and 1998. As of today, the number of civilian

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

victims resulting from the sanctions against Iraq has
reached over 1.6 million, most of them children. The
sanctions are killing 5,000 Iraqi children monthly. The
least one can say about this is that it is a crime of
genocide being experienced today with the full
knowledge of the Security Council. Despite all this, the
United Nations is still incapable of providing even the
slightest explanation as to why these sanctions that are
killing children every day continue to be in place.
As if that vengeance were not enough, the United
States and the United Kingdom continue to take
revenge on the Iraqi people, including children, despite
the norms of international law and the United Nations
Charter. Both those States have imposed no-fly zones
in the northern part of Iraq since 1991. Those zones
were extended to the south of Iraq in 1992. American
military planes are daily bombing civilian targets in
Iraq, killing children, causing terror in villages and
towns, burning agricultural land and destroying
schools. Despite the entire international community’s
condemnation of those daily acts of terrorist
aggression, and despite the statement made by the
United Nations to the effect that a no-fly zone
constituted a unilateral use of force against a sovereign
State, the Security Council and the United Nations do
not appear to be in a position to end that aggression
and terrorism.
The Palestinian people is also subject to
occupation and oppression. Their lands have been
usurped. Their villages and towns have been destroyed
and are under siege. All of this is happening without
the United Nations making any attempt to take any
concrete steps against the Zionist entity, the main
perpetrator of that aggression or against Zionist
terrorism, which mows down Palestinian children.
Those children are suffering from very serious
psychological trauma, which has a severe impact on
their future.
We have chosen to refer exclusively to these two
situations by way of example to emphasize that the
United Nations and the international community are
still far from achieving their objective of fully
respecting duties and commitments entered into for the
protection of children in conflict and post-conflict
situations. The United Nations still has a great deal to
do in order to stop, bring to justice and punish those
who perpetrate violence and violate the rights of
children. We refer primarily to those who use the
machinery of the United Nations to target children and

who exert pressure to prevent the United Nations from
playing its proper role in the protection of children.
We would also have liked the draft resolution that
is now before the Security Council, and which we
learned of only a few hours ago, to have contained
some provisions about children under foreign
occupation, or those under the effects of embargo.
We would have also preferred it had the Council
not been so abominably selective, once again, due to
certain pressures.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Israel. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lancry (Israel): On behalf of my
Government, I wish to express our satisfaction at the
convening of this debate. Protection of the rights of the
child, particularly in areas of conflict, has been a
matter of concern to the international community for
some time. This concern stems from our recognition
that childhood is a period of innocence and dreams,
and yet, all too often, the harsh realities of war and
unrest have denied children the right to grow and
develop in a nurturing environment of peace and
stability.
Israel wishes to thank the Secretary-General for
his excellent report on children and armed conflict, and
for
the
many
insightful
and
important
recommendations contained therein for protecting and
defending the rights of the child.
The situation of children in areas of conflict is
one of the most heart-wrenching issues we address in
the United Nations. The images of suffering that we
have all seen emerge from virtually every corner of the
earth. The manner in which so many children around
the world are taken from their homes and schools,
physically and emotionally abused, and forced to fight
in wars they did not start is a matter that must be of
concern to all of us.
The international community has repeatedly
affirmed that children must be spared the horrors of
armed conflict. The Secretary-General’s report offers
important recommendations, first and foremost among
which is adherence to the relevant international
conventions, which, if they were widely respected,
would almost entirely solve the problem of children in
armed conflict.

25

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

In our region, children have suffered terribly from
decades of conflict and from the still-looming threat of
terrorism. The Middle East has endured more than its
share of wars, which have left scars on all people in the
region, but particularly on children.

world is supplanted by indoctrination into endless
struggle. When it comes to the education of our
children, we must take a long view of the situation and
consider their well-being and the nature of the society
they will inherit.

For these reasons, Israel has supported
international initiatives aimed at protecting children
from the devastation of armed conflict, including the
landmark Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Israel’s accession to the Convention was followed by
the adoption of “Basic Law: Human Dignity and
Liberty”, a law that ensured that the rights of the child
were guaranteed constitutional protection. The
adoption of that law sparked a flurry of judicial and
legislative activity that broadened and extended the
commitment of Israeli society to the principles of the
Convention.

The scars that war and terror inflict on children
are immeasurable and can result in psychological
problems and antisocial behaviour long after the
conflict has ended. Children will be truly sheltered
from the horrors of war only when terrorism comes to
an end and they are no longer viewed as pawns in a
larger struggle.

Our Foreign Minister, Mr. Shimon Peres, who
was in New York last week for the general debate,
signed the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, and on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography, signifying Israel’s
enduring commitment to preserving the innocence of
youth, as part of a fundamental right enjoyed by all
children. Israel’s becoming a signatory to the Optional
Protocols is sure to inspire yet more revisions to Israeli
legislation.
The report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2000/712 correctly draws attention to the
importance of education and to its potential for use and
misuse in times of conflict. The report refers to
separate curriculums that must be unified, and, in
paragraph 46, to “distinct history lessons… [that]
obstruct long-term reconciliation”. It draws attention to
the phenomenon whereby schools are used as
recruitment centres and teachers are instructed to
convince children of the nobility and glory of war and
martyrdom.
The significance of these factors cannot be
underestimated. Children who are taught to hate and to
embrace death and violent struggle will not grow up to
be responsible adults prepared to live in peace and to
resolve differences peacefully.
They will, instead, believe in the power and
virtue of force and violence. Conflicts will be
perpetuated in every corner of the globe if teaching the
next generation the skills it needs to succeed in the

26

In this respect, I would like to express my regret
that the Permanent Representative of Egypt, speaking
about the plight of Palestinian children, did not find it
necessary to utter a single word of concern about the
dozens of Israeli children decimated by Palestinian
terrorism this last year. The 23 Israeli children and
adolescents savagely assassinated by a Palestinian
suicide bomber last June in the Dolphinarium
discotheque attack in Tel-Aviv were totally ignored by
the Permanent Representative of Egypt, as if this
horrific event had never occurred. That is only one
dramatic example in a series of gruesome carnages in
which scores of Israeli children met their deaths. The
fact is that Israel deeply regrets any harm to civilians,
both Israeli and Palestinian, but especially to children,
who should be kept in school rather than on the front
lines of conflict.
I should also like to remind the Permanent
Representative of Egypt that those who incite others to
violence, encourage extremism and tolerate the most
vile anti-Semitic rhetoric in their official media also
bear responsibility for the abuse of Palestinian children
and the continued suffering on both sides.
In closing, I would like to reaffirm our position
that the protection of children in armed conflict is best
achieved by ending armed conflict. Our attempts to
protect the lives and well-being of our children cannot
be separated from our broader efforts to ensure that
peace, security and prosperity extend to every region of
the world.
Promoting peaceful means for the resolution of
conflicts, widening educational opportunities and
teaching our children to value life and the lives of
others will protect not only our children but all of us
from the horrors of war.

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Nigeria. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): Nigeria is pleased to
participate in today’s Council debate on children and
armed conflict. We are delighted to see Jamaica
presiding over yet another open debate of the Security
Council on the well-being of children during and after
armed conflict. My delegation appreciates the efforts of
the Council in keeping the issue of children on its
agenda. Let me also recall with appreciation, Madam
President, your role as Chairperson of the Preparatory
Committee for the Special Session of the General
Assembly on Children: the 10-year review of the
outcome of the World Summit for Children.
The story that Alhaji Babah Sawaneh told the
Council this morning was a graphic presentation of the
challenges facing child soldiers during and after
conflicts, especially in the African region. But the story
also pointed to the urgency of remedial action by the
international community to translate into action the
shared commitment to protect children in armed
conflict. In that regard, we thank the Secretary-General
for his statement and for his report (S/2001/852). We
also welcome the detailed statement to the Council of
the Special Representative of the Secretary General,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, whose clear advocacy and concern
for children caught in conflict are shared by the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol Bellamy. We thank them
all for their engagement on this issue.
We are gratified to note that today’s debate is the
fourth the Council has had on the issue of children and
armed conflict. That is pursuant to resolutions 1261
(1999) and 1314 (2000), and it underscores the
Council’s commitment and its resolve to address the
issue of children in conflict on account of its relevance
to international peace and security.
The need for action cannot be overemphasized.
Children who are traumatized by the experience of war
are scarred for life, both physically and
psychologically. Because they are made to serve as
child soldiers, they may grow up to embrace violence
unless they are properly rehabilitated. The case of girls
is even worse, as they are vulnerable to sexual abuse,
rape and addiction; they are also exposed to HIV/AIDS
and other infectious diseases.

The international community therefore cannot
afford to stand aloof in the face of this deplorable
situation. A conducive atmosphere in which children
can develop must be created. In our region, a number
of initiatives have been taken to address the problem,
as part of a broad commitment to enhancing the social,
economic and cultural well-being of women and
children. These include the establishment of a child
protection unit within the Economic Community of
West African States last April to protect and enhance
the rights of children caught in conflict situations in the
West African subregion.
Undoubtedly, the Convention on the Rights of the
Child provides us with the most comprehensive
instrument for strengthening the rights of children
affected by armed conflict. It is noteworthy that, as we
learned from the statement of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Optional
Protocol to the Convention will enter into force next
February. However, ratifications of the Convention and
of the Protocol are not enough; they should be backed
by concrete action. Nigeria is committed to the
implementation of those and other relevant
instruments.
We welcome the increased level of cooperation
and
partnerships
among
Governments,
nongovernmental organizations and civil society to provide
education, training and humanitarian relief to affected
children. It is imperative that the rehabilitation of waraffected children be sustained and properly completed
so as to facilitate their integration into society. There is
also a need to ensure the provision of adequate
resources for ongoing United Nations peacekeeping
missions to enable them to carry out demobilization
and rehabilitation programmes. We also encourage the
establishment of child protection units and the
inclusion of monitoring provisions in United Nations
peacekeeping and peace-building mandates.
Finally, it is our hope that war-affected children
throughout the world — and especially in Rwanda,
Sierra Leone and Angola — will find in the draft
resolution on which the Council will be taking action at
the end of this debate the support and sustenance they
deserve.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

27

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): At the outset, Madam
President, allow me to congratulate you and the other
members of the Council on once again convening an
open debate on the important issue of children and
armed conflict. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2001/852) on
children
and
armed
conflict
and
for
the
recommendations he made in that report.
In today’s wars, children have become
increasingly involved both as targets of violence and as
combatants. It is estimated that more than 500,000
children have been recruited as combatants in 87
countries. At least 300,000 are actively participating in
conflicts and are directly involved in combat in 41
countries. Although most child soldiers are between 15
and 18 years old, others are as young as 7.
The world leaders who gathered at the 1990
World Summit for Children committed themselves,
among other things, to taking political action at the
highest level to protect children from the scourge of
war and to take measures to prevent further armed
conflict. The Secretary-General has rightly observed,
and we entirely agree with him, that the best way to
address the problem of children in armed conflict is to
prevent armed conflict from occurring in the first
place. Hence his emphasis on the promotion of a
culture of peace and prevention.
Children have been used in support services and
even as soldiers throughout history. However, the rise
in intra-State conflict has exacerbated the conditions,
such as internal displacement, refugee flight and the
separation of families, that are most likely to pressure a
child to become a soldier. It is thus impossible to make
a distinction between a forced and a voluntary child
soldier. Some children join armed groups for food,
survival or to avenge atrocities in their communities;
others have been physically abducted for war by armed
groups.
Children commonly start out in support roles but
often end up on the front lines of combat, planting or
detecting landmines or participating in first-wave
assaults. Often plied with drugs and given promises of
food, shelter and security, child soldiers are at times
forced to commit atrocities against other armed groups
and civilian populations, including sometimes their
own families and communities.
The use of children in armed conflict is greatly
facilitated by an estimated 500 million small arms and

28

light weapons worldwide. These weapons are
inexpensive and are durable, small, lightweight, easy to
maintain and small enough for a 10-year-old to handle.
Illegal arms trafficking and poor monitoring of the
legal trade make it easy for nearly anyone to obtain
these weapons and to put them into the hands of
children.
That being the case, the protection of children in
armed conflict should be all encompassing. They
should be assured of their physical security, as well as
provided with legal protection under international law.
We cannot deny the fact that in many conflict
situations, the most vulnerable members of the
population, particularly women and children, are
targeted with impunity. My delegation is of the firm
conviction that there should be no leniency or amnesty
for crimes against innocent children. At the same time,
we have to be humane in dealing with children who are
manipulated by unscrupulous adults to take part in
armed conflicts, as in the tragic case of the children of
Sierra Leone.
My delegation also condemns in the strongest
terms the use of rape as a deliberate weapon in warfare.
The spread of a practice that degrades women and
children must not be tolerated. It must be condemned
in the strongest terms. We agree entirely with the call
by the Secretary-General for sexual violence against
women and children to continue to be prosecuted as a
war crime, and with the Statute of the International
Criminal Court, which designates rape as both a crime
against humanity and a war crime.
My delegation commends the excellent work
being carried out by the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), the Offices of the United Nations
High Commissioners for Refugees and for Human
Rights, as well as Ambassador Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, in drawing attention to the
problem and improving the condition of children
affected by situations of armed conflict. While we
appreciate their enormous efforts in working with
Governments to improve the lives of children
everywhere, we are concerned with what we perceive
to be gaps in the protection of children, particularly
those in the Middle East.
We are of the view that in order to have any
meaningful discussion of this subject, the issue of the
Middle East must be addressed. Between the paralysis

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

of the Security Council on the Middle East issue and
the focus by the Special Representative on situations of
armed conflict predominantly in Africa, the plight of
Palestinian children and children under foreign
occupation seems all but forgotten. It is a sad state of
affairs indeed when we ignore the suffering of these
children merely because we cannot find a political
solution to the problem of the Middle East. Should the
issue be one of lack of mandate, then my delegation
suggests that this be looked into and remedied without
delay.
One must not quibble over issues of mandate
when children become victims of an ongoing conflict,
as is clearly the case in the occupied Palestinian
territory, where out of some 800 Palestinians killed and
over 20,000 wounded since September last year, a very
high proportion comprises children. According to a
UNICEF official based in Arab Jerusalem, Israel has
arrested more than 600 children since September last
year, sometimes holding them in harsh conditions.
Another area of concern to my delegation is the
plight of children suffering under sanctions. Being the
blunt instruments that they are despite efforts to make
them more targeted, sanction regimes have the most
debilitating effect on children. Reports of United
Nations specialized agencies and non-governmental
organizations have highlighted the catastrophic effects
the comprehensive sanctions imposed on Iraq have had,
claiming the lives of more than 1.5 million people,
mostly children. It is shocking and scandalous that,
according to UNICEF, half a million children under the
age of five could have been saved had sanctions not
been imposed on Iraq.
Child and maternal mortality in that country has
increased many times over, ranking among the highest
in the world. If the United Nations does not want to be
further stigmatized by the dire plight of children in
Iraq, immediate steps must be taken to end their
suffering. My delegation has persistently called for the
immediate review and lifting of comprehensive
sanctions. We would urge that all future sanctions — if
they need to be invoked at all as a necessary measure
of last resort — should be imposed only after an indepth and careful study of their potential impact on
civilians, especially children.
My delegation welcomes the imminent entry into
force of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in

armed conflict with its tenth ratification, by New
Zealand on Monday, 12 November 2001. It is the
fervent hope of my delegation that the Optional
Protocol will hugely advance our fight to end the use of
children as soldiers. We recommend all Member States
to become parties. For our part, Malaysia is closely and
actively studying the provisions of the Optional
Protocol, with a view to its signature.
The President: I shall now give the floor to Mr.
Olara Otunnu for brief closing remarks.
Mr. Otunnu: Given the late hour, my remarks
will be very brief. I thank you, Madam President, and
all the members of the Council for this debate. I have
taken note of the critique, the comments and the
proposals by members, and I shall do everything within
my power to act on them.
Secondly, I want to say that the mandate that has
been entrusted to me concerns the fate of children in all
situations of armed conflict.
Let me say, thirdly, that all of us, especially
within
the
international
community,
cannot
discriminate among children affected by armed
conflict, regardless of their geographic location or the
political circumstance in which they may be, which is
the reason why I said this morning that all the children
are waiting for the same thing — redemption songs.
I have also taken note of the tremendous desire
on the part of Council members to see the gap between
words and deeds narrowed, and I hope that the next
time we return to this debate in the Council there may
be some concrete, even if modest, steps, made to try to
bridge this gap.
Finally, I want to say that I have taken note of the
wish of the Council to see a particular focus on
Afghanistan. I shall be working very closely with
UNICEF and other colleagues within the United
Nations system and the leadership of Ambassador
Brahimi to make this indeed an example of a more
comprehensive and proactive response to the needs and
the rights of children.
Once again I thank the Council. I thank the
Council very much for allowing Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
to address the Council on this occasion. It has been a
historic day.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Carol
Bellamy for her closing remarks.

29

S/PV.4422 (Resumption 1)

Ms. Bellamy: I, too, will be brief. I would like to
begin first by saying on behalf of UNICEF that we
really appreciate the opportunity to participate, and to
participate with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. I
think the partnership that we have developed over the
last several years is an increasingly strong one and one
that, from UNICEF’s perspective, we appreciate very
much and we hope that we complement each other in
the work that we do.
I would just like to briefly express my
appreciation for the Council’s strong commitment to
address child protection issues and to integrate the
child dimension into all its deliberations — whether on
thematic issues such as small arms and light weapons
and HIV/AIDS, or more country-specific issues such as
the collaboration between peacekeepers and the United
Nations country teams, the need for better information
on the situations of children or better monitoring and
reporting on violations.
I would also like to acknowledge the positive
response to Alhaji’s participation. I hope this augurs
well for the potential of involving children and young
people themselves in the work of the Council. I also
wish, as an aside, to apologize for returning a bit late in
the afternoon. Anyone who had been with me would
have seen his good form on the football field as he
participated in the announcement today of the
partnership between the International Federation of
Association Football (FIFA) and UNICEF during the
2002 World Cup, which will be held in Japan and
Korea.

30

I also wish to state my appreciation for the
continued high-level importance that the Council
attaches to the special session on children, which will
indeed be held and be even more special than ever, we
hope. We also hope that the portion of the outcome
document devoted to the issue of children affected by
conflict will be strong and clear in its final
presentation.
We recognize the importance that the Council has
attributed to the adoption of the Optional Protocol,
education and the need for a special focus on girls.
Finally, I would just like to conclude by saying
we also recognize that this is not the first time that the
Security Council has considered these issues. This is
about the fourth time, at least, that there has been a
clear recognition that the well-being of the world’s
children is indeed a matter of global security. But we
would urge that the broad consensus on children
affected by conflict, which is reflected in the strong
draft resolution, be applied in the Security Council’s
response to specific country situations.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting was adjourned at 6.25 p.m.
