United Nations

A/RES/70/261

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 May 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda item 23 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 15 April 2016
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/70/L.45)]

70/261. Modalities for the Comprehensive High-level Midterm
Review of the Implementation of the Istanbul Programme
of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011–2020
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 69/231 of 19 December 2014 and 70/216 of
22 December 2015 on the follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries,
Reaffirming its resolutions 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming
our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, and 69/313 of 27 July
2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development,
1.
Recommends the provisional agenda of the Comprehensive High-level
Midterm Review of the Implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action for the
Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020, as set out in document
A/CONF.228/1, for adoption at the Midterm Review;
2.
Recalls the modalities approved in its resolutions 69/231 and 70/216 , and
decides that the present resolution amends and complements these modalities and
that further decisions regarding arrangements for the Midterm Review may be taken
by the President of the General Assembly in consultation with Member States;
3.
Requests the co-facilitators to present a draft outcome document in the
form of a political declaration, by the first half of March 2016 and in advance of the
preparatory meeting of experts, prepared on the basis of inputs from the national
and regional preparatory meetings, the report of the Secretary-General and other
inputs, including those from Member States;
4.
Decides that the Midterm Review shall elect from among the
representatives of participating States the following officers: a President and an
ex officio Vice-President from the host country, and nine Vice-Presidents, 1 one of
whom shall be designated as Rapporteur;
_______________
1

Two from each of the following groups: African States, Asia-Pacific States, Eastern European States and
Latin American and Caribbean States; and one from Western European and other States.

15-17015 (E)

*15-17015*

Please recycle

Modalities for the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of the
Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/261

5.
Also decides that the Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small
Island Developing States shall serve as the Secretary-General of the Midterm
Review, and shall be responsible for making all the necessary arrangements for
carrying out the work of the Midterm Review;
6.
Further decides that the opening plenary meeting of the Midterm Review
will include statements by the President of the Midterm Review, the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, the President of the General Assembly, the President
of the Economic and Social Council, the former and current Chair of the Group of
Least Developed Countries, the President of the European Commission, the Chair of
the African Union, the President of the World Bank Group and one representative
each from civil society and the private sector;
7.
Decides that the Midterm Review four thematic round-table meetings, to
be held in parallel with the plenary meetings, will be scheduled as follows:
27 May 2016, from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.
28 May 2016, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.
29 May 2016, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
8.
Also decides that the thematic meetings will focus on identifying
concrete suggestions to further strengthen the global partnership for development
for least developed countries in all priority areas of the Istanbul Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011 –2020 2 in order to
ensure the timely, effective and full implementation of the Programme of Action
during the remainder of the decade, while taking into account synergy and
coherence of the Programme of Action with global processes, including the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, 3 the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development ,4 the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, 5 and the Paris Agreement under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 6 and that the four round tables
will be held on the following themes:
Round table 1: Productive capacity, agriculture, food security and rural
development
Round table 2: Trade and commodities; and economic diversification and
graduation
Round table 3: Human and social development; and good governance at all
levels
Round table 4: Multiple crises and other emerging challenges; and mobilizing
financial resources for development and capacity-building
9.
Further decides that the organizational arrangements of the round tables
will be as follows:
_______________
2

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey,
9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
3
Resolution 70/1.
4
Resolution 69/313, annex.
5
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
6
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.

2/3

Modalities for the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of the
Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/261

(a) Each round table will be co-chaired by two Chairs, one from the least
developed countries and one from the development partners, to be appointed b y the
President of the Midterm Review, from among representatives at the level of Head
of State or Government and/or at the ministerial level;
(b) The Secretary-General of the Midterm Review, in consultation with the
President of the General Assembly, will select up to four panellists for each of the
round tables, and the panel discussion will be followed by an interactive debate
among States and other relevant representatives and stakeholders;
(c) The round tables will be interactive and open to all co nference
participants. There will be no prepared list of speakers. At the discretion of the
Chair or Chairs, priority in the order of speakers will be given to those speaking at
the level of Head of State or Government or at the ministerial level. The roun d
tables will aim to achieve a balance among speakers from all stakeholders. In order
to provide for maximum participation, interventions should not exceed three
minutes. Representatives are invited to indicate to the Secretariat by e -mail if they
will be represented in a round table at the level of Head of State or Government or
at the ministerial level;
10. Decides that summaries of the round-table meetings will be presented
orally by the Co-Chairs at the closing plenary meeting;
11. Reiterates the importance of the effective participation of all relevant
stakeholders, including parliamentarians, civil society and the private sector, in the
Midterm Review and its preparatory process, and decides that:
(a) Non-governmental organizations that are in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council and non-governmental organizations accredited to the
Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries shall register
with the Secretariat in order to participate in the Midterm Review;
(b) The President of the General Assembly shall also draw up a list of
representatives of other relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society
organizations, academic institutions and the private sector who may participate in
the Midterm Review as observers, taking into account the principles of transparency
and of equitable geographical representation, and will submit the proposed list to
Member States for their consideration on a non-objection basis and bring the list to
the attention of the Assembly. 7
91st plenary meeting
15 April 2016

_______________
7

The list will include proposed as well as final names. The general basis of any objections, if requested by
one or more States Members of the United Nations or States members of the specialized agencies, will be
made known to the Office of the President of the General Assembly and the requester.

3/3
