IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

date an international convention against the recruitment,
use, financing and training of mercenaries;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee, in the fulfilment
of its mandate, to consider the suggestions and proposals
of Member States, bearing in mind the views and comments
submitted to the Secretary-General2° and those expressed
at the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly during
the debate in the Sixth Committee devoted to the consideration of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee; 21
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to
the Ad Hoe Committee at its next session the texts of the
conventions drafted by international and regional organizations on mercenaries, as well as any other relevant
documentation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Ad
Hoe Committee with any assistance and facilities it may
require for the performance of its work;
6. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit its report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Report of the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment. Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries" .
85th plenary meeting
4 December /98/

36/106.

Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and
Security of Mankind

The General Assembly,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations for
the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of
international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolution I 77 (II) of 2 I November 1947.
by which it directed the International Law Commission to
prepare a draft code of offences against the peace and security of mankind,
Having considered the draft Code of Offences against the
Peace and Security of Mankind prepared by the International
Law Commission and submitted to the General Assembly
in 1954, 22
Recalling its belief that the elaboration of a code of offences against the peace and security of mankind could
contribute to strengthening international peace and security
and thus to promoting and implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations.
Bearing in mind its resolution 33/97 of 16 December
1978, by which it decided to accord priority and the fullest
consideration to the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences
against the Peace and Security of Mankind",
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General2 3
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 35/49
of 4 December 1980,
Considering that the International Law Commission has
just accomplished an important part of its work devoted to
the succession of States in respect of State property, archives

20

See A/35/366 and Add.1-3 and A/361438.
Official Records of the General As.,emblv, Thirrv-sixrh Session, Sixth
Committee, 16th-23rd and 57th meetings; and ibid., Sixth Committee,
Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
22
Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/2693). para. 54.
23
A/36/416.
21

239

and debts and that the programme of work is thus at present
lightened,
Taking into consideration that the membership of the
International Law Commission was increased during the
thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly 24 and that it
has at its disposal a new mandate of five years to organize
its future work,
Taking into account the views expressed during the debate
on this item at the current session,
Taking note of paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 36/114 of 10 December I 981 on the report of the
International Law Commission,
I. Invites the International Law Commission to resume
its work with a view to elaborating the draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind and to
examine it with the required priority in order to review it,
taking duly into account the results achieved by the process
of the progressive development of international law;
2. Requests the International Law Commission to consider at its thirty-fourth session the question of the draft
Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind
in the context of its five-year programme and to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the
priority it deems advisable to accord to the draft Code, and
the possibility of presenting a preliminary report to the Assembly at its thirty-eighth session bearing, inter alia, on the
scope and the structure of the draft Code;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his invitation to Member States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations to present or update their
comments and observations on the draft Code of Offences
against the Peace and Security of Mankind, and to submit
a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the International Law Commission all the necessary documentation, comments and observations presented by Member
States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations on the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against
the Peace and Security of Mankind";
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind" and to
accord it priority and the fullest possible consideration.
92nd plenary meeting
/0 December 1981

36/107.

Progressive development of the principles and
norms of international law relating to the new
international economic order
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter of

the United Nations, the General Assembly is called upon
to initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling its resolutions 34/ 150 of 17 December 1979
and 35/166 of 15 December 1980, entitled "Consolidation
'" See sect. II, resolution 36/39.
