S/PRST/2005/9

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 February 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5131st meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 February 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Cross-border
issues in West Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has carefully reviewed the Progress Report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/86) dated 11 February 2005, on the implementation
of the recommendations of the Council on cross-border and subregional
problems in West Africa and reaffirms the statement of its President,
S/PRST/2004/7 of 25 March 2004.
“The Council notes with appreciation the enhanced cooperation among
the various United Nations political and peace-keeping missions in the
subregion and looks forward to receiving the Secretary-General’s forthcoming
report on intermissions cooperation. The Council also welcomes the growing
and constructive partnership between the United Nations system, Economic
Organization of West African States (ECOWAS), individual Member States,
key bilateral and multilateral development partners, as well as civil society
organizations, including women’s organizations, aimed at addressing the many
complex challenges confronting the West African subregion.
“The Council reiterates its belief that action on cross-border and
subregional issues should take place as part of a wider strategy of conflict
prevention, crisis management and peace-building in the subregion. The
Council thus also encourages the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA) further to promote an integrated and joint subregional approach
with ECOWAS and the African Union, as well as with other key international
partners and civil society organizations.
“The Council welcomes the encouraging prospects for the reactivation of
the Mano River Union and the resumption of dialogue among its Member
States, notably on ways to deal with mercenaries. It also welcomes initiatives
taken by ECOWAS, to establish a Small Arms Unit and to adopt a new Small
Arms Control Programme (ECOSAP) and its ongoing efforts to transform the
Moratorium signed in Abuja on 31 October 1998, on the import, export and
manufacture of small arms and light weapons, into a binding convention.
“The Council welcomes the decision of the European Commission on
2 December 2004 to assist ECOWAS in implementing its plans to combat the

05-24968 (E) 250205

*0524968*

S/PRST/2005/9

illicit dissemination of small arms. The Council reiterates its call on all
Member States and Organizations, in a position to do so, to extend further
assistance to ECOWAS in this field. The Council calls on arms producing and
exporting countries and West African States to explore ways in which they can
ensure the implementation of the Moratorium.
“The Council calls on Member States and key international partners to
explore practical ways of assisting ECOWAS in enhancing its capacities in the
areas of conflict prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping, including
through the provision of technical expertise, training programmes, and
logistical and financial resources. In this connection, the Council reaffirms the
crucial importance of the reintegration of ex-combatants, taking into account
the special needs of child soldiers and women, in order to reverse the culture
of violence and create an enabling environment for national reconciliation in
countries emerging from conflict, and reiterates its call to the international
community to provide adequate funding to this end.
“The Council underlines that ongoing or emerging crises in West Africa
are a threat to the subregional stability and, in this regard, notes with deep
concern the tensions emerging and ongoing in some countries over the transfer
of power, involving members of security and armed forces, and which may
further obstruct efforts to stabilize the subregion.
“The Council recalls in this regard the African Union position on
unconstitutional changes of governments, as stated in the 1999 Algiers
Declaration and the 2000 Lomé Declaration.
“The Council welcomes the action taken by ECOWAS and the African
Union to address these issues.
“The Council expresses its deep concern about the involvement of
individuals including those from security and armed forces in such illicit
activities as smuggling of arms, drugs and natural resources, human
trafficking, extortion at roadblocks and money laundering, in the context of
mismanagement in the administration of justice, and weak government
capacity to fight against criminal activities and impunity. The Council stresses
the need to pay special attention to those critical issues that have direct bearing
on efforts to enhance peace, stability and democratic governance in West
African countries.
“The Council emphasizes the need to pursue security sector reforms
aiming at improving civil-military relations in countries emerging from
conflict situations and creating a culture of peace and stability and promoting
the rule of law. In this regard, the Council requests the UNOWA to further
explore with interested governments and organizations ways in which security
sector reforms could be formulated and implemented.
“In this regard, the Council welcomes the ongoing efforts of ECOWAS,
in collaboration with the United Nations Office of Drug Control, to improve
border control mechanisms in West Africa by facilitating the flow of
information among national law enforcement authorities, as well as regional
networking and cooperation in the law enforcement issues.

2

S/PRST/2005/9

“The Council reiterates the importance of curbing the growing risks of
instability along some border areas. The Council, therefore, encourages
UNOWA to facilitate, in close cooperation with the ECOWAS Executive
Secretariat and its member States concerned, the implementation of strategies
developed for sensitive border zones in the subregion and calls on the donors
to support these efforts.
“The Council stresses the need to help West African States to curb illicit
cross-border activities and to strengthen the capacities of the civil society
groups working to promote a cross-border culture of non-violence and peace.
“The Council further emphasizes the need to generate economic
activities and foster development as a means of promoting sustainable peace in
the subregion. It urges international donors to assist ECOWAS States to
address that need.
“The Council reaffirms the urgency of finding lasting solutions to the
problem of youth unemployment in order to prevent the recruitment of such
youth by illegal armed groups. In this connection, the Council requests the
Secretary-General to include in his next progress report practical
recommendations on how best to tackle the problem of youth unemployment.
“The Council urges the donor countries, international organizations and
civil society to address the dire humanitarian situation in many parts of the
subregion and to provide adequate resources in the framework of the
Consolidated Appeals Process 2005 for West Africa as part of a regional
humanitarian response strategy to improve the human security of the people in
dire need of protection or those whose coping capacities are close to
exhaustion.
“The Council expresses its intention to keep these issues under review
and requests the Secretary-General to report on them regularly through his
reports on the United Nations missions in the subregion.”

3
