Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Foorth Committee

Recalling further all previous resolutions concerning
the question of Southern Rhodesia adopted by the General Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolution 2769 (XXVI) of 22 November 1971, in particular paragraphs 1 and 2 thereof,
Gravely concerned at the "proposals far a settlement"
which, if implemented, will entrench the rule of the
racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia and will
perpetuate the enslavement of the African people of
Zimbabwe,
Deeply conscious that the "proposals for a settlement" were agreed upon without the participation of
the representatives of the African people of Zimbabwe,
l. Rejects the "proposals far a settlement" agreed
upan by the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the racist
minority régime in Salisbury as constituting a flagrant
viol~tion of the inalienable right of the African people
of Z1_mbabwe_ to self-determination and independence as
prov1ded for m GeneralAssembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Reafjirms that no settlement which does not
conform strictly to the principie of "no independence
befare !llajority rule" on the basis of one man, one
vote, w1ll be acceptable;
3. Invites the Security Council, when examining the
question of Southern Rhodesia, to consider taking appropriate measures, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, in
arder to enable the people of Zimbabwe to exercise
freely and without further delay their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence;
4. Welcomes the decision by the Security Council
on 2 December 1971 52 to invite Mr. Joshua Nkomo
and the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole, the respective
leaders of the Zimbabwe African People's Union and
the Zimbabwe African National Union, to appear befare the Council to express their views concerning the
future status of the Territory, and calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom, as the administering
Power, to comply with that decision;
5. Calls upon all States to adhere strictly to the
relevant provisions of the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council on the question
of Southern Rhodesia, and in particular to observe the
resolutions of the Council imposing sanctions against
the racist minority régime.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

Bearing in mind the need to provide increased educational and training facilities, at all levels, far the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make generous offers of
study and training facilities to inhabitants of Non-SelfGoverning Territories;
4. Requests those States offering scholarships and
those which might subsequently do so to inform the
Secretary-General of the details of the offers made
under this programme and, whenever possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students;
5. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
give widespread publicity in Territories under their
administration to offers of study and training facilities
~ade by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves of such
offers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
~eneral Ass~mbly at its twenty-seventh session on the
1mplementat1on of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2877 (XXVI). Question of Southern Rhodesia49

The General Assembly,
Having heard the statement by the representative of
the Govemment of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern lreland 50 concerning the "proposals for a settlement" agreed upon between that Government and the racist minority régime in Salisbury, 51
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,' containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
49 See also resolutions 2765 (XXVI), 2769 (XXVI) and
2796 (XXVI).
50 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentysixth Session, Fourth Committee, 1956th meeting.
51 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1971
document S/10405.
'

*

111

52 fbid.,

*

Twenty-sixth Year, 1604th meeting.

*

Other decisions
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples
(Item 23)

At its 2028th pl~nary meeting, on 20 December 1971, the General Assembly,
on the reco~mendatron of the Fourth Committee, 53 adopted the fallowing text
as representmg the consensus of the members of the Assembly:
63 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda
item 23, document A/8616, para. 24.
