S/2017/208

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 March 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2277
(2016), in which the Council requested me to report on the implementation of the
commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. 1 It covers developments since
the issuance of my report of 4 October 2016 (S/2016/840) and provides information
on peace and security developments in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region until 28 February 2017.

II. Major developments
A.

Security situation
2.
During the reporting period, the activities of illegal armed groups, including
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF), the Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI), Mai -Mai groups
and the Lord’s Resistance Army, combined with inter-ethnic tensions in several
parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, have continued to threaten security
and stability. In response, the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (FARDC) and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) have continued operations against
FDLR, ADF and FRPI, as detailed in my reports on MONUSCO of 29 December
2016 (S/2016/1130) and of 10 March 2017 (S/2017/206).

__________________
1

17-03519 (E)

In this context, the region includes the 13 signatories of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, namely, Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. In addition, the following four intergovernmental
organizations act as witnesses/guarantors of the Framework: the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African Development Community and the
United Nations.

130317

*1703519*

S/2017/208

3.
The reporting period witnessed the resumption of clashes between FARD C and
elements of the former Mouvement du 23 mars (M23) in North Kivu, in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the first since the signing of the Nairobi
Declarations in December 2013. Following reports of the disappearance on
11 November 2016 of Sultani Makenga, the military leader of the former M23, from
his residence in Kampala, the Minister for Defence of the Democratic Republic of
Congo, Crispin Atama Tabe, requested the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to investigate
reports that approximately 180 former members of M23 had left their cantonment in
Bihanga, Uganda, and infiltrated Rutshuru territory in North Kivu province.
4.
On 19 January 2017, the Government of Uganda issued a statement noting that
it had arrested 101 former members of M23 headed to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In the statement, the Government acknowledged that some 40
combatants had escaped from the Bihanga camp earlier, reaffirmed its commitment
to the Nairobi Declarations and stressed that Uganda would not support any activity
intended to destabilize the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
5.
On 27 January, two FARDC helicopters crashed in two separate incidents in
Rutshuru, as FARDC reportedly battled former M23 combatants in the vicinity. On
29 January, the Rwanda Defence Force indicated that a group claiming to belong to
the former M23 and reportedly fleeing combat with FARDC had crossed into
Rwanda. Reports indicate that the Rwandan authoritie s handed the individuals over
to the International Committee of the Red Cross for appropriate action under
international law.
6.
On 22 February, a spokesperson for FARDC indicated that Congolese armed
forces had exchanged fire with ex-M23 combatants over a period of two days, near
Rutshuru, North Kivu, killing at least 16 rebels. The following day, a spokesperson
for the Uganda People’s Defence Forces announced that 44 ex-M23 combatants,
who had fled to Uganda following clashes with FARDC, had been apprehen ded and
were being held in a military camp in Kisoro, western Uganda.
7.
The arrival of elements of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition (SPLM/A-IO) in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in
August 2016, fleeing conflict in South Sudan, remains a matter of concern and
could exacerbate tensions in fragile local communities that have long been
traumatized by the activities of armed groups. Furthermore, the development could
negatively affect relations between the Democratic Repub lic of the Congo and
South Sudan. Congolese authorities have called upon MONUSCO to remove
SPLM/A-IO elements on its premises from Congolese territory as soon as possible.
8.
In a separate development, on 21 December 2016, clashes occurred between
FARDC and the Burundi National Defence Force in Uvira, South Kivu province,
killing at least five Burundian soldiers. The latter had reportedly crossed the border
in pursuit of armed elements from the Forces nationales de libération (FNL). The
incident followed efforts by the Burundi National Defence Force to neutralize
Burundian rebels operating along the border with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
9.
In Burundi, while the overall security situation has somewhat improved,
violence continued with the assassination attempt on Presidential Adviser Willy

2/18

17-03519

S/2017/208

Nyamitwe, on 28 November 2016, and the killing of the Minister for Environment,
Emmanuel Niyonkuru, on 1 January 2017.
10. In Uganda, intercommunal tensions in the areas bordering the Democratic
Republic of the Congo escalated when security forces clashed with local militia in
Kasese District, Rwenzori region, on 26 and 27 November 2016. The fighting
occurred after suspected guards of the Rwenzori traditional leader, Charles Wesley
Mumbere, accused by Ugandan authorities of leading a secessionist movement,
reportedly attacked police and army patrols. At least 87 were reported killed and
149 arrested. Police detained Mr. Mumbere on 27 November 2016. He was
subsequently granted bail on 6 February 2017.

B.

Political developments
11. The region witnessed some positive developments during the reporting period.
The Regional Oversight Mechanism held its seventh high -level meeting on
26 October 2016 in Luanda following a successful reform of the governance
structures of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. Signatories and
guarantors renewed their commitment to accelerate the full implementation of the
Framework. The meeting also provided the opportunity for the leaders of Angola
and the Congo to discuss the national dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with that country’s President, Joseph Kabila.
12. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a political agreement, facilitated by
the African Union, was signed on 18 October 2016. On 31 December,
representatives of the ruling majority and the opposition platform known as the
Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales de la République démocratique du
Congo acquises au changement reached another agreement, facilitated by the
Conférence nationale épiscopale du Congo (CENCO). The agreements helped
stabilize the country and chart a path towards the conduct of peaceful and credible
elections by the end of 2017. More details are provided in section IV below and in
my reports on MONUSCO of 29 December 2016 and of 10 March 2017,
respectively.
13. In letters addressed to me and to the President of the Security Council dated
26 December 2016, Jean-Marie Runiga, leader of the former M23 faction in
Rwanda, which is now registered as a political party named Alliance pour le salut du
peuple, requested that the sanctions against him be lifted, and that his party be
allowed to participate in the talks. On 28 December, Bertrand Bisim wa, leader of
the former M23 elements in Uganda, requested that CENCO consider raising the
repatriation of former M23 elements, the release of former M23 prisoners and the
development of a road map for the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations
during the talks.
14. The inter-Burundian dialogue, facilitated by the East African Community, has
yet to produce a breakthrough. From 7 to 9 December 2016, the East African
Community Facilitator, former President of the United Republic of Tanzania
Benjamin Mkapa, visited Burundi to encourage the resumption of talks. In reaction
to a statement by the Facilitator upon his departure from Bujumbura on 9 December,
the main opposition coalition, the Conseil national pour le respect de l’Accord
d’Arusha pour la paix et la réconciliation au Burundi et la restauration de l’état de

17-03519

3/18

S/2017/208

droit (CNARED), stated that it no longer recognized the Facilitator and urged the
President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, who serves as the East African Community
Mediator, to consult with the East African Community Heads of State and designate
another Facilitator. Several civil society entities also accused the Facilitator of bias
towards the regime.
15. From 16 to 19 February 2017, Mr. Mkapa convened another consultative
session with the parties in Arusha in the United Republic of Tanzania. While the
Government of Burundi was not represented, a delegation of the ruling Conseil
national pour la défense de la démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la démocratie
(CNDD-FDD) party joined the discussion. Representatives of CNARED, led by
Jean Minani, also travelled to Arusha to meet with the Facilitator. Large
demonstrations took place in Bujumbura, Gitega and other parts of Burundi to
denounce the consultations, especially the participation of so -called “putschistes”.
While the session was under way, the Government of Burundi requested the
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania to arrest several dialogue
participants. In his concluding statement on 19 February, Mr. Mkapa called upon the
East African Community to convene an extraordinary summit on Burundi to discuss
the impediment to the process. Further details on the situation in Burundi are
provided in section IV below and in my report on Burundi of 23 February 2017
(S/2017/165).
16. Preparations for elections progressed in Angola, Kenya and Rwanda, all three
set for August 2017. In December 2016, the President of Angola, José Eduardo dos
Santos, announced his intention to step down before the elections. Subsequently, the
ruling People’s Movement for the Liberation of Angola elected the Minister for
Defence, retired General João Lourenço, as its lead candidate. General elections in
Kenya to select the president, senators, county governors and members of the
National Assembly and the County Assemblies, as well as women county
representatives, are scheduled for 8 August. The President of Rwanda, Paul
Kagame, will be seeking a third term on 4 August against three declared contenders:
founder and chair of the Democratic Green Party of Rwanda Frank Habineza, and
Philippe Mpayimana and Thomas Nahimana.

C.

Humanitarian situation
17. As noted in my previous report (S/2016/840), the humanitarian situation in the
region remains challenging, with more than 6 million internally displaced persons
and 3.5 million refugees. Together, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, South Sudan, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania account for 4.41 million internally displaced persons and
2.8 million refugees as a result of conflicts in the region.
18. The humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remained
of concern, particularly in the eastern provinces, but also increasingly in southeastern Tanganyika and central Kasai provinces, where activities by armed groups
and rising intercommunal tensions contributed to accelerated displacement, bringing
the number of internally displaced persons countrywide to a stagg ering 2.1 million
at the end of 2016. The eastern part of the country is also home to the vast majority
of refugees from neighbouring countries, totalling 451,000 people, mainly from

4/18

17-03519

S/2017/208

Burundi, the Central African Republic, Rwanda and South Sudan. The multi -year
Humanitarian Response Plan for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
covers the period from 2017 to 2019, foresees a deteriorating humanitarian situation
and intends to aid 6.7 million people in 2017, up from 6 million in 2016.
19. Large-scale displacement continued in South Sudan. Some 761,550 refugees
fled the country in 2016 alone, of a total of 1.4 million registered refugees. Another
1.9 million people are internally displaced in South Sudan.
20. At the end of 2016, Uganda became the largest host of refugees in Africa,
providing asylum to 736,953 South Sudanese refugees, among others, as at
10 February 2017. That puts the Ugandan authorities and the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their partners under increasing pressure to accommod ate
the needs of both the refugee and host communities and defuse possible tensions.
21. In Burundi, political instability and insecurity generated significant
displacement. In total, nearly 387,000 refugees have fled the country since April
2015, primarily to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the
United Republic of Tanzania, while some 170,000 people are internally displaced.
In 2016, the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance increased from
1.1 million to at least 3 million, including a four-fold increase in the number of
food-insecure people, from 730,000 to 3 million, due to the rising prices of basic
food items, seasonal rain deficit during the agriculture season and chronic poverty.
In 2017, the humanitarian community will appeal for $73.7 million to assist
approximately 1 million Burundians.
22. On 31 January 2017, at the border crossing in Uvira, South Kivu province, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo handed 124 Burundian
nationals over to the Burundian authorities. All deportees were detained upon arrival
in Burundi and charged with endangering State security. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the United Nations
Children’s Fund were granted access to their places of detention.

D.

Human rights and judicial cooperation
23. Violations of international humanitarian and human rights law continued in the
region throughout the reporting period. Restrictions on the basic rights to free
expression and association, among others, were reported in Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan. Civilians in South Sudan continued to
suffer serious abuses committed by both government forces and opposition fighters.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, political violence and government
repression intensified, as detailed in my report on MONUSCO of 29 December
2016.
24. Major incidents were recorded in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
December 2016 in the context of election-related human rights violations.
MONUSCO and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) reported that, between 15 and 31 December 2016 in Kinshasa, in
the context of events surrounding the end of President Kabila’s second and last
constitutional mandate, 40 people, including 5 women and 2 children, were killed,
and 147, including 14 women and 18 children, were injured owing to the

17-03519

5/18

S/2017/208

disproportionate use of force and the use of live ammunition by defence and
security forces. Hundreds of arrests were also reported throughout the country
during those events. The actual number of victims may be much higher, as human
rights investigators were denied access to many detention centres, hospitals and
morgues, and were therefore unable to properly assess the total number of victims.
25. The report published by MONUSCO and OHCHR on those incidents states
that repression by Congolese defence and security forces was executed through
illegal restrictions on public freedoms, including the rights to freedom of
expression, information and peaceful assembly. Those restrictions are in
contravention of both international human rights standards and the Constitution of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
26. In Burundi, national authorities suspended cooperation with OHCHR
following the publication in October 2016 of the report of the independent
investigation on Burundi carried out pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution
S-24/1 (A/HRC/33/37). The report found that gross human rights violations were
committed primarily by State actors and those linked to them. During the same
month, the President of Burundi, Pierre Nkurunziza, signed legislation related to the
country’s withdrawal from the International Criminal Court. Serious human rights
violations and abuses continued to be reported, including extrajudicial killings,
arbitrary arrests and detentions, forced disappearances and cases of torture and ill treatment. Most violations were perpetrated by national security forces and the
Imbonerakure, the ruling party’s youth militia, who are re portedly increasingly
acting as law enforcement agents. Unlawful practices by the Imbonerakure include
illegally arresting citizens and handing them over to the police, as well as
conducting joint operations with local authorities and, sometimes, the polic e.
27. Meanwhile, democratic space remained very limited in Burundi, where civil
society organizations continued to suffer repression. Between 19 and 21 December,
the Government of Burundi passed three ministerial ordinances to ban or suspend at
least 11 non-governmental organizations, including Ligue ITEKA, one of the oldest
and most respected human rights organizations in the country. Further restrictions
were implemented on 23 December, when the National Assembly adopted
legislation requiring civil society organizations operating in Burundi, including
those based or funded from abroad, to deposit one third of their operating budget
into the central bank of Burundi, pay all their employees in Burundian francs and
respect set ethnic quotas when hiring Burundian nationals. The law was adopted by
the Senate and promulgated by the President in January 2017.
28. In a positive development, the trial of Dominic Ongwen for crimes against
humanity and war crimes, committed as a prominent member of the Lord’s
Resistance Army, commenced at the International Criminal Court on 6 December
2016.

E.

Regional economic developments
29. The countries of the region continued their efforts to strengthen regional
economic and financial cooperation. On 20 October 2016, the Ministers in charge of
trade from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, both members of the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), launched the

6/18

17-03519

S/2017/208

COMESA Simplified Trade Regime and signed a memorandum of understanding for
the promotion of cross-border trade between the two countries. The Simplified
Trade Regime aims to facilitate cross-border trade, eliminate non-tariff barriers and
address commercial and customs fraud. Furthermore, 2 new one -stop border posts
were set up along the border between Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania,
bringing the total number of operational one-stop border posts in Kenya, Rwanda,
Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania to 10.

III. Implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework
A.

Commitments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
30. Further information on the implementation of the national commitments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is contained in my reports on MONUSCO of
29 December 2016 and of 10 March 2017.

B.

Commitments of the region
31. During the reporting period, signatory States continued to implement their
commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, with mixed
results. In that regard, following the decisions of the sixth Ordinary Summit of the
Heads of State and Government of ICGLR, held in Luanda on 14 June 2016,
Ministers for Defence and representatives from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kenya, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania met in Kinshasa on
13 October and adopted the concept of operations and the budget for the Joint
Follow-up Mechanism established to address the growing threat posed by ADF. On
18 February 2017, the Joint Follow-up Mechanism, staffed by military intelligence
officers from the four participating countries, was inaugurated in Kasese district,
Uganda, at the border with the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However,
progress in the repatriation of disarmed combatants, including those of FDLR and
the former M23, remained limited.
32. The reporting period witnessed challenges in relations between some countries
in the region. Tensions that developed between Burundi and Rwanda last year have
not fully dissipated. Meanwhile, renewed friction emerged between t he Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda, against the backdrop of the incursion by former
M23 elements into the Democratic Republic of the Congo in January 2017. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo requested the Expanded Joint Verification
Mechanism to investigate the reported incursion and blamed Uganda for not
upholding regional commitments in the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework.

C.

International commitments
33. During the reporting period, my Special Envoy continued his engagement with
regional and international partners, with a view to promoting sustained and

17-03519

7/18

S/2017/208

concerted support to the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. In that regard, efforts continued towards the operationalization of the
United Nations Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017, launched in
New York on 21 March 2016. The United Nations Regional Development Group
and the Office of my Special Envoy met in Kampala from 19 to 21 October to agree
on the way forward regarding the implementation of the Regional Strategic
Framework. The main outcomes included agreement on the establishment of a Great
Lakes cross-border trust fund and the adoption of a resource mobilization strategy.
Participants also agreed on priorities for each of the six pillars of the Regional
Strategic Framework, including the promotion of cross-border private sector
initiatives, the facilitation of labour mobility and the enhancement of women’s
participation in decision-making, among other things.
34. In Paris, on 8 December 2016, my Special Envoy attended a meeting of the
International Contact Group for the Great Lakes region, which discussed regional
developments and the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. Representatives of Angola, Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands,
Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America attended the meeting, alongside those of the European Union and
the International Organization of la Francophonie. They discu ssed coordinated
international support to ongoing dialogue processes and initiatives to address the
root causes of conflict in the region.

IV. Activities of my Special Envoy
A.

Reform of the oversight mechanisms of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework
35. On 7 and 15 October 2016, the Technical Support Committee of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, co-chaired by my Special Envoy and the
African Union Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region, held its
fourteenth and fifteenth sessions in Nairobi. The purpose was to prepare for a
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of signatory States, in prelude to the
seventh high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the
Framework.
36. The Technical Support Committee adopted a status report on the
implementation of national, regional and international commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. The report recommended faster
progress with regard to, inter alia, the repatriation of disarmed combatants and the
implementation of the Nairobi Declarations. On 24 October, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs endorsed the status report and recommended it for consideration by
the Regional Oversight Mechanism.
37. On 26 October, the Regional Oversight Mechanism convened in Luanda at its
first meeting hosted by a signatory State, in line with a recommendation adopted on
29 September 2015. Chaired by the President of Angola, who also serves as the
Chair of ICGLR, the well-attended meeting helped enhance regional ownership and
strengthen the signatory States’ commitment to the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework.

8/18

17-03519

S/2017/208

38. While welcoming the progress achieved, the Regional Oversight Mechanism
took note of challenges and outstanding issues and directed the Technical Support
Committee to submit an updated list of priorities, drawing on the Regional Action
Plan for the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
The Regional Oversight Mechanism also welcomed ongoing cooperation between
FARDC and MONUSCO against FDLR and ADF, as well as the establishment of
the Joint Follow-up Mechanism to address the growing threat from ADF. It also
expressed appreciation for the initiatives taken by the guarantors of the Framework
to tackle illegal armed groups, and endorsed the recommendations of the meeting of
Ministers for Defence of ICGLR and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), held in Nairobi on 20 July 2016. The Regional Oversight
Mechanism highlighted the need for faster progress with the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, repatriation and resettlement of disarmed combatants
present in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and neighbouring
countries, notably former FDLR and M23 combatants.
39. Developments in Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan were also on the agenda of the meeting.
The Regional Oversight Mechanism called upon all Burundians to commit to
inclusive dialogue and extend full cooperation to the East African Community
Facilitator. The meeting further urged the governments of the region, supported by
the African Union and the United Nations, to assist in finding durable solutions for
the SPLM/A-IO combatants present in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Participants also encouraged the parties in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to seek peaceful solutions to the political crisis, in line with the country’s
Constitution and Security Council resolution 2277 (2016). In the margins of the
meeting, the Presidents of Angola and the Congo encouraged the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to take steps to broaden support for the political
agreement of 18 October 2016. In a related development, the President of the
Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, offered to host the eighth high -level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism on 20 October 2017 in the Congo.
40. On 25 January 2017, my Special Envoy hosted the third meeting of the
guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework in Addis Ababa in
order to take stock of regional initiatives to neutralize negative forces and
encourage ongoing dialogue processes in Burundi and the Democratic Repub lic of
the Congo. Among other things, the guarantors urged the Chiefs of Defence Staff of
ICGLR and SADC member States to carry out a field mission to the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as recommended by the meeting of the
Ministers for Defence of ICGLR and SADC held in Nairobi on 20 July 2016.
Furthermore, they called upon the Chiefs of Defence Staff to develop
recommendations to facilitate the neutralization of negative forces in the region.
The guarantors further encouraged the resumption of joint consultations between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and representatives of the
former M23 regarding the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations. They also
undertook to assist with efforts to relocate the elements of SPLM/A -IO present in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
41. The guarantors welcomed the signing of a political agreement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on 31 December 2016. They urged the parties to
continue to cooperate with CENCO to expedite discussions on the implementation

17-03519

9/18

S/2017/208

of the agreement. With regard to the situation in Burundi, they called upon all
parties to renounce violence and collaborate with the East African Community
Facilitator to accelerate the conclusion of the dialogue.
42. As decided at the seventh high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism, the Technical Support Committee held its sixteenth session on 9 and
10 February 2017 in Nairobi. The Committee, inter alia, considered a draft updated
list of priorities for the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. It also examined a proposal for the establishment of a regional task
force on the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration, repatriation and
resettlement of disarmed combatants and stressed the urgency of strengthening
existing mechanisms. The Committee undertook the initiation of preparations for
thematic meetings, at expert and ministerial levels, in the areas of natural resource
management, displacement and youth.

B.

Good offices of my Special Envoy
43. During the reporting period, my Special Envoy continued his good offices, in
close coordination with national, regional and international partners, in support of
the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. As outlined
below, he took some initiatives to help address outstanding issues related to the
neutralization of negative forces and the implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations. He also continued his support to dialogue processes, as well as
activities to promote women, youth and civil society. In addition, he continued to
promote durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons, in close
consultation with relevant United Nations entities in the region. Furthermore, my
Special Envoy continued to facilitate the administration of justice through judicial
cooperation and to support regional economic cooperation.
Implementation of the Nairobi Declarations
44. During a working session on 23 November 2016, my Special Envoy and the
new Coordinator of the Congolese National Oversight Mechanism discussed ways
to accelerate the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations, notably the
repatriation of former M23 combatants still in Rwanda and Uganda. They reviewed
the recommendations from two joint evaluation meetings between representatives of
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and a delegation of the
former M23, held in Kinshasa on 27 and 28 May and on 27 and 28 June 2016,
respectively.
45. Following the incursion of former M23 combatants into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in January 2017, the Coordinator of the National Oversight
Mechanism wrote to the guarantors of the Peace, Security and C ooperation
Framework to request their urgent assistance. Consequently, my Special Envoy and
my Special Representative and Head of MONUSCO met with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Léonard She Okitundu,
and the Coordinator of the National Oversight Mechanism on 22 and 23 January.
The two officials echoed the need to resume joint consultations between the
Government and the former M23 leadership. My Special Envoy and Special
Representative also met with the Vice-President of CENCO, Fridolin Ambongo

10/18

17-03519

S/2017/208

Besungu, and encouraged CENCO to include relevant concerns raised by the former
M23 in the ongoing political dialogue.
46. My Special Envoy and Special Representative also met with the President of
Uganda in Entebbe, Uganda, on 24 January 2017. The President deplored the
continuing presence and activities of negative forces in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. He agreed to meet with the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to discuss the issue of negative forces, the implementation of
the Nairobi Declarations and the repatriation of former M23 elements still present in
Uganda.
Regional consultations on Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition elements present in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
47. Following a request by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to MONUSCO regarding the relocation of SPLM/A-IO elements out of the
country, my Special Envoy and Special Representative undertook consultations in
Goma and Kinshasa from 12 to 14 January 2017. During a meeting with
representatives of SPLM/A-IO at their cantonment site in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the members of that organization committed to renouncing
fighting and requested that they be reunited with their relatives, who are being
hosted as refugees in neighbouring countries. In Kinshasa, my Special Envoy and
Special Representative met with the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Interior,
as well as the Chief of Staff of the President. The officials reiterated their demand
for the immediate relocation of the SPLM/A-IO elements out of their country.
48. During his aforementioned meeting with my Special Envoy and Special
Representative on 24 January, the President of Uganda indicated his readiness to
host those SPLM/A-IO combatants who wished to relocate to Uganda, subject to
concurrence from the Government of South Sudan.
49. My Special Envoy and the Deputy Special Representative for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo travelled to Juba and Addis Ababa from 5 to 8 February for
consultations with senior officials of the Transitional Government of National Unity
of South Sudan and with representatives of the African Union. First Vice -President
Taban Deng Gai and Minister for Foreign Affairs Deng Alor of South Sudan
reaffirmed their commitment to maintaining neighbourly relations with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and agreed to engage the Congolese authorities
on the voluntary repatriation of SPLM/A-IO elements on MONUSCO premises.
They also expressed support to efforts to identify acceptable solutions that would
not undermine peace and security in South Sudan. In Addis Ababa, the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, Smaïl Chergui, expressed his
commitment to working closely with the United Nations in efforts to resolve the
issue and offered the support of the Liaison Office in Kinshasa to MONUSCO in the
matter.
Support to dialogue processes in the region
Burundi
50. My Special Envoy continued his good offices and advocacy in support of
dialogue processes in the region, in line with Security Council resolutions 2211

17-03519

11/18

S/2017/208

(2015) and 2277 (2016). In Dar es Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania, on
17 October 2016, he met with the Facilitator of the inter -Burundian dialogue,
Mr. Mkapa, to inquire about the status of the talks and reiterate the support of the
United Nations.
51. Mr. Mkapa briefed my Special Envoy on his efforts to bring the parties back to
the negotiating table. He stressed that both the Government of Burundi and the
opposition coalition in exile needed to display greater political will to enable the
talks to move ahead, and called for stronger political e ngagement by the leaders of
the region.
52. My Special Envoy encouraged the Facilitator to pursue his contacts with all
parties and agreed that stronger involvement by regional leaders would help
advance the dialogue. He stressed the importance for all international actors to rally
behind the East African Community-led facilitation. While in Dar es Salaam, my
Special Envoy also met with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Republic
of Tanzania, Augustine Mahiga, and discussed the dialogue process es in Burundi
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They agreed on the need for stronger
cooperation between the United Nations and the region through the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework.
53. In Addis Ababa, on 24 and 29 January 2017, my Special Envoy met with
Mr. Mahiga and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burundi, Alain Aimé Nyamitwe.
He welcomed the reactivation of the inter-Burundian dialogue and encouraged the
Government of Burundi to extend full cooperation to the East African Communi ty.
Mr. Mahiga stressed the need to call upon all parties to demonstrate flexibility and
readiness for compromise.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
54. Following the meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism on 26 October
2016, and efforts by CENCO to broaden participation in the dialogue, my Special
Envoy carried out several visits to Kinshasa in close consultation with my Special
Representative.
55. My Special Envoy visited Kinshasa from 22 to 25 November and met with
CENCO leaders, officials of the ruling presidential majority and opposition leaders
of the political platform known as the Rassemblement, led by the late Étienne
Tshisekedi. The Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Samy
Badibanga, indicated that he would hold consultations on the formation of his
government with all national stakeholders, including those who did not participate
in the African Union-facilitated dialogue.
56. Representatives of the presidential majority reiterated that they were ready to
accommodate the Rassemblement but stressed that some of the coalition’s demands,
notably a transition without the President and the holding of elections in 2017, were
unacceptable. Representatives of the Rassemblement confirmed their support for the
CENCO facilitation but asked that CENCO allow the parties to engage directly.
They also denounced alleged arbitrary arrests and movement restrictions by security
organs targeted at their members.
57. Following the signing of the political agreement of 31 December 2016, my
Special Envoy returned to Kinshasa twice in 2017, first from 13 to 15 January, and

12/18

17-03519

S/2017/208

again on 23 January. On both occasions, together with my Special Representa tive,
he consulted with Congolese stakeholders on the CENCO -led dialogue. My Special
Envoy and Special Representative met with the CENCO President, Marcel Utembi
Tapa, and Vice-President, Fridolin Ambongo Besungu. They also met with the
Prime Minister and the Chief of Staff of the President. My Special Envoy also held
separate meetings with the papal nuncio, Luis Mariano Montemayor, Félix
Tshisekedi of the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social (UDPS) and Ève
Bazaiba of the Movement pour la libération du Congo (MLC). In all those meetings,
my Special Envoy and Special Representative welcomed the signing of the political
agreement of 31 December, reiterated full support to CENCO and hoped for early
agreement on the implementation details of the agreeme nt, notably with regard to
power-sharing.
58. At that point, CENCO leaders appeared encouraged by the signing of the
political agreement of 31 December and by the progress made since then. They
commended the important role that the international community, notably the United
Nations, had played in bringing about the agreement. They encouraged the United
Nations to pursue its engagement with all stakeholders and support the
implementation of the agreement.
59. Similarly, all opposition representatives encouraged the United Nations to
fully support efforts to resolve outstanding issues, including the implementation of
the mesures de décrispation agreed to by the parties. Opposition leaders stressed
that financial and logistical support would be critical, nota bly for the benefit of the
Conseil national de suivi de l’accord (CNSA), mandated to monitor the
implementation of the agreement, and the Independent National Electoral
Commission.
60. The Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo stressed the need
to reconcile the political agreements of 18 October and 31 December 2016. He
insisted that those who assumed Government positions under the agreement of
18 October should be included in the implementation of the agreement of
31 December. The MLC representative contended that the agreement of
31 December had been prearranged by the Government and the Rassemblement,
with no regard for the other opposition parties. Mr. Tshisekedi of UDPS insisted
there was no room to renegotiate the position of Prime Mi nister; he elaborated that
the Rassemblement had agreed to extend the term of the President during the
transition in exchange for the positions of Prime Minister and Chair of CNSA.
61. On 23 January 2017, my Special Envoy and Special Representative met wi th
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and CENCO leaders. My Special Envoy also met
with some opposition leaders and encouraged all parties to promptly finalize the
talks on the implementation of the political agreement of 31 December 2016.
During their second meeting with my Special Envoy on 23 January, CENCO leaders
expressed frustration over the lack of progress in the ongoing talks on
implementation. Nevertheless, they expected the parties to agree on the
implementation details by 28 January. Regrettably, the agreement did not fully
materialize, owing to persistent differences between the parties.
62. On 1 February, opposition leader Étienne Tshisekedi passed away in Belgium,
where he had been evacuated for medical reasons. His sudden death cast uncertaint y
over the fate of the political dialogue. While the Government of the Democratic

17-03519

13/18

S/2017/208

Republic of the Congo promptly appointed a committee to organize a State funeral
for Mr. Tshisekedi, discussions on the repatriation of his body and the holding of his
funeral were still ongoing at the time of finalizing the present report.
63. Throughout the reporting period, my Special Envoy and Special
Representative remained in close contact with key regional stakeholders, including
senior officials of the African Union and ICGLR. My Special Envoy also met with
the President of the Congo twice, in Brazzaville on 24 November 2016, and again in
Addis Ababa on 29 January 2017.
64. From 7 to 9 November 2016, my Special Envoy visited Brussels for a series of
meetings with European Union officials, including members of the Political and
Security Committee of the European Union.
65. While in Brussels, he also met with Congolese opposition leader Moïse
Katumbi and encouraged him to remain engaged in the peaceful resolution of the
political crisis in his country. Mr. Katumbi assured my Special Envoy of his
commitment to dialogue.
Private Sector Investment Conference for the Great Lakes Region
66. As a follow-up to the first Private Sector Investment Conference for the Great
Lakes Region, held in Kinshasa on 24 and 25 February 2016, preparations for a
second Conference continued during the reporting period. Rwanda offered to host
the event in Gisenyi, a city located near its border with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
67. On 2 February 2017, the Office of my Special Envoy, ICGLR, the United
Nations country team in Rwanda and the Rwanda Development Board agreed on the
composition of the steering committee mandated to oversee preparations for the
second Conference. They also agreed that the Conference would focus on the
promotion of cross-country business activities and on economic cooperation and
integration among Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania.
Partnerships
68. During the reporting period, the Office of my Special Envoy continued its
collaboration with ICGLR, the African Union and SADC, the other guarantors of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. It also continued to enhance
coordination among United Nations presences in the region and promote
partnerships with other entities.
69. On 20 January 2017, my Special Envoy convened a meeting with the Resident
Coordinators of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda
and the United Republic of Tanzania and Regional Directors of relevant United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes. Participants exchanged views on key
political and security developments in the region, and agreed on coordinated actions
in political engagements and programmatic interventions in order to effectively
support the peace, security and development of the region.
70. On 16 and 17 February, the Office of my Special Envoy and the Government
of Switzerland, in partnership with the Conflict Prevention and Peace Forum,

14/18

17-03519

S/2017/208

convened a stakeholders meeting on the Great Lakes region, which gathered
experts, representatives of governments and civil society of countries of the region
and representatives of regional and international institutions. Parti cipants reviewed
peace and security developments in the region and identified priorities for future
engagements, including options to foster synergies among various national, regional
and international actors in order to achieve the objectives of the Peace , Security and
Cooperation Framework.
71. On that occasion, my Special Envoy held a side meeting with other Special
Envoys to exchange views on the situation in the region, including on the dialogue
processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi and on the
resumption of tensions related to the presence and activities of negative forces in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
72. My Special Envoy continued his cooperation with partners to advance the
women, peace and security agenda in the region. From 29 November to 1 December
2016, his Office supported the convening of a meeting of the ICGLR Regional
Women’s Forum in Khartoum, which adopted a three-year strategic plan and a
fundraising strategy for the establishment of a secretari at in Kigali.
Promotion of women, youth and civil society
73. From 31 January to 2 February 2017, my Special Envoy convened the Global
Open Days on Women, Peace and Security in Goma, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, with the support of the MONUSCO leadership. The discussions offered an
opportunity for women leaders in the region to strengthen their leadership capacity,
share their experiences on effective participation in political and peace processes
and assess the implementation of women’s political participation in line with
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) in their respective countries. Participants
called for increased financial support to the ICGLR Regional Women’s Forum, and
requested that a representative of the Forum participate in the Technical Support
Committee and the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.
74. The recommendations were discussed at a high-level dialogue on 2 February
among the Ministers in charge of gender affairs of Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, South Sudan and Uganda and other representativ es
of those countries, in the presence of my Special Envoy, my Special Representative
and representatives of the African Union and ICGLR. A side meeting was convened
by my Special Envoy with the participants of the panel, which recommended the
convening of a follow-up meeting of the Ministers in charge of gender affairs to
discuss the inclusion of women.
75. In order to strengthen the role of youth in support of peace and stability in the
region, the Office of my Special Envoy participated in the ICGLR Multipurpose
Youth Forum meeting in Goma from 29 November to 1 December 2016. The
meeting brought together youth delegates from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Kenya and Rwanda and representatives of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of Congo, ICGLR and the United Nations. Participants
emphasized the importance of youth-led initiatives to support social cohesion,
election monitoring and observation, democratic governance and cross -border

17-03519

15/18

S/2017/208

confidence-building. The meeting also adopted a road map
operationalization of an ICGLR youth centre for peace based in Goma.

for

the

Promotion of durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons
76. In Kampala on 24 January 2016, my Special Envoy met with the Ugandan
Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, Hilary Onek, to discuss the
political and security implications of the ongoing refugee crises in the region in line
with the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
Mr. Onek highlighted the increasing burden placed on Uganda as a result of the
influx of refugees, the lack of progress in the implementation of the tripartite
agreements on the voluntary repatriation of refugees between Uganda, UNHCR and
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, respectively , and
rising discontent within the Ugandan population. In response to a proposal by my
Special Envoy, he agreed to host a regional meeting at the ministerial level on
displacement in the Great Lakes region later in 2017 in order to agree on regional
actions as envisaged by the Framework.
Judicial cooperation and efforts to combat impunity
77. In Nairobi on 10 and 11 November 2016, the ICGLR Executive Secretary and
my Special Envoy convened a meeting to establish a Great Lakes judicial
cooperation network, bringing together the directors of prosecution and
investigation services of ICGLR member States. The creation of the network is a
key milestone in efforts to strengthen and facilitate the administration of justice in
the region. It is expected to provide a forum for exchange and cooperation on
regional legal action and will contribute significantly to promoting accountability
for crimes committed in the region.
78. With the support of the Office of my Special Envoy, ICGLR published, in
October 2016, a report on improving access to justice and ending impunity for
sexual and gender-based violence in ICGLR member States and a compendium of
case law on that subject. The publications are expected to support the ICGLR
regional training facility on sexual and gender-based violence in ensuring greater
protection for victims of sexual and gender-based violence and accountability for
those who commit such crimes.

V. Observations
79. Four years after its signing, the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region remains a vital
mechanism to achieve durable peace and stability, as noted by the Heads of State of
the signatory countries during the seventh high -level meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism, held in Luanda on 26 October 2016. I commend the
successful efforts, led by my Special Envoy, to reform the governance structures of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and reinvigorate its
implementation. I wish to thank Angola for hosting the first meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism held in the region. I also thank the Congo and Uganda for
offering to host the eighth and ninth high-level meetings in 2017 and 2018,

16/18

17-03519

S/2017/208

respectively. Those developments denote growing ownership of the Framework by
the signatories.
80. I am concerned, however, that the gains achieved so far could be negatively
affected by the continued presence of non-State armed groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as other worrying security trends
observed in recent months. In particular, incursions by former M23 elements into
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, followed by clashes with the Congolese
army, represent a serious setback to our stabilization efforts. Urgent and decisive
action is required to avoid the resurgence of the M23 rebellion. I call upon the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the leadership of the
former M23 to promptly resume joint consultations on the implementation of the
Nairobi Declarations, particularly the repatriation of ex -M23 elements still present
in Rwanda and Uganda. My Special Envoy and Special Representative are fully
engaged in finding a solution to that pressing issue and stand ready to assist the
Congolese authorities. As signatories to the Peace, Security, and Cooperation
Framework, I count on the neighbours of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
assist in preventing the former M23 from resuming its illegal activities, which once
had a devastating impact on the lives and welfare of scores of civilians in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
81. The prolonged presence of SPLM/A-IO elements in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo also warrants urgent collective action to remove a potential
threat to that fragile conflict-affected area. I encourage my Special Envoy and
Special Representative to continue their engagement with leaders and institutions in
the region to help resolve that issue.
82. I am encouraged by the enhanced cooperation between MONUSCO and
FARDC against illegal armed groups, as well as by regional initiatives to address
security issues, notably the establishment of a Joint Follow-up Mechanism to deal
with ADF. I call upon States of the region and international partners to ensure that
the Mechanism is well resourced and effective. I also emphasize the importance of
complementary, non-military approaches to resolving the issue of negative forces,
including by engaging local communities in conflict prevention and addressing the
root causes of conflict in the region.
83. It is my hope that the ongoing dialogue processes in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will reach successful conclusions and contribute
to stability in the region. My Special Adviser, together with my Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Region, will continue to support East African Community -led
efforts in the inter-Burundian dialogue. I urge the parties to cooperate with the East
African Community Facilitator and to refrain from any action likely to undermine
peace efforts. I also call upon East African Community leaders to urge the parties to
participate in the dialogue without precondition.
84. I commend CENCO and the Congolese parties on the signing of the political
agreement of 31 December 2016. I call upon all Congolese actors to refrain from
violence and to take the necessary steps to swiftly implement the agreeme nt. In
particular, I encourage all parties to resume talks without further delay, with a view
to resolving all outstanding issues. The United Nations will continue to support the
political dialogue and the conduct of peaceful, credible, inclusive, transpar ent and
timely elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

17-03519

17/18

S/2017/208

85. As other countries in the region prepare for elections in 2017, I call upon all
parties to create an environment conducive to the holding of timely, peaceful and
credible elections.
86. I commend the governments and the people of the region for their hospitality
towards large populations of refugees and asylum seekers, in a context of rising yet
underfunded humanitarian needs. I ask them to continue to uphold their obligations
under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its Protocol. I
emphasize once more the importance of durable solutions championed by the
leaders of the region. In that regard, I welcome the offer by the Government of
Uganda to host a ministerial meeting on displacement. I urge the international
community, as well as regional and subregional organizations, to increase their
support to displaced populations, host countries and host communities.
87. Finally, I thank my Special Envoy, my Special Representative and their
respective teams for their efforts to promote peace and stability in the region and
advance the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. I
call upon the Security Council and the international community to continue to as sist
the signatory States with the implementation of their commitments.

18/18

17-03519
