United Nations

S/PV.6633

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6633rd meeting
Wednesday, 19 October 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Dushyant Singh
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
Letter dated 17 October 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/644)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-55462 (E)

*1155462*

S/PV.6633

the protection of marine resources and the safety and
security of lives and property.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
Letter dated 17 October 2011 from the
Permanent Representative of Nigeria to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2011/644)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Benin to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the following briefers to
participate in this meeting: Mr. Mahamane Touré,
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security
of the Economic Community of West African States,
and Her Excellency Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga,
Deputy Executive Secretary for Political Affairs of the
Commission of the Gulf of Guinea.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/644, which contains a letter dated
17 October 2011 from the Permanent Representative of
Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I wish to welcome the presence of His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, whom I now invite to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General: I would like to
commend Nigeria for initiating this timely discussion.
Since Under-Secretary-General Pascoe briefed
the Council last August, the threat of piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea has continued to grow. New cases of piracy
and armed robbery aboard vessels along the West
African coast are being regularly reported, with
significant potential consequences for economic
development and security. The threat is compounded
because most Gulf States have limited capacity to
ensure safe maritime trade, the freedom of navigation,

2

I discussed this issue with many leaders from the
region and beyond during their visits to United Nations
Headquarters last month. In their statements to the
General Assembly, a number of heads of State
highlighted the need for a concerted regional and
international response. I therefore commend the States
in the Gulf of Guinea and their partners for working
together to tackle this security threat. Recently, Benin
and Nigeria launched joint patrols to secure the waters
off Benin. Similarly, Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea,
Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe have launched a
joint strategy to secure the vital interests of members
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS).
I am also encouraged by the initiatives taken by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central
African States to coordinate regional responses. I
understand that ECOWAS plans to convene a summit
of the Gulf of Guinea States and that ECCAS plans to
hold an international conference. I urge the two
regional organizations to work together to develop a
comprehensive,
integrated
strategy,
in
close
cooperation with the Commission of the Gulf of
Guinea and the Maritime Organization of West and
Central Africa. I also encourage them to build on the
existing memorandum of understanding on maritime
law enforcement developed by the Maritime
Organization of West and Central Africa and the
International Maritime Organization with the support
of United Nations agencies. That memorandum has
already been signed by 15 States from the region.
As the Council was informed in August, I have
decided to deploy an assessment mission to the region
in November, following a request by President Boni
Yayi of Benin. Earlier this month, my Special
Representative for West Africa, Mr. Said Djinnit, met
with Beninese authorities, who stressed that the
country’s economy could be severely affected if piracy
were not addressed adequately and quickly. The
forthcoming United Nations assessment mission will
examine the scope of the threat and the capacity of
Benin and of the West African subregion as a whole to
ensure maritime safety and security in the Gulf of
Guinea. It will also make recommendations on
antipiracy, including in the broader context of
organized crime and drug trafficking.

11-55462

S/PV.6633

The mission will include representatives of the
Departments of Political Affairs and Peacekeeping
Operations, the United Nations Office for West Africa,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Maritime Organization. It will work in
close consultation with national authorities, the
European Union and other international partners. I will
arrange to present the mission’s report to the Council
once I receive it.
Piracy transcends national boundaries and
economic interests. It has a negative impact on West
Africa’s trade with the rest of the world, especially
with its principal trading partners in the Americas, Asia
and Europe. The recent deployment of naval vessels to
support antipiracy operations in the Gulf of Guinea
attests to the readiness of the region’s States and their
partners to address this threat. I call upon other
Member States to join these efforts.
As we have learned from our experience in
Somalia, we must approach the issue in a holistic
manner, focusing simultaneously on security, the rule
of law and development. Responses that fall short of
these requirements will only exacerbate the problem.
Let us therefore work together to forge a balanced and
coherent strategy that addresses the roots of the
problem and deterrence on land and at sea.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Touré.
Mr.
Touré:
I
am
Touré
Mahamane,
Commissioner in charge of political affairs at the
Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS).
It is a singular honour, and indeed a privilege, for
the ECOWAS Commission to be recognized on behalf
of the region and given the floor to present the efforts
made by the region in addressing the crippling disease
of piracy, which is taking root in our region, as well as
its related maritime security risk within our shores and
beyond. His Excellency Mr. James Victor Gbeho,
President of the ECOWAS Commission, has therefore
asked me to convey his sense of gratitude for this
opportunity. He has also asked me to congratulate you,
Madame President, and Nigeria on your accession to
the presidency of the Security Council and on the
laudable agenda initiative you have put forward to

11-55462

bring to the forefront some of the key regional issues
and challenges we face.
Allow me to report on some key initiatives
undertaken by our Community to address the issue.
The key recommendation of the 29th meeting of the
ECOWAS Committee of Chiefs of Defence Staff, held
on 4 and 5 October at the headquarters of the
ECOWAS Commission in Abuja, had at its core the
issue of the threats of piracy and other maritime
security issues in our coastal areas and the way and
means to tackle them. The 15 Chiefs of Defence Staff
members and heads of navies gathered for the occasion
noted that, on the shores of the Gulf of Guinea, piracy
and other criminal acts were becoming prevalent,
threatening local and international movements of ships
and their cargo transiting Benin, Ghana, Togo, Nigeria
and, lately, Guinea. This constitutes a worrisome, new
and more complex development, compared to last
year’s attacks from the sea in Benin, Togo and Ghana.
This developing insecurity impedes the efforts being
made by member States and the integration process of
our region.
Following the presentation made on West African
maritime security and safety by experts of the navy of
Nigeria, and inputs from all other members of the
region’s armed forces and heads of navies, the
aforementioned meeting decided to expand its
sub-committee on maritime security to include Benin,
Cape Verde, Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea-Bissau, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone and
Togo, as well as three experts on legal affairs related to
maritime security.
The expanded sub-committee was tasked with
studying the existing documents, including that which
was developed and presented to the Chiefs of Defence
Staff in Bamako in 2010, and all other documents
drafted by the ECOWAS Security Division, and with
looking further into other maritime security areas that
had not yet been considered in order to make informed
and pragmatic recommendations to the Chiefs of
Defence Staff Committee within the next two months.
They had decided to look into the matter at the
27th meeting held on 14 and 15 April 2010 in Cotonou,
Benin, where it was agreed that the delegations of
Nigeria, Cape Verde and Ghana would conduct a
survey of maritime security threats and present their
findings, with specific recommendations to its next

3

S/PV.6633

meeting in Bamako. Thus, the issue had already been
addressed in April 2010.
The aforementioned presentation was made at the
28th meeting of the Committee held in Bamako on 18
and 19 January. The Commission was tasked with
developing a regional maritime governance concept
that would be broken down into implementation
strategies, with a subsequent plan of action. The task
was immediately undertaken, and the ECOWAS
Commission went to work with one of its strategic
think-tank partners, which is also working on the
African
Union
continental
maritime
security
framework. In so doing, ECOWAS intended to be in
line with African Union strategic directives on the
matter.
A draft ECOWAS integrated maritime strategy,
with an ECOWAS integrated maritime strategic plan,
was subsequently produced. The two drafts are actually
being presented to the sub-committee to which I just
referred and will be examined by a meeting of
ECOWAS experts on maritime security before being
presented, in accordance with our rules of procedure,
to the ministers of the ECOWAS Mediation and
Security Council, composed of ministers of defence,
foreign affairs and internal security. Once they have
adopted the documents, they will present them to the
Heads of State for adoption.
As I stated earlier, within the framework of the
implementation of the African Union integrated
maritime security framework, with the support of the
Africa Center for Strategic Studies in Washington,
D.C., the United States Government is facilitating a
process of formalizing the existing partnership between
the two regional economic communities — ECOWAS
and the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS). An initial brainstorming session was
organized in Stuttgart, Germany, from 11 to 16 June,
closely followed by a wider formal meeting in
Garmisch, Germany, from 19 to 22 July. Besides the
African Union, ECCAS, ECOWAS, the Maritime
Organization of West and Central Africa and the Gulf
of Guinea Commission, the Garmisch meeting was
attended by representatives of Benin, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea, Gabon, the Gambia,
Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Senegal and
Togo.
The Garmisch meeting established three working
groups that produced a draft memorandum of

4

understanding between ECCAS and ECOWAS on
cooperation to better control and safeguard the
maritime coasts of West and Central Africa, and a draft
multilateral agreement on cooperation to fight illicit
transnational activities within the maritime waters of
Central and West Africa. That agreement is intended to
formalize common approaches and share best practices
among security services and agencies in charge of the
daily fight against the concerned activities in the two
regions. The third document adopted was an
operational framework plan of action for joint
activities among States members of the two regions.
Copies of these drafts have been provided to all
participants to review, fine-tune and improve and to
make them widely discussed nationally among all
concerned stakeholders — including navies, civilian
maritime stakeholders, customs, immigration services,
police, gendarmerie, coastguards and so on — for their
input and ownership. A second plenary meeting is
slated for early January to finalize these drafts, which
will be submitted to the two decision-making organs of
ECCAS and ECOWAS as soon as possible, followed
by a joint summit of the Heads of State and
Government of the two organizations.
Our group of friends, including the United
Kingdom, the United States and other partners, are
contributing to build the internal capacity of the
ECOWAS Commission to enable it to coordinate and
add value to initiatives undertaken by member States.
We are trying to avoid duplication and to make sure
that we do not step on the toes of member States as we
add value to their processes. The group of friends, for
instance, is establishing a special maritime fund soon
to be launched in the Republic of Benin, and the
United States is ready to bring operational capacity in
the form of shared accord programmes and
information-sharing, while the United Kingdom is
financing a detachment of naval officers to the
ECOWAS standby force.
Meanwhile, the clock is still ticking and there is a
need for immediate action to deter the ongoing attacks.
Bilateral initiatives between Nigeria and Benin have
already been presented by the Secretary-General. These
have reduced the scourge of the attacks in our maritime
waters. However, this is not enough; it needs to be
extended to all countries concerned and all partners.
We need more; we need international attention,
recognition and support that take into account the fact

11-55462

S/PV.6633

that we all — landlocked countries, partners and
regional coastal members — have interests at stake.
ECOWAS praises the initiative taken by the
Ambassadors of the Gulf of Guinea to draw
international attention and support to the pleas of our
region. Just as the Gulf of Aden has received
international support, we need a political umbrella
resolution of the United Nations to support our efforts.
ECOWAS is wholeheartedly supporting this call, and is
therefore actively engaged in this fight. We will do our
share. ECOWAS calls on the Security Council to
consider and adopt a resolution with regard to piracy
and other related maritime criminal acts. ECOWAS
suggests that, although the emphasis and focus should
be on the fight against piracy, the following concerns
be taken into account.
First, the littoral concerns should be extended
beyond those of the Gulf of Guinea and cover all
ECCAS and ECOWAS member States, including the
hinterland countries with no access to the sea, such as
Burkina Faso and Mali. The coasts of Cape Verde and
Senegal should be covered as well.
Secondly, all other criminal acts need to be
included: transnational organized criminality, all types
of trafficking — in drugs, in human beings — illegal
migration, terrorist acts, illegal fishing and bunkering,
and toxic waste dumping, to cite just a few.
I rest my case.
The President: I thank General Touré for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga.

Her

Excellency

Mrs. Ukonga: Let me begin by thanking the
Nigerian presidency for inviting the Gulf of Guinea
Commission (GGC) to participate in this debate and
discussion on the subject of “Peace and security in
Africa: piracy in the Gulf of Guinea”. This issue has
become a real cause for concern for the countries of the
region and the rest of the world because of the
increased number of acts of piracy, terrorism and
robbery at sea, illicit trafficking of arms, drugs,
persons and goods regularly being carried in the Gulf
of Guinea region.
I bring apologies from the Executive Secretary of
the Gulf of Guinea Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Miguel Trovoada, who was unable to participate in

11-55462

this meeting due to reasons beyond his control. For me
personally, it is a great honour to represent the Gulf of
Guinea Commission at this very important meeting.
The Gulf of Guinea Commission welcomes this
development at the Security Council and hopes it will
lead to an effective collaboration to strengthen the
region’s defence mechanism so as to prevent its
becoming another dangerous zone like the Gulf of
Aden.
Among other reasons, it was precisely to forestall
this nefarious development that the Gulf of Guinea
Commission was established. The Treaty establishing
the Gulf of Guinea Commission was first signed in
July 2001 and came into effect in August 2006. Its
secretariat was set up in Luanda in April 2007. The
Treaty states in Article 2 that the membership of the
Commission shall be “sovereign States bordering the
Gulf of Guinea, parties to the present Treaty”. The
current members are Angola, Cameroon, the Republic
of the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Nigeria, and Sao Tome and
Principe. Under Article 27, countries of the Gulf of
Guinea region can accede to the Treaty and be admitted
as members.
Among the objectives of the Commission, as
clearly stated in its Article 3, are the following: to
create conditions of mutual confidence and peace and
security conducive to the harmonious development of
States; to promote close consultation in the exploitation
of the natural resources of the Gulf, with a view to
ensuring the economic development of member States
and the well-being of their peoples; to harmonize the
respective policies of States regarding matters of
common interest, particularly matters concerning the
exploitation of natural resources; to protect, preserve
and improve the natural environment of the Gulf of
Guinea and cooperate in the event of natural disaster;
and to strengthen cooperation in communications,
especially maritime communication, with a view to
facilitating ties and trade among member States.
Article 5 of the Treaty clearly states the areas of
cooperation:
“In pursuit of the objectives stated above, the
High Contracting Parties undertake to pool their
efforts towards the harmonization of their
respective policies in the areas of common
interest.

5

S/PV.6633

“To this end, they pledge to identify areas of
common interest in the geographical area of the
Gulf and map out common policies, particularly
in the areas of peace and security, exploration of
hydrocarbons, fisheries and mineral resources,
the environment, movement of peoples and
goods,
development
of
communications,
promotion of the economic development and
integration of the Gulf region”.
Since its inception in 2007, the Executive
Secretariat of the Gulf of Guinea Commission has
striven to establish contacts and mechanisms that will
assist in attaining the objectives of the GGC, especially
in the face of the growing importance of the region as a
major supplier of marine and hydrocarbon resources to
the international community, including, inter alia, the
United States of America, China, France, Portugal and
Spain.
The Gulf of Guinea region is an important
shipping route and hub that connects the region with
Europe and America. This importance has equally
drawn both domestic and international attention to the
need for more focused and better coordinated attention
in addressing the growing challenges of piracy,
especially boarded piracy, armed robbery at sea,
terrorism, illicit trafficking in arms, drugs and persons,
and other illegal activities like illegal, uncontrolled and
undeclared fishing, among others.
In the Gulf of Guinea region we now have
installed facilities for oil and gas exploration and
exploitation, such as oil and gas production platforms
in shallow waters, floating production systems in deep
waters, drilling rigs for exploration in deep waters, and
onshore and offshore storage facilities. Those represent
very heavy investments, and the countries of the region
and their business partners cannot afford to watch
while pirates and armed robbers at sea threaten
facilities that are vital to the economic survival of the
countries of the region.
We also have ports for export and import in both
the maritime countries and their landlocked
neighbours. Ports like Douwala, Kribi, Abidjan,
Cotonou and Lomé serve Chad, Mali and Burkina
Faso. Any threat to these ports, through piracy and
armed robbery at sea, also affects the economic
activities and survival of those countries that depend
on them for their imports and exports. Such criminal
activities would destabilize not only the host countries

6

but also the landlocked countries that depend on them.
Therefore, the situation involves a security imperative
for the development of the region.
Many of main cities and towns of the Gulf of
Guinea region are found along the coast. Hence any
threat to security caused by criminal activities at sea or
by ecological problems will affect many, many people.
The Gulf also serves as a very important route that
connects the region to Europe and America. Piracy and
armed robbery at sea directly affect the cost of sea
transportation in the region in terms of high insurance
costs and the frequency of ships.
If all these installations, facilities, populations
and sea routes are threatened by piracy, armed robbery
at sea and other criminal and illegal activities, the
problem is massive and has regional and international
consequences. How do we face the threats?
There is an urgent need for regional institutions
like the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) to work with us, the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, to uproot the scourge of
criminalities from their respective subregions for a
successful realization of their mandates. We also
welcome the current initiative that is being pursued
within the United Nations system.
The fundamental idea for establishing the Gulf of
Guinea Commission was to provide maritime security
for the region in order to protect the exploration for
and exploitation of its natural resources — oil and gas
and fisheries — for the development of the countries of
the region and their populations. The Commission also
seeks to encourage best practices in exploration for and
exploitation of the natural resources of the region and
to assist in case of natural and environmental disasters.
The Commission is open to working in synergy with
countries of the region and with ECOWAS and ECCAS
to fight all the threats to the natural resources and
environment of the region.
Since our inception, we organized a defence and
security conference in Malabo in February 2010 with a
view to charting a way forward in the search for
effective and inclusive solutions to the increasing
incidence of threats to security and criminal activities
in the region. We also participated in the African
Union-coordinated conference on maritime security in
Africa. In July 2011, we were part of the ECCAS and

11-55462

S/PV.6633

ECOWAS Maritime Safety and Security Seminar, on
which General Touré has ably briefed the Council.
We have realized, on the basis of all those
meetings, that fighting criminals at sea is a high-cost
operation. Securing a maritime space the size of the
Gulf of Guinea region goes beyond the capacity of any
one country, as no country in the region has the human,
material and financial capacity to cover it. This has
created a need for cooperation and close collaboration
among the countries of the region, which must work
closely with external partners to establish a robust, allinclusive regional defence mechanism that can be
simultaneously deployed, coordinated and controlled at
the regional level.
Fighting such illegal activities as piracy,
terrorism and trafficking of all kinds — arms, persons
and drugs — is not like fighting a war in the classical
sense of the word, that is, with organized armies.
Individual, bilateral and tripartite or quadripartite
approaches will only the drive criminal actors to
operate in those areas of the region that are not covered
by such security arrangements. That has been the case
with the arrangements made between Nigeria and
Benin, as well as the efforts of Equatorial Guinea and
some countries of the ECCAS region, which have also
set up a quadripartite arrangement.
The war will require technological know-how,
radar surveillance, equipment, good expertise for
effective monitoring, and preventive deterrence.
Why is the Gulf of Guinea Commission
involved? There will be a need to harmonize laws
regarding illegal activities. How do we deal with piracy
without the process being hijacked for the purposes of
political vendettas, among other things? We need to
improve the legal framework by ensuring that member
States adopt laws against piracy that can be used in all
countries of the region. We also need to encourage the
standardization of punishments for offences at the
regional level, so that one country does not sentence a
convicted pirate to two years’ imprisonment, while
another hands out a 20-year sentence.
The Gulf of Guinea Commission is there to
perform such harmonization work for member States,
be they from ECOWAS or ECCAS. We currently have
members from West, Central and southern Africa with
shorelines on the Gulf of Guinea. It is therefore most
suitable to carry out the functions of any joint
mechanism that may be established to confront the

11-55462

dangers now shattering the peace and security of the
region. We are a brand-new organization and, if
politically supported and provided with the necessary
human and material resources, funding and other
required logistical support, we will be in a very good
position to perform our functions and fulfil our
mandate.
The United States of America, France and
Germany have been at the forefront of efforts to
provide assistance, organizing training exercises for the
maritime and naval personnel of some member States.
Nigeria, Benin and Cameroon have benefited from
such assistance, which should be coordinated and
extended to all States of the Gulf of Guinea region,
under the auspices of the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
It is our fervent hope that the Security Council will
take these factors into consideration in the decision on
a comprehensive and coordinated approach to
combating piracy and other criminal activities, such as
terrorism, robbery at sea, trafficking in arms, drugs and
persons, as well as controlling illegal, unauthorized
and undeclared fishing activities. The Gulf of Guinea
Commission was established with the objective of
warding off such maritime challenges and to control
and contain them until they are eventually eliminated.
The President: I thank Mrs. Ukonga for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I
commend you, Madame President, and the SecretaryGeneral for having taken the initiative to organize
today’s debate on an issue that has taken on worrisome
proportions in the Gulf of Guinea and along the West
African coast. Naturally, I thank the preceding
speakers for their briefings and welcome the
representatives of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission.
We share the recognition that maritime insecurity
has increased in the waters of the Gulf of Guinea. This
phenomenon involves many factors. Insecurity in the
Niger delta, in particular the attacks on oil
installations, has now extended to neighbouring
territorial waters. This transnational threat has been
compounded by the rise in trafficking activity along
the West African coast, for example in drugs, migrant
smuggling and illegal fishing. Finally, an ever-growing

7

S/PV.6633

number of hostage-taking incidents and the rising costs
of maritime trade and extraction activities threaten the
growth, development and, in turn, stability of States on
the Gulf of Guinea.
The attacks in the Gulf of Guinea have their own
features, however, and cannot be compared with the
rampant piracy off the Somali coast. Indeed, this
insecurity affects States whose sovereignty is not in
question, must be respected and should form the basis
for our actions. Thus, the guiding principle of our
policy should be that the Gulf of Guinea States bear the
primary responsibility for ensuring security in the
maritime areas under their jurisdiction.
We should operate in a framework of cooperation
among the States and organizations of the region and
on the basis of capacity-building for its stakeholders.
That is why we fully support the proposal of President
Boni Yayi of Benin to organize a regional meeting on
this issue that would focus on dialogue among the
concerned States and help to better distribute tasks
among donors of funds and assistance.
We welcome the first instances of operational
coordination between Benin, Nigeria and Cameroon, in
particular the conduct of joint maritime patrols.
Finally, we commend the initial efforts made by
regional organizations, particularly the Economic
Community of Central African States and its regional
coordination centre for maritime security.
A related issue for the Gulf of Guinea countries is
improving inter-ministerial cooperation, as well as
adapting legislation and the institutions responsible for
carrying out coast guard activities. That is the spirit of
the West Africa Coast Initiative, launched in 2009 by
the United Nations to strengthen local entities in the
fight against trafficking on the West African coast. The
Initiative brings together various sources of police,
customs and judicial expertise to that end. In that
connection, we could also consider extending this
model from the Atlantic Arc to the eastern Gulf of
Guinea.
In that regard, we welcome the Secretariat’s plan
to deploy a piracy assessment mission to the Gulf of
Guinea. We also hope that the two United Nations
offices in Dakar and Libreville can coordinate their
efforts so as to regularly brief the Council on
developments in piracy and efforts undertaken to fight
it.

8

The international community can further improve
its support to regional initiatives. France and the
European Union have spared no effort in helping the
concerned States to enhance their capacities and
maritime cooperation. France’s navy is using its ports
of call in the region to carry out training activities. On
11 October, the authorities of Equatorial Guinea
opened a new national naval academy in Bata. The
academy has a regional focus and is supported by
French cooperation. Finally, in September we launched
a priority solidarity fund project for maritime security
sector reform in the countries of the Gulf of Guinea.
The European Union is also active in this area. It
funds a project aimed at establishing a regional training
and information-sharing framework and at bolstering
coast guard activities in the States of the Gulf of
Guinea. The Strategic Sealift Contingency Planning
System is focused on strengthening efforts to fight
maritime trafficking and on ensuring the safety of ports
and goods.
We believe that these international initiatives to
support local capacities and regional coordination
represent a coherent approach to preventing and
effectively suppressing acts of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. These actions should be based on the
sovereignty of the States of the region, national
ownership of the responses to piracy and, finally,
respect for the law of the sea and freedom of
navigation. We are, of course, prepared to give close
and favourable consideration to a draft resolution on
that basis.
Ms. Viotti (Brazil): Madame President, I thank
you for convening this meeting on an issue of
increasing concern to all of us. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his presence among us today and
for his remarks.
I am also grateful to the Commissioner for
Political Affairs, Peace and Security of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and to
the Deputy Executive Secretary for Political Affairs of
the Gulf of Guinea Commission for their presentations.
Piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea are a matter of concern, especially owing to
their damaging impact on security, trade and economic
activities in one of the world’s emerging trade hubs.
We should not forget that the security situation in West
Africa was already fragile and complex, even before

11-55462

S/PV.6633

the relative intensification of cases of piracy and armed
robbery.
Issues such as transnational organized crime
compound the challenges typical of post-conflict
situations in some countries of the region, resulting in
a very disquieting picture. Efforts to combat piracy and
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea must therefore be
conducted in a concerted manner with a strategy for
stabilizing the region as a whole. International
cooperation in this field must take into account issues
related to national sovereignty and ownership, as well
as regional leadership. One cannot overemphasize the
importance of regional cooperation and leadership in
any comprehensive strategy to address this challenge.
We praise the efforts being undertaken by the
countries concerned, by ECOWAS and by the
Economic Community of Central African States to
combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
We believe that a close dialogue between the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, the
United Nations Overseas Development Council, the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the
International Maritime Organization can help intensify
the efforts of West African countries to combat
terrorism. We encourage regional and subregional
organizations and national authorities to engage in a
coordinated response from the region that takes into
account the specificity of West Africa and the
aspirations and concerns of the countries in the region.
We concur with the Secretary-General that
combating piracy must not be limited to attacking the
problem at sea. Efforts must be made to address the
root causes, which are usually found on shore.
In many cases, piracy and armed robbery at sea
are criminal manifestations of economic hardship and
lack of opportunity, posing serious challenges to
effective law enforcement by coastal States. The
adoption of a comprehensive strategy must therefore
consider political as well as socio-economic factors. It
must integrate deterrence, security, the rule of law and
socio-economic development. Efforts to develop
regional cooperation that supports national policies
aimed at enforcing security and the rule of law must be
coupled with support for economic opportunities and
job creation, especially for young people.
Brazil shares with the countries in the Gulf of
Guinea the same ocean, through which we received

11-55462

strong human and historical ties. We fully support the
sovereign right of those nations to determine the best
means to exploit the natural resources in their
exclusive economic zones, including fisheries, in
accordance with international law.
The fight against piracy and armed robbery in the
Gulf of Guinea should lead to initiatives that are in full
harmony with and supportive of the objectives and
spirit of the zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic. Brazil stands ready to contribute to that fight.
We are also prepared to cooperate with the countries of
the Gulf of Guinea region to stem armed robbery at sea
within their national jurisdiction, in coordination with
other
international
partners,
particularly
the
Governments of the region, our fellow members of the
Community of Portuguese Language Countries and
member States of the zone of peace and cooperation of
the South Atlantic.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his substantive briefing. We also
welcome the participation in this meeting of
representatives of the Economic Community of
Western African States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission.
The Russian Federation is seriously concerned
about the recent upsurge in armed robbery at sea and
the seizure of vessels for ransom as well as of highvalue freight off the west coast of Africa.
On 8 October, 70 nautical miles south of Lagos,
the German tanker Cape Bird was seized; it was freed
on 14 October. Russian Federation citizens were
among the crew taken hostage. That was not the first
case where Russian sailors suffered acts of piracy in
that subregion. We believe that such acts are serious
crimes and that the security of people, including
Russian citizens, is at risk, and we therefore intend to
give this issue high priority.
There were isolated attacks on vessels in the Gulf
of Guinea in the past, but this year piracy and armed
robbery at sea off the coasts of Ghana, Togo, Benin and
Nigeria have shown all the hallmarks of a wellfunctioning criminal enterprise that threatens the
security of maritime shipping and the economic wellbeing of coastal States.
Based on information from the International
Maritime Organization, since the beginning of this year

9

S/PV.6633

there have been upwards of 30 incidents in the Gulf of
Guinea. We believe that the real figure is much higher.
In comparison, in 2010 there was not a single serious
attack.
In addition, the character of these acts of piracy is
changing. Whereas in the past there were minor
robberies and the seizure of small vessels and small
quantities of freight, today we are seeing large-scale
robberies carried out by well-equipped groups of
pirates. In addition, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is
becoming increasingly violent. We must also now
consider the possibility of links between piracy and
other branches of organized crime, including drug
trafficking in Western Africa.
The situation in that region continues to be a
growing concern for shipping companies and the
insurance industry. Most of the attacks are carried out
close to shore, within the territorial waters of coastal
States. That demands appropriate measures of
response, mainly from the affected countries of the
region, in order to enhance the security of shipping.
We must step up control of the coast by
improving coast guard services and providing them
with the latest technical equipment. We must build on
successful experience in combating piracy in other
regions of the world’s oceans, based on the valuable
work of the International Maritime Organization in that
arena. It is clear that the primary burden for dealing
with the threat of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea lies with
the States of the region. However, they require
significant international support in their struggle.
We welcome the organizational and practical
steps adopted by the countries of the region, either
individually or within the context of regional
groupings, in particular ECOWAS, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, aimed at developing effective
ant-piracy measures. We also welcome the idea of
holding a subregional conference on the problem.
We must not underestimate the risk of piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea. If effective measures are not taken
to address it now, the situation could get out of control
in the near future. In that case, more resources and
additional effort will be required to deal with it. The
aim should be for the countries of West and Central
Africa, with the support of the international
community, to implement a combined anti-piracy

10

strategy and a coordinated security system for shipping
in the Gulf of Guinea.
Given Russia’s own experience in this area, we
are ready also to consider possible cooperative support
to those countries and regional groupings.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to begin by
thanking Nigeria for its initiative in convening this
timely debate and the Secretary-General for his useful
introductory remarks. I would also like to thank today’s
briefers, General Touré, from the Economic
Community of Western African States (ECOWAS), and
Mrs. Adenike, from the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
Their valuable presentations offer us a perspective
from the areas affected by the phenomenon of piracy.
The views and information shared are crucial for a
clearer understanding of the dimensions of the
problem, as well as of what we can do collectively to
address it.
Portugal fully shares the concerns expressed here
by the briefers and those contained in the concept notes
circulated by the Nigerian Presidency (S/2011/644).
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is not a new phenomenon;
however, in recent years it has grown more frequent,
more sophisticated in its techniques and more violent.
Its effects are felt far beyond the mere realm of
security, because it disrupts trade and economic
activity that are vital for coastal States. Most
importantly, piracy affects countries with very different
levels of institutional capacity to address the problem
and cannot be solved by isolated measures on the part
of individual States.
As we have previously remarked when discussing
the threat of organized crime in West Africa, of which
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is clearly another
ramification, success in tackling the problem in one
country can easily create additional pressure on that
country’s neighbours. We are therefore glad to see that
there is a growing consensus on the need for a regionwide strategy to fight piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
based first and foremost on the efforts of regional
bodies.
Let me add a few thoughts on the role of the
international community, and of the United Nations in
particular, in contributing to regional efforts. First, it is
very positive that the main regional organizations —
not only ECOWAS and the Economic Community of
Central African States, but also the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and the Maritime Organization of West

11-55462

S/PV.6633

and Central Africa — are paying attention to
addressing the problem of piracy. To be effective, those
distinct efforts must be coordinated, respecting each
organization’s particular area of competence. The
United Nations can play a central role in ensuring the
coherence and overall coordination of those initiatives,
particularly considering that these organizations have
different sets of members, and none of them covers all
the countries potentially affected by this threat.
We should also try to make good use of existing
mechanisms. For example, the ECOWAS regional
action plan for organized crime is a reference
framework for initiatives in this area and should be
enlarged to cover the threat of piracy as well. The West
Africa Coast Initiative, which encourages the pooling
of national knowledge and resources, could also add
the issue of piracy to its areas of activity. The same
applies to the original programmes for West Africa of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). The best practices of individual countries
and bilateral assistance programmes already in place
should be shared with regional partners.
The role of the international community in
encouraging and supporting region-led efforts is
instrumental; hence the relevance of this meeting
today, which we once again thank Nigeria for its
initiative in convening. In this context, I would also
like to underline the contribution and efforts of the
European Union in this particular field. Portugal also
attaches due importance to this issue in the framework
of its strong bilateral relations with many countries of
that region, particularly those in the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.
The international community should also
reinforce regional initiatives and capacities by
contributing to a better understanding of the
phenomenon. As the concept note recognizes, many
piracy incidents go unreported. We have very little
information about the link between acts of piracy and
organized crime onshore. We are therefore very
supportive of the idea of a United Nations assessment
mission, with the participation of UNODC and the
International Maritime Organization, to those countries
in the region most affected by piracy, in order to give
us a clearer picture. We also expect the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa, in their future reports to the
Council, to give more extensive coverage to the

11-55462

problem of piracy and their involvement with national
and regional authorities in combating it.
As we have learned from the situation in the
Indian Ocean, piracy is a complex phenomenon that
requires our regular and close attention. Encouraging
better capacities, knowledge and coordination among
the actors in the fight against piracy will result in a
decisive contribution by the Security Council to
regional stability and development.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first to thank you, Madame President, for
your initiative in holding a briefing on peace and
security in Africa and the matter of piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea. I would also like to commend the important
contributions made by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, whose presence here we appreciate; the
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Mr. Mahamane Touré; and Her Excellency
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, Deputy Executive
Secretary for Political Affairs of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission.
International statistics suggest that attacks and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of West Africa,
particularly in the Gulf of Guinea, have increased in
recent years, affecting the security of maritime
navigation in the subregion and having a harmful
impact on trade and other economic activities. This
obliges us to conduct a detailed analysis of the best
ways whereby the international community can help
the Gulf of Guinea coastal States exercise their
sovereign responsibility both to provide security to
maritime traffic in their territories and jurisdictional
waters, and to combat acts of piracy in the subregion,
where appropriate.
In addressing these problems, we must be able to
rely on precise, detailed and verifiable information on
the scope, modalities and specific areas in which the
incidents reported in the region occurred, as well as on
the deficiencies and needs of the national authorities
and subregional organizations in responding to these
illegal acts. A clear picture of the nature of the
phenomenon we are facing, and what dealing with it
requires, will enable the international community to
participate in developing initiatives tailored to each
case and in directing its assistance to the areas that the
countries of the region have designated priorities.

11

S/PV.6633

To those ends, the United Nations Charter and
international law are essential foundations for our
discussion, since they offer a legal and conceptual
framework on which to base our initiatives. The 1982
Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 1998
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Maritime Navigation defined the
scope of application and the measures that the
international community can take in helping to develop
and implement strategies to combat armed robbery at
sea and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
It is crucial that we keep leadership and the lead
role in the hands of the States concerned in the fight
against these crimes, without shirking the international
community’s duty to increase its cooperation and
technical assistance in improving national, regional and
global capacities to overcome legal and security
deficiencies relating to maritime navigation. The
United Nations, through its Department of Political
Affairs, its regional offices for West and Central
Africa, its Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the
Sea, and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, together with the International Maritime
Organization and INTERPOL, should assist the
national authorities, ECOWAS, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission in establishing and building their
capacity to respond to these multiple issues.
Finally, we believe that the international
community must support efforts to promote effective
capacity-building for preventing, combating and
eradicating these illegal acts. We should focus on
exchanging information and intelligence, disseminating
best practices, establishing technical assistance
programmes for improving national legislation and
developing action plans for the region, creating and
disseminating guidelines for timely and coordinated
responses, and considering the possibility of setting up
mechanisms to finance efforts to enhance national and
regional capacities and institutions. The United Nations
should make an urgent and permanent commitment to
providing the assistance and capacity needed to
develop a regional strategy that will ensure that this
criminal practice does not spread to other regions or
affect navigation in international waters.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Nigeria for having taken the
initiative to convene this meeting on piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea. I would also like to thank the Secretary-

12

General, Mr. Touré and Mrs. Ukonga for their
briefings.
I would like to emphasize the following points.
First, the United Nations should pay particular
attention to piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. In recent
years, acts of piracy there have increased; there have
been more attacks, and the scope of those attacks has
worsened, as has the violence involved. This is a
serious threat to economic activity in the Gulf of
Guinea and to shipping security. It is therefore also a
threat to peace and security in the region. The coastal
States, regional organizations and the international
community must become fully aware of the seriousness
of the problem of piracy and take timely measures to
combat it and prevent a worsening of the situation.
Secondly, to deal with piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea, both underlying and ongoing causes must be
addressed. The international community and the
countries of the region must focus on the causes of
piracy and adopt an integrated strategy to effectively
maintain peace and stability in the countries of the
region, based upon capacity-building aimed at ensuring
peace and dealing with the economic situation of the
countries in the region. The international community
must play an active and constructive role in that
context.
Thirdly, the coastal States and international and
regional organizations must scale up coordination.
Given the many countries along the Gulf of Guinea
coast, combating piracy will require the efforts of all
States. China pays tribute to the joint patrols launched
by Nigeria and Benin and welcomes the efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States, the Gulf
of Guinea Commission and other regional
organizations to formulate a regional strategy to
combat piracy.
It is our hope that the countries concerned and
international organizations will enhance efforts to
coordinate their work. Assistance must also be
provided to combat piracy. China calls upon the
international community to provide the necessary
support to coastal States and regional organizations by
sharing information and experience and providing
technical assistance and capacity-building.
China welcomes the decision of the SecretaryGeneral to send a fact-finding mission to the Gulf of
Guinea and hopes that the he will be able to brief the
Security Council in a timely manner.

11-55462

S/PV.6633

Mr. Singh (India): First of all, I would like to
join others in placing on record our appreciation to the
Nigerian delegation for organizing this meeting on an
issue that is becoming a major threat to maritime
navigation, trade and economic activities in the Gulf of
Guinea. I also would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the representatives of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission for their comprehensive briefings.
Their participation in the meeting today is important,
for the problem of piracy and maritime robbery is
regional and can be addressed only through the
cooperation of regional stakeholders.
Piracy off both of the coasts of Africa has become
a serious obstacle to the development aspirations of the
region. The increasing attacks on shipping vessels off
the western coast of Africa, particularly in the Gulf of
Guinea, are affecting the oil industry in the region —
which includes Nigeria, Angola and Equatorial Guinea,
the largest oil producers in sub-Saharan Africa. That
compounds the problems in the region, which already
faces others such as the illegal narcotics trade and the
proliferation of small arms.
India has been at the forefront of efforts to
highlight the menace of piracy off the coast of
Somalia, stressing the urgent need for the international
community to work towards a comprehensive counterpiracy strategy. India is also concerned about the new
surge in piracy and maritime robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea. While the two situations are different in
proportion at this stage, it is quite possible that the
failure of the international community to act decisively
against piracy off the coast of Somalia could have
spawned a new surge in piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
A number of unemployed youth have become
attracted to the business of piracy and maritime
robbery, which they find involves low cost and risk,
but yields high returns. The problem in the countries of
West Africa, therefore, is fast assuming the proportions
of an organized cartel. Societal issues of poverty,
unemployment, political instability, the lack of
appropriate naval infrastructure and weak prosecution
systems have not helped counter-piracy efforts.
While incidents of piracy and maritime robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea are considered underreported by
many, they have already escalated from low-level
armed robberies to hijackings, cargo thefts and largescale robberies. Pirates have also shown a propensity to

11-55462

employ torture and other forms of physical violence
and abuse against sailors and crew members.
In view of the increasing incidents, there is a
need to pay special attention to the safety, security and
well-being of the seafarers taken as hostage and to
ensuring their speedy release by appropriate means.
Also, given the large investments made by countries in
the region’s oil industry and the increasing oil exports
from the region, there is an urgent need to act now
before the problem assumes an even greater intensity
and proportion.
It is therefore time to focus proper attention on
the problem. We are happy to note that countries in the
region, clearly aware of the problem, have launched
efforts to collectively address the issue. India would
like to commend Nigeria for taking a lead in that
initiative, along with other affected countries in the
region.
We are also glad that the Security Council has
been seized of the matter and that its deliberations and
press releases in the past few months have helped to
increase awareness. Concrete action needs to be taken
now. In that connection, it is important that countries in
the region work together on joint counter-piracy
efforts, including sharing information and capacitybuilding related to their naval forces. In addition,
strengthened legal systems to ensure effective and
expeditious prosecution are also critical. We welcome
the decision to convene a special meeting in Equatorial
Guinea of the members of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission to discuss this issue.
The international community, led by the United
Nations, should help those regional efforts by
providing resources for capacity-building of coast
guards and naval forces. That would greatly help in
effectively patrolling the seas and carrying out
surveillance along the coast.
United Nations agencies in the region,
particularly the United Nations Office for West Africa,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Maritime Organization, have an important
role to play in regional counter-piracy efforts, as well
as in addressing the related problems of terrorism,
illicit trafficking in drugs and the proliferation of small
arms, as all those issues conspire together to
destabilize the region. To that end, we welcome the
upcoming visit of the United Nations assessment

13

S/PV.6633

mission to examine the situation
modalities for United Nations support.

and

explore

In conclusion, India stands ready to contribute to
international efforts aimed at increasing effective
cooperation among States to tackle the threat of piracy
and armed robbery at sea and at ensuring the safety and
release of hostages taken by pirates.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing this morning, as well as General Touré of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and Mrs. Ukonga of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission. The United Kingdom welcomes this
discussion of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, and I am
grateful to you, Madam President, for the leadership
you have shown in bringing this issue to the Council.
The threat that piracy and maritime robbery in the
Gulf of Guinea poses to the lives of crews and the
ongoing threat it poses to safe trade within the region
deserve our attention. The United Kingdom is
concerned by the increasing number of attacks and the
level of violence linked to piracy and maritime armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. While attacks are
currently focused on the waters of Nigeria and Benin,
the geographical scope of the attacks is expanding,
posing a greater threat to the region as a whole. Recent
reporting suggests that there have been approximately
27 reported piracy attacks this year, although many
analysts think that as few as one in 10 attacks is
actually reported.
The severity of the issue clearly calls for a
coordinated response. We therefore welcome the
initiatives of regional States, especially the joint
patrolling recently agreed by Nigeria and Benin. Strong
and robust action by military and law-enforcement
agencies is necessary to counter the threat of piracy.
This is a valuable opportunity to hear how
countries in the region are taking steps to tackle the
problem and to consider how best we can support their
efforts. Attacks by pirates not only endanger lives but,
additionally, are beginning to jeopardize oil and gas
exports, as well as dramatically increasing insurance
premiums, which is raising the cost of doing business
across the region.
It is therefore in the interests of all regional
partners to work closely with regional bodies such as
Economic Community of Central African States and

14

ECOWAS to ensure that action is taken now. We would
encourage more States to follow the examples of
Nigeria and Benin and undertake joint maritime patrols
with their neighbours and regional partners to
collectively suppress all illicit maritime activity.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is a different model
to the one used by Somali pirates. Attacks in the Gulf
of Guinea have often been more violent, with the main
focus on offloading and selling their cargo. However,
drawing on lessons learned from the international
community’s experience in countering piracy off East
Africa will be very valuable. Good examples from that
experience include the role of information stations and
coastal law-enforcement agencies, which have together
warned and steered ships away from potential attacks.
Regional action requires international support,
and the United Kingdom strongly supports the efforts
of the International Maritime Organization and the
Maritime Organization of West and Central Africa
(MOWCA) to increase the integration of regional coast
guard functions through closer coordination and
information-sharing.
In an effort to boost regional capability and
develop robust and coordinated maritime security, the
United Kingdom will continue to provide ongoing
regional maritime support. As General Touré pointed
out, in the past year the United Kingdom, in support of
the African Partnership Station, has provided maritime
security, support and training to Nigeria, Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, and has
made a commitment to participate in future regional
capacity initiatives.
The United Kingdom is also supporting the
European Union’s work with Cape Verde, Ghana and
Senegal on a project called SEACOP, which develops
national capacity to set up specialist intelligence and
investigation units located in seaports or sensitive
coastal areas to reinforce seaport capacities, develop
regional maritime intelligence and organize regional
training. We will also be supporting Ghana, with the
assistance of the shipping industry, in hosting a
maritime trade information-sharing centre that will
provide information and warnings to commercial
shipping travelling in the Gulf of Guinea. The United
Kingdom’s Maritime Trade Organization helped fight
piracy off the coast of Somalia by carrying out a
similar function.

11-55462

S/PV.6633

In conclusion, the first step to stopping piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea must come from the regional
countries working more closely together. The recent
conference in Germany, which brought together
representatives of the African Union, the International
Maritime Organization, MOWCA and the maritime
representatives of countries in the economic
communities of West and Central African States to
discuss this issue, was a useful way of bringing
together all those who must work collectively to
address this problem. It is now essential that an active
regional approach be pursued. For our part, we are
ready to engage on a Security Council resolution which
supports this regional approach.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I would like to take
this opportunity once again to thank you, Madam
President, and your delegation for having organized
this important debate. We thank the representatives of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission for
their respective briefings. The briefings allowed us to
have a better and deeper appreciation of the nature and
implications of piracy in the region. Effective action to
combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has been
hampered partly by a lack of information regarding the
extent of the problem. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks today.
While international focus has been principally on
piracy off the coast of Somalia, it should not be
forgotten that piracy affects other regions of the world,
including waters off the coast of West Africa, in
particular the Gulf of Guinea. Like others, we remain
concerned at the risk to the region’s security posed by
piracy. The increase in the number of attacks in the
past year and the violent nature of those attacks has
brought greater attention to the growing problem of
piracy off the coast of West Africa. South Africa is
concerned that those attacks pose a threat to
navigation, security and the economic development of
States in that region. We commend the efforts already
undertaken by the African States, including the joint
patrols by Nigeria and Benin, in the region.
Nonetheless, more needs to be done, and the
international community’s collective support is
required.
In the search for a tailor-made solution that fits
the threats specific to the Gulf of Guinea, it has to be
acknowledged that the countries of the region will need

11-55462

adequate resources and technical capacities to address
the scourge of piracy. We stand ready to assist to the
best of our capabilities those countries that are most
affected by piracy in the region.
We call upon other States and organizations to
offer whatever assistance they can, including through
the provision of financial and technical assistance. We
welcome the initiative taken by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office
in West Africa and the International Maritime
Organization to set up a mission to assess the region’s
capacity to combat piracy, and hope that this spirit of
partnership will contribute to the eradication of piracy.
We are encouraged in this regard by the intention
of the countries of the region to convene a summit of
heads of State and Government in order to find a
comprehensive response to the problem. We are
confident that this summit will develop an all-inclusive
strategy which aims to bolster efforts in the fight
against piracy and armed robberies in the Gulf of
Guinea. We welcome the efforts made by ECOWAS
members to discuss the creation of regional
mechanisms to tackle piracy in the region.
It is also important to acknowledge and
emphasize the importance of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, which remains the
framework for dealing with piracy on the high seas,
including the exclusive economic zone. The relevant
provisions of the Convention, including articles 101,
105 and 107, grant all States the right to exercise
universal jurisdiction. While States have the sovereign
right to legislate, more international assistance is
needed to support all efforts to fight the scourge of
piracy.
All of this makes it necessary for all States,
not only those affected, to adopt legislation to deal
with piracy and to implement such legislation.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this important briefing on piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea, which can be described as a serious threat to
peace and stability in West Africa. I should like also to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing as well as
General Mahamane Touré, Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security of the Economic
Community of West African States, as well as Her
Excellency Ms. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, Deputy
Executive Secretary for Political Affairs of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission.

15

S/PV.6633

Bosnia and Herzegovina notes with concern that
the pirate attacks in the Gulf of Guinea are a growing
threat that has a negative impact on the security,
stability and economies of West African States. We
note the efforts made by affected countries and
regional organizations to tackle the problem. We
strongly encourage the further continuation and
enhancement of regional efforts to combat this
problem. In that context, we welcome the plan to
organize a summit of Gulf of Guinea heads of State to
discuss a regional response to this matter.
We also underline the importance of international
assistance in combating the challenge of piracy and
armed robbery at sea. We therefore call upon the
international community to continue to extend its
support for that goal, as well as to support the efforts
of States and regional organizations in building the
capacity necessary to address piracy.
Although differences between piracy off the coast
of Somalia and pirate attacks in the Gulf of Guinea are
evident, lessons learned should be used to prevent the
escalation of this negative trend. We share the view of
other members that root causes must be addressed
along the coast, starting with poverty and the lack of
opportunities for young people.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the decision
of the Secretary-General to deploy an assessment
mission in November to gather more information
regarding piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and to
investigate further possibilities for collaboration with
regional organizations and States concerned to address
the problem. Bearing in mind the linkage between
piracy, organized crime and drug trafficking — which
have a direct negative impact on peace and stability —
we share the view that there is a need for a
comprehensive strategy. Of course, an important part
of such a strategy is bringing to justice those who
finance, plan, organize and execute pirate attacks and
armed robbery at sea. In that regard, information
sharing is essential.
Finally, we would like to emphasize the
importance of close cooperation among the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, the United
Nations Office for West Africa, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the International
Maritime Organization, within the framework of their
current respective mandates on this issue.

16

Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me thank the
Nigerian presidency for putting on the agenda the issue
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. I also want very much
to thank the Secretary-General and the representatives
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission for
their presentations.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has been on the rise
and is affecting economic and security interests in the
region and beyond. Early and coordinated actions are
needed in order to avoid an escalation to similar levels
as those off the Horn of Africa.
We welcome the initiatives taken so far by
different actors in the Gulf of Guinea and by
international partners. Those measures are very
important steps to enhance regional joint anti-piracy
efforts, information sharing and capacity building.
Regional organizations, such as ECOWAS, the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission have a
decisive role to play.
In 2010, the European Union (EU) began to
assess the situation with regard to maritime security in
the Gulf of Guinea. Current EU projects at the early
stage of implementation aim at capacity-building
support for ECOWAS and ECCAS, in cooperation with
the International Maritime Organization. Germany is
pleased to be associated with efforts to assist the Gulf
of Guinea Commission.
A dual approach should be followed in order to
increase maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea. First,
the maritime security capacities of the States in the
Gulf of Guinea — that is, coast guards, navies, et
cetera — should be strengthened. In doing so, the
capacity to actively fight piracy should be a priority.
Secondly, a holistic concept of maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea should be developed. Such a concept
should consider the questions of preventing and
deterring piracy, as well as the legal and political
framework to deal with pirates.
In that regard, lessons can be learned from the
fight against piracy off the coast of Somalia. The same
goes for best practices with regard to self-protection
measures for the shipping industry. However, the
success of that approach will very much depend upon
the capacity of affected States to ensure the rule of law
and effective security forces and institutions.

11-55462

S/PV.6633

We welcome the intention of the SecretaryGeneral to deploy an assessment mission to examine
the situation and explore possible options for United
Nations support. We look forward to the results of the
mission as a possible basis for further action.
We are confident that the combined expertise of
different United Nations offices and agencies — such
as the United Nations Office for West Africa, the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Maritime Organization — can be used
effectively to assist in the fight against piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. In order to enhance the effectiveness
of the different anti-piracy efforts, we encourage
further coordination and exchange of information
among all partners engaged in this area.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me join
others in thanking you, Madame President, for
convening this important meeting. We would also like
to convey our gratitude to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Touré and Mrs. Adenike Ukonga for their very
important briefings.
Today’s meeting is both timely and important. In
recent years, the number of reported incidents of piracy
and maritime armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea has
increased alarmingly. While attacks are under-reported,
we do know that in this year alone at least two dozen
maritime armed robbery and piracy attacks were
reported in the Gulf of Guinea, with a particularly
sharp increase in incidents off the coast of Benin. Such
attacks, whether within territorial waters or on the high
seas, threaten regional and maritime security and the
safety of seafarers, as well as impede economic growth
across West and Central Africa. Maritime attacks have
included assaults on coastal cities, and even an attack
on the presidential palace in Malabo, the coastal capital
of Equatorial Guinea. Illicit maritime trafficking in
goods, drugs and persons also undermines governance
and unravels the fabric of fragile societies.
The impact of maritime crime on local economies
is substantial. It has become a crippling problem in
countries including Benin, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire,
Gabon, Ghana and Nigeria. Militants in the Niger delta
have demonstrated the capacity to reach offshore oil
facilities in recent years, threatening the secure supply
of the over 2 million barrels of oil that emanate from
that region every day. The increasing frequency of

11-55462

attacks against the shipping sector in Benin is a
particular concern.
Beyond its impact on the oil sector, by one
estimate attacks on offshore oil facilities result in an
estimated loss of $2 billion annually to the broader
regional economy, including the fishing industry and
commercial shipping. That is obviously a very high
price for a region with urgent development needs and
fragile economies.
In early August, only 50 ships were at anchor in
Cotonou’s port, instead of the usual 150. Benin has
experienced a dramatic drop in the customs fees and
other port revenues on which the Government relies for
55 per cent of its revenue.
There are important differences, thus far, between
piracy and maritime attacks in the Gulf of Guinea and
those along the coast of Somalia. In the Gulf of Guinea
attackers primarily seek to steal valuable commodities,
which are often sold illicitly in West and Central
Africa. Cargo and valuables are what the attackers
typically want, not necessarily the ships themselves or
the crew and passengers. Somali pirates usually strike
on the high seas, and then utilize safe havens on shore
to hold ships and people hostage. In the Gulf of Guinea
criminals often operate closer to shore, usually with the
goal of robbery rather than hostage-taken. They have
mainly left crews and passengers unharmed.
Clearly, the primary responsibility for patrolling
and security territorial waters rests with individual
countries in the region. Each country should make
maritime security a national priority, both as a matter
of law enforcement and to enable continued economic
development. Yet the international community, too,
must do more to support regional and national efforts.
The United States supports the work of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) to
strengthen coordination among countries in the region.
Since 2007 the United States has provided
approximately $35 million in coastal radar, equipment,
boats and associated maritime security training to our
West and Central African partners. The United States is
committed to collaborating with our African and other
international friends to build national and regional
maritime capacity through programmes like the Africa
Partnership Station and the African Maritime Law
Enforcement Partnership.

17

S/PV.6633

Earlier this year, in exercises hosted by ECCAS,
the United States Navy worked with Belgium,
Cameroon, France, Gabon, Nigeria, Sao Tome and
Principe, the Republic of Congo and Spain to help
local forces improve their capacity to counter illicit
maritime activities. Those and other Africa Partnership
Station activities will strengthen regional maritime
coordination and improve maritime safety and security
in Africa. Those are just a few examples of
international support to the region’s maritime security
efforts.
In order to strengthen international assistance in
the region, we would all benefit from additional insight
and information. The United States therefore welcomes
the Secretary-General’s decision to send a fact-finding
team to the Gulf of Guinea. We look forward to
receiving his report. We hope it will contain important
insights about how to build national and regional
capacity to counter maritime security threats and
strengthen the maritime sector as a whole.
The scourge of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has
threatened the economies, Governments and peoples of
the region for far too long. Now it is time for the States
of the region, with the close support of the
international community, to work together to address
the threat effectively.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Madame President, for
having convened this meeting. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his important briefing,
as well as Mr. Touré and Mrs. Ukonga for their
statements.
We are seriously concerned about the increasing
number of acts of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and
about drug trafficking, hostage-taking and armed
robbery along the coast of that region. We also
condemn those crimes, which destabilize the region
and undermine security. They also threaten commercial
shipping and have a negative impact on economic
development. The losses from such acts are huge,
especially when it comes to the oil, fishing and
shipping industries.
Lebanon believes that piracy is evolving, thereby
requiring an effective and swift response at the
national, regional and international levels. At the
national level, we emphasize the need to support
countries in the region to build their own capacities
and modernize their equipment, so as to enable them to

18

eliminate piracy. We also call for harmonization
between domestic and international law in combating
piracy so that countries of the region can capture
pirates and armed bandits, bring them to justice and
imprison the guilty.
At the regional level, we welcome the joint sea
patrols by States of the region in the Gulf of Guinea to
combat piracy, as well as the information exchange
among those countries. We urge them to increase that
cooperation and coordination. We also stress the
importance of regional organizations, such as the
Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union and the Economic Community of
Central African States, establishing a regional plan to
combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea by instituting a
joint protection force. That would entail protecting the
countries’ territorial waters and cooperation with the
United Nations Regional Offices for Central and West
Africa.
At the international level, we should be guided by
international law, which provides the necessary legal
framework to deal with piracy. We would like to thank
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for
placing its expertise at the disposal of the countries of
the region. We call on the international community and
the Security Council to support plans by those
countries to establish joint protection forces to patrol
their coastlines.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s decision to
deploy an assessment mission to the Gulf of Guinea to
explore the various options available to the United
Nations to combat piracy.
Finally, would like to reiterate what we have said
in the past on the subject of piracy in Somalia. We
believe that dealing with the underlying causes of
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea in the longer term will
require that we address the economic and social
problems that countries face, set up sustainable
development programmes and combat poverty and
unemployment. We also need to engage in capacitybuilding for Government institutions, including coast
guards, so that countries of the region can control their
territorial waters and ensure a better future for their
people.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Nigeria
for having inscribed on the agenda the important issue
of maritime piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. I also wish to

11-55462

S/PV.6633

thank the Secretary-General and the representatives of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission for
their important contributions to today’s debate.
The region of the Gulf of Guinea, which includes
my country, has the two-fold advantage of being rich in
fishing and oil resources as well as an area of great
geopolitical and geostrategic importance. Recent
events in the Gulf of Guinea — especially in Benin and
Nigeria — show the point to which piracy has become
a real threat to international peace and security.
My country welcomes the constant efforts of
Nigeria in the fight against this phenomenon in the
Gulf of Guinea region. We support the initiatives in
that regard undertaken by Benin and your own country,
Madame President, including the upcoming summit to
develop a regional strategy to combat piracy in the
region.
Given the ongoing nature of the piracy
phenomenon, we support the Secretary-General’s plan
to deploy an assessment mission to the region to
explore the possibility of a United Nations role.
I should now like to turn to Gabon’s efforts in the
fight against piracy, efforts at the regional level and
efforts at the international level.
At the national level, Gabon is party to the
principal legal instruments pertaining to maritime
piracy, specifically, the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea and the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Maritime Navigation, signed in Rome in 1988,
including its additional Protocol. Moreover, my
country has participated in enforcing those legal
instruments and their means of suppressing maritime
piracy.
At the regional level, there is a need to strengthen
inter-State cooperation in the fight against maritime
piracy; while, at the international level, there is a need
to strengthen legal instruments and the means of
enforcing them. In that regard, Gabon would like to
highlight the efforts made by regional economic
communities, namely, the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and ECOWAS. In
Central Africa, for instance, Cameroon, Equatorial
Guinea and my own country signed a technical
agreement in May 2009 on carrying out regular joint
patrols in the three areas under maritime surveillance

11-55462

identified by ECCAS. Likewise, a mechanism for
combating maritime piracy has been put in place in the
subregion.
I also support the idea that the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa and the United
Nations Office in West Africa cooperate closely in the
fight against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
For its part, the African Union has put together a
comprehensive regional programme to combat
maritime crime. As part of its implementation, with the
support of the Africa Center for Strategic Studies and
the United States Africa Command, a process has been
launched to bring the two regional centres into closer
communication in order to strengthen their cooperation
in the fight against, and eradication of, the threats
related to maritime activities.
At the international level, the meetings among the
countries of the Gulf of Guinea held in Stuttgart and
Garmisch, Germany, in June and July are also part of
such efforts.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to welcome the military assistance that the United
States, France and Germany have provided to the
countries of the Gulf of Guinea in their fight against
this phenomenon.
Thanks
to
these
partnerships,
regional
cooperation has already produced noteworthy results.
However, that cooperation should be strengthened in
terms of training for coast guard units, financing for
equipment
and
infrastructure,
and
bolstering
information and cooperation mechanisms between
existing regional forces.
Many countries, including mine, believe that
while these conventional mechanisms are important,
they do not take into account the specificities of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea. It is for this reason that Gabon
has sought to work with other Gulf of Guinea countries
to strengthen national and subregional measures to
combat maritime piracy, as well as the confidencebuilding measures undertaken in the context of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa.
At the international level, Gabon supports the
drafting and adoption of a general convention against
maritime piracy. The effectiveness of such an
instrument would strengthen the mechanisms already
in place in this area.

19

S/PV.6633

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Nigeria.
First, I want to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, not only for his briefing this morning but
especially for his abiding interest in the subject under
review. My appreciation also goes to Mr. Touré of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Commission and Ambassador Adenike
Ukunga of the Commission of the Gulf of Guinea for
their very lucid and detailed briefings.
The challenges of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
are enormous and daunting, with devastating
consequences for the economies of the countries of the
subregion. These reprehensible acts are unremitting
and continue to hamper maritime navigation,
consequently threatening the stability and security of
coastal countries and beyond.
We now know that perpetrators are motivated by
access to crude oil and that many of them are also
involved in the trafficking of illicit goods and small
arms and light weapons. Their activities have led to an
escalation in criminal acts, including armed attacks on
financial institutions along coastal areas. In convening
this briefing, our intention was to build on the
momentum already generated through the Council’s
statement of 30 August and to underpin the resolve of
the international community to tackle the problem.
As has been aptly acknowledged by speakers
before me this morning, Nigeria is already working
with bilateral and multilateral partners to find solutions
to these challenges, One of these initiatives is my
country’s cooperative arrangement with the Republic
of Benin to confront piracy, in the spirit of collective
security. Our joint patrol mission incorporates a fleet of
armed vessels to patrol our territorial waters and
disrupt the activities of pirates. For an initial period of
six months, a fleet of six Nigerian vessels and
helicopters will work with the Beninese navy to deter
piracy and counter the threat that these criminals pose.
The recent call by ECOWAS to incorporate elements
from all of the coastal areas and beyond in the patrol
and interdiction effort is very pertinent. Obviously, this
problem cannot be resolved by two nations alone; it is
a collective responsibility. For this reason, we eagerly
look forward to the forthcoming summit of the heads
of State of the region to devise a comprehensive
strategy to address this important threat.

20

We are nevertheless mindful of the capacity
constraints that confront countries in the region. It is in
that connection that we call on the international
community to support ongoing regional efforts. Thus
far, France and the United States have deployed naval
vessels to the area and are assisting with anti-piracy
training. Such international initiatives, including
efforts by the United Kingdom, are highly appreciated
and must be encouraged. China has also recently
offered funds to the Government of Benin to assist in
its antipiracy efforts. I believe I speak for many
affected countries when I say that we are willing to
form strategic and lasting partnerships with
international stakeholders to exchange information and
technical know-how, mount surveillance and formulate
interception techniques, all culminating in capacitybuilding.
There is no doubt that cooperative arrangements
such as these will benefit enormously from the overall
strategic assessment of the Secretary-General’s
intended mission to the region. We hope that the
briefing today will provide the mission with the
necessary focus to undertake this assignment. It is also
expected that concrete proposals for United Nations
support will emerge from the mission, capitalizing on
the presence and activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa, the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.
The need for concerted international effort to
address the problem of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
cannot be overemphasized. The Council must therefore
lend its support to regional efforts and, in so doing,
eliminate the security challenge that affects not only
the countries of the Gulf of Guinea but also
international navigation.
Today, following this meeting, Nigeria will
circulate a draft resolution that builds on the statement
of 30 August. The draft resolution focuses on regional
cooperation as the basis of the fight against piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea and calls for firm, strategic and
targeted international support for this demonstrable
political will.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Benin.

11-55462

S/PV.6633

Mr. Zinsou (Benin): As this is the first time that I
take the floor, allow me, at the outset, to congratulate
you, Madame President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. The countries of
the Gulf of Guinea, on behalf of which I speak, wish
you full success during your presidency. Let me also
commend your predecessor for his leadership in
guiding the work of the Council during the month of
September.
The States of the Gulf of Guinea are confronted
with the resurgence of piracy and armed robbery along
their coasts. In the recent months, the phenomenon has
grown to worrying proportions on the coasts of those
States.
This situation seriously affects the safety of
maritime navigation and increases the level of
transnational organized crime in the region. It is
seriously affecting the ability of the States to meet their
primary responsibility to protect people and goods in
their territory and to secure safe traffic in their
territorial waters. As such, the upsurge of piracy and
armed robbery represent a serious threat to peace and
security in the region, since it also has negative
impacts on the economic performance of the States
concerned and could destabilize them.
If left unaddressed, this situation could seriously
jeopardize the tremendous investments made by the
international community in both establishing durable
peace and in fostering economic development in the
subregion. It is not in the interest of the international
community to tolerate the establishment off the coast
of West and Central Africa of a zone of lawlessness
breeding all kinds of illicit activities, including the
smuggling of illegal immigrants, human trafficking,
and the traffic in small arms and light weapons. These
worrying occurrences at sea have also been
accompanied by an increase of arms attacks on banks
and trading centres in cities along the rivers,
undermining the confidence of citizens in the ability of
the States to protect their assets and their lives.
To tackle the problem, the States of the Gulf of
Guinea have taken many initiatives, including joint
patrols at sea, mainly between the Federal Republic of
Nigeria and the Republic of Benin, the countries most
affected. The Heads of States of the region are carrying
on consultations with the intention of convening a
summit for the consideration of a comprehensive
response to the threat. In addition to these efforts, the

11-55462

Heads of States have also felt, quite rightly, the
necessity to inform the wider international community,
expecting its support in undertaking an effective fight
against the phenomenon. In this regard, consultations
and meetings have been held by the Permanent
Representatives of the States of the Gulf of Guinea,
and have been extended to all members of the African
Group in August.
The efforts made and other initiatives taken by
the Heads of State of the region and here in New York
by the ambassadors have enjoyed an initial favourable
response of the United Nations. Indeed, on 30 August
the Security Council, briefed on the matter by
Mr. Lynn
Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Political Affairs, issued a press statement (SC/10372)
on the matter of piracy and maritime armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea off the coast of West Africa.
In this regard, I would like, on behalf of the
States of the region, to pay a sincere tribute to the
Security Council for the promptness of its response,
which, among other things, seriously strengthened the
affected Member States in their efforts to find the best
strategy against the threat. It was encouraging that,
through the aforementioned press statement, the
members of the Security Council expressed concern
over the increase in piracy, maritime armed robbery
and hostage-taking in the Gulf of Guinea and their
damaging impact on security, trade and economic
activities in the subregion.
Our Governments are galvanized by the
recognition of the leadership role of the regional bodies
and States on this issue and of the need for the
international community to support affected countries,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Economic Community of Central
African States and other relevant organizations, as
appropriate, in securing international navigation along
the Gulf of Guinea. We would like to encourage the
Secretary-General to deploy a United Nations
assessment mission to consider the situation and
explore possible options for United Nations support for
developing a comprehensive strategy to address this
threat.
The countries of the Gulf of Guinea highly
appreciate the readiness of the international community
to provide the necessary support to strengthen the
national and regional efforts deployed to tackle the
problem of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of

21

S/PV.6633

Guinea. In this regard, we are of the view that the
Security Council should consider going one step
further by adopting a resolution on the issue in order to
generate a clear mandate for all stakeholders to support
the determination of our Governments to take decisive
measures, individually and collectively, to restore
maritime safety and the security of maritime navigation
in the region.

their sovereign function of ensuring human security
and the provision of public services. With the
entrenchment of regional integration, the threat of
inter-State conflict is now negligible, if not almost
extinct. However, the threats coming from scourges
such as maritime piracy and the growth in unlawful
activities that threaten the security of States are also a
genuine threat to international peace and security.

We also believe that the adoption of such a
resolution would send a strong signal to the pirates that
the international community always remains united and
strong in the fight against transboundary organized
crime and terror wherever they occur. The States of the
Gulf of Guinea suggest that, through such a resolution,
the Council would offer them strong encouragement to
step up their individual and collective efforts to
overcome the scourge of piracy and armed robbery
along their coasts, and strive to establish a common
framework of action. We think that the Council could
also pledge its full support and assistance to the
establishment of such a regional framework, in liaison
with the relevant regional organizations. It is well
known that the implementation of such measures
requires the mobilization of special expertise and
material and financial resources for the development of
strong capacities at national and regional levels.

The upsurge in attacks against banks and peaceful
citizens going about their productive activities in
markets and the concomitant increase in attacks at sea
against commercial shipping and oil tankers have led
to a significant reduction in the number of ships that
berth in the autonomous port of Cotonou. The risk of
seeing the State of Benin and its young democracy
stifled under the impact of these illicit activities is
enormous. The autonomous port of Cotonou is the
main source of customs income, which represents more
than 55 per cent of the income funding the national
budget, which depends essentially on tax revenues.
There were genuine signs of this income being wiped
out because of the unsafe reputation of the port due to
the growth in unlawful activities off the coast of Benin.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that the
upsurge of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf
of Guinea is a global challenge. It should not be left on
the shoulders of the countries affected, even if they
have demonstrated, as we have done, strong
determination to take action against this phenomenon
and their readiness to develop a regional framework to
foster the coordination of their collective measures
against it. In this sense, the States of the Gulf of
Guinea expect a lot from the debate being held today.
We are confident that the Security Council will assume
its responsibility to act to strengthen peace and security
in the subregion.
(spoke in French)
Having made this joint statement, I should like to
make a few comments in my national capacity.
I pay tribute to the Secretary-General, ECOWAS
and the Gulf of Guinea Commission for their
significant contributions to this debate.
The capacity of States to maintain order and
peace on their territory depends on their ability to fulfil

22

Aware of the seriousness of the situation, the
President of the Republic of Benin, His Excellency
Mr. Boni Yayi, brought it to the permanent members of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General. Since
then, the Government of Benin has sought every means
possible to combat and eliminate piracy off the coast of
Benin.
Among the measures taken, I would like to
mention here the repair and putting back into service of
two patrol boats acquired by the Benin navy within the
framework of cooperation with China, and the
measures taken with Nigeria to conduct joint
surveillance patrols in the territorial waters of Benin to
make shipping activities safe. Since the launching of
these joint patrols, there has been no instance of piracy.
Furthermore, Benin has decided to invest in
strengthening maritime security and is taking measures
to increase its logistical capacities for its navy by
procuring new surveillance vessels, both maritime and
aerial. By the beginning of next year, the Benin fleet
will grow to six ships. Benin, through me, would like
to thank all the development partners who are
cooperating in building the capacity of our navy.
A year from now, the armed forces of Benin will
be able to ensure security within its territorial waters

11-55462

S/PV.6633

and to contribute more to efforts in the subregion to
ensure, within the regional integration framework, the
security of people and goods both on land and at sea.
Clearly, the process of integrating naval forces and of
establishing a regional framework for cooperation, in
line with the maritime security strategy of the African
Union, will develop along the line of sharing means
and resources so that the States concerned assume
ownership of their maritime territorial waters and,
above all, so that an information exchange network can
be developed and local expertise built up to ensure the
effectiveness of individual and collective management
of threats at sea.
The Government of Benin thanks the Security
Council for sizing up the true scale of the threat
represented by piracy and the growth of unlawful
activities in the Gulf of Guinea, as it has demonstrated
in this meeting. Benin is convinced that as the Council
understands the global dimension of the problem, it
will draw the appropriate conclusions to help the States
of the region to effectively combat this threat to
international peace and security.

Benin very much hopes that, through the adoption
of a resolution on this issue under Chapter VIII of the
Charter, the Security Council will establish a clear
mandate for a determined commitment by the
international community to support the efforts being
made by countries in the region in order to establish
coordinated and coherent efforts to combat organized
transborder crime.
In this regard, we welcome the decision of the
Secretary-General to send an integrated technical
mission to Benin to examine the necessary forms of
assistance. I would like to assure him of the full
readiness of Benin to cooperate with the entire United
Nations system to totally eliminate the scourge of
piracy and unlawful activities off our coast.
The President: I thank the representative of
Benin for his statement.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

11-55462

23
