1863rd

United Nattons

PLENARY MEETING

GE NE RA L
ASS EM BLY

Tuesday, 13 Octobe r 1970,
at 10.30 a.m.

TWENTY·FIFTH SESSION
NEW

Official Records
CONTE NTS
Page

Agenda item 65:
Question of Fiji: report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
.
Countries and Peoples
Agenda item lOO:
.
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
Agenda item 21:
Celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
'"
Nations (continue d)

YORK

The draft resolution was adopte d by acclamation
(,.esolution 2622 (XXV)) .
4. The PRESI DENT : I declare Fiji admitte d to membership in the United Nation s.

The delegation of Fiji was escorte d to its place in
the General Assem bly hall.

10

President: Mr. Edvard HAMBRO (Norw ay).

AGENDA ITEM 65
Question of Fiji: report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to ~he Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
1. The PRESI DENT : I would refer the Assem bly
to the letter from the Chairm an of the Fourth Committee dated 8 Octobe r 1970 [A/8I05], which informs the
Genera l Assem bly that the Comm ittee has conclu ded
c0~sideration of item 65 "by taking note with satisfac
tion that Fiji was about to achieve the goals laid down
in the Charte r of the United Nation s and the Declar ation on the Grantin g of Indepe ndence to Colonial
Countr ies and People s and extend ing to the people
of Fiji congra tulation s and best wishes for peace and
prospe rity in the future" .
2. May I take it that the Genera l Assem bly takes
note of the letter from the Chairm an of the Fourth
Comm ittee and has thus conclu ded its consid eration
of agenda item 65?

It was so decided.

AGENDA ITEM 100
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
3. The PRESI DENT : The Securit y Counci l has
unanim ously recomm ended, in docum ent A/8119, that
the Genera l Assem bly should admit Fiji to membe rship
of the United Nation s. In this connex ion a draft resolution ha5 been submit ted by 28 countri es [A/L.595] for
consid eration by the Genera l Assembly. May I take
it that the Genera l Assem bly decides to accept the
recomm endatio n of the Securit y Counci l and to adopt
this draft resolut ion by acclam ation, admitti ng Fiji to
membe rship of the United Nation s?

5. Yhe PRESI DENT : On the eve of our comme morative session , it is a special pleasur e for me on behalf
of the Genera l Assem bly to greet a new Memb er that
has becom e indepe ndent under the sign of peace, a
countr y of great beauty , where the old and the new,
sea and mounta in and many differe nt races all live
togethe r in amity. We look forwar d to co-ope rating
with represe ntative s of Fiji and we have confide nce
that Fiji, drawin g on a rich and varied nationa l
experie nce, will make import ant contrib utions to the
work of our Organi zation.
6. Sir Colin CROW E (United Kingdom): I have a
most welcom e task today. It has been the privilege
of my delegat ion to join all the other Comm onwea lth
delegat ions in co-spo nsoring the draft resolut ion that
the Genera l Assem bly has just adopte d. It now gives
me the greates t pleasur e to be the first to congra tulate
the State of Fiji on its admiss ion to membe rship of
our Organi zation.
7. The delegat ion of Fiji, which is presen t with us
now, can have no doubt of the warmth and sinceri ty
of the good wishes and congra tulatio ns of the United
Kingdo m delegat ion.

8. When I spoke in the Securit y Counci l on Saturd ay
last [1554th meetin g] in sponso rship of Fiji's application for membe rship, I drew attenti on to the wisdom
and statesm anship of the leaders of Fiji and to the
lead they had given their people , which had transcended earlier differe nces among the main communitie s in the islands . Their action, which was wholly
conson ant with the overrid ing interes t of all the people
of Fiji, made possibl e a move to indepe ndence in a
spirit of unity and harmon y. I expres sed my admira tion
for that spirit in my statem ent to the Securit y Counci l
and I have no hesitat ion in expres sing it again today
to this wider audien ce.

2
10. Finally ,
good wishes
people of Fij
for them. It

11. Mr. SC
land delegat i
most warmly
Our relation s
is only two
are very clos
12. The sue
Confer ence i
ment that
Octobe r wer
New Zealan d
Minist er was
celebra tions.
sincere wishe
island nation
expect ed to
hithert o in th
are convin ce
be a worthy
13. Fiji has
many difficul
racial societ
forms which
of the variou
That it has
co-ope ration
ca! parties an
their determ i
of their corn
Fiji as a wh
the Consti tut

"Inam u
toleran ce
These qual
traditio ns
sions in th
and intere
the multi-r
! am sure ar
basis for the
14. It is an
membe rship
annive rsary y
the Declar ati
a happy exa
to indepe nde
people .

9. The people of Fiji took the last steps to indepe ndence with a firm and confide nt stride and, it gives
me pleasur e to say, in the closest co-ope ration with
the then admini stering Power, my own countr y. What
could be a happie r augury for the contrib ution which
I feel sure Fiji will make to our Organi zation?

15. New Ze
a South Paci
strengt hening
friendship, h
close and sov

A/PV.1 863

16. Mr. KU
for my delega

2

General Assembly - Twenty-fifth Session - Plenary Meetings

10. Finally, I should like to express again the warmest
good wishes of my delegation to the Government and
people of Fiji. This must be a proud and happy day
for them. It certainly is for us.
11. Mr. SCOTT (New Zealand): For the New Zealand delegation it is a special pleasure to welcome Fiji
most warmly to membership "in' the Goifed' Nations.
Our relations with Fiji, a South Pacific country which
is only two hours distant from New Zealand by air,
are very close and friendly.
12. The successful outcome of the Fiji Constitutional
Conference in London earlier this year and the agreement that Fiji would become independent on 10
October were greeted with particular pleasure by the
New Zealand Government. A few day .. ago my Prime
Minister was p.esent in Suva for th; independence
celebrations. He took with him New Zealand's most
sincere wishes for the future well-being ofthis emergent
island nation which, as an independent State may be
expected to play an even more significant role than
hitherto in the development of the South Pacific. We
are convinced that Fiji, with its dynamic people, will
be a worthy new Member of this Organization.
13. Fiji has encountered in the past, and still faces,
many difficult tasks in its nation-building. As a multiracial society Fiji has had to seek for constitutional
forms which would reflect th.e aspirations and rights
of the various communities which -make up its people.
That it has succeeded is a great compliment to the
co-operation and understanding of the leaders of political parties and communities in Fiji. They have shown
their determination to m;:Jve together in unity, in pursuit
of their common goal of the progress and welfare of
Fiji as a whole. The Prime Minister of Fiji stated at
the Constitutional Conference earlier this year:
"In a multi-racial society trust, understanding, and
tolerance are the cornerstones of peace and order.
These qualities are nourished and developed by the
traditions and culture of every race. Hence the provisions in the Constitution to safeguard the culture
and interests of the various units which make up
the multi-racial society of Fiji. ..
! am sure all will agree that this represents a solid
basis for the future success of Fiji.
14. It is an added pleasure that Fiji is joining the
membership of this Organization in its twenty-fifth
anniversary year and in the tenth anniversary year of
the Declaration on colonialism since it provides us with
a happy example of a Territory emerging peacefully
to independence in accordance with the wishes of the
people.
15. New Zealand is fully conscious of its identity as
a South Pacific country and we look forward to the
strengthening and maturing of our present warm
friendship, here at the United Nations, with our new
close and sovereign neighbour, Fiji.
16. Mr. KURUBO (Nigeria): It is a great pleasure
for my delegation to speak on this auspicious occasion

Jf the admission of the island of Fiji to membership
of this Assembly. Fiji's qualifications for membership
of the United Nations should leave no doubt in anyone's mind. In our opinion, no one can allege that
Fiji has non-peaceful intentions, and we are convinced
that the new State is willing and sufficiently able to
discharge me obligations it has assumed under the
Charter.
17. My delegation is therefore gratified that the Security Council was unanimous in recommending Fiji's
application for endorsement by this Assembly. It was
also right that, given the clear merit of this particular
application and the shortness of time involved, the
Security Council found it wise to deal expeditiously
with the application and dispense with the relevant
provisions of the Council's rules of procedure, which
might grind too slowly in certain circumstances.

digni
dom,
21.

admi
gran
cele"
of so
ity f
22.

grat
We
nati
and
of i
inde

,.

23.

18. This morning the delegation of Nigeria felt honoured to lend support to Fiji's admission to this
Organization-for two happy reasons. First, we joined
in co-sponsoring with other Commonwealth members
the draft resolution that has been adopted by the
Assembly, for the approval of Fiji's application. My
Government had no reservations in considering that
the newest Commonwealth member fully qualifies for
membership in this Organization. As partners in the
Commonwealth, we believe that Fiji will bring valuable
contributions to the work of the United Nations, in
furthering the purposes of the Organization and the
application of the prindples of international relations
for which the United Nations stands.

anm
the
ing
can
sion
beh
dele
see
the
24.

ticu
the
tura
in c
roa
and
out
as
ma
orig
al
The
ese
too
not
wel
refr
bro
con
co

19. Secondly, I am privileged to be in the position
ofwelcuming Fiji to membership of the United Nations
this morning on behalf of the African group of Member
States of which my delegation is Chairman during the
current month, October 1970. As is well known, the
group of countries on whose behalf I speak share a
particularly unique experience in the post-war
decolonization process in which it is acknowledged
the United Nations has played a significant role. The
African membership of this Organization has resulted,
in large measure, from the achievement of the movements for national liberation which have characterized
the histories of their respective countries in recent
years. It is therefore a matter of common pride for
us, on a felicitous occasion like this, to welcome the
accession to sovereign independence of a country and
people for so long subjected to dependent statehood.
20. But the joy we derive from this auspici.ous occasion should only remind us more vividly and forcibly
of the unfinished business of decolonization that the
United Nations still faces in other areas of the world,
particularly in a large part of the African continent.
The United Nations is committed to, and should press
steadily on with, the task of securing the right to selfdetermination and independence of the millions of
people languishing under the systems of colonization
and racist oppression in southern Africa. It is of critical
importance that the frontiers of freedom shoulJ be
expanded to long-dominated areas of our continent and
that the peoples concerned should have their human

25.

•

ar
In
int
int
acr
tho
Asi
a t
en
to
po
the
in

1863rd meeting - 13 October 1970
dignity and the enjoyment of their fundamental freedoms restored to them.
21. It is perhaps an instructive coincidence that the
administering Power, whose further achievement in the
granting of independence to colonial countries we
celebrate with the admission of Fiji to the community
of sovereign nations, also has a significant responsibility for the enlargement of freedom in southern Africa.

•

22. The Nigerian delegation extends its heartiest congratulations and best wishes to the new State of Fiji.
We wish the Government and people of that island
nation every success in their political independence
and prosperity for their future. We trust that the flavour
of international life will gain enrichment with the
independence of Fiji, the crossroads of the Pacific.
23. Mr. ABDULGANI (Indonesia): The twenty-fifth
anniversary of the founding of this Organization and
the tenth annivel sary of the Declaration on the Granting ofIndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
can be celebrated in no better way than by the admission of a new Member into our midst. Therefore, on
behalf of my country, Indonesia, and the Indonesian
delegation, I should like to say how happy we are to
see Fiji obtain its independence and be admitted into
the United Nations.
24. We in Indonesia have many reasons to be pllrticularly happy with Fiji's independence and entry into
the United Nations since, both geographically and culturally, the Indonesian and Fijian peoples have much
in common. Indonesia is an archipelago on the crossroads of two great continents and two great oceans,
and the islands of Fiji lie quite close to us, reaching
out into the middle of the Pacific. We have historical,
as well as geographical, ties with the Fijian peoples,
many of whom, we are told by scholars, trace their
origin to an arrival by sea from the West and speak
a language belonging to the Malayo-Polynesian group.
The title ratu of the Fijian Prime Minister, Ratu Kamisese K.T. Mara, sounds familiar to our ears, for we
too have long used the word raW to refer to nobility,
not only nobility of standing, but nobility of spirit as
well. These are some of the reasons why we cannot
refrain from expressing our particular joy that our
brothers and sisters in Fiji have once again regained
control of their own destiny and are joining the world
community here today.

..

25. We all know that the Pacific Ocean is not always
a region blessed with peace, as its name would imply.
In the recent past, as a result of conflicting· power
interests, we have seen its calm surface transformed
into fearsome and destructive waves which swept
across its entire length and breadth, affecting even
those of us like Indonesia and the whole of South-East
Asia located on its periphery. Wp; know that if such
a tempest were to arise again, it would most surely
engulf South-East Asia as it did in 1942. We are pleased
to see any step that may help to ensure that the Pacific
possesses the characteristics that its name implies, and
the independence of a new nation is an important factor
in achieving the peace and calm which we all seek.

3

4

26. In earlier times, when we, too, were a colony
of a European Power, our eyes were directed towards
the West. But when the new nation of Indonesia was
born in 1945, we began to look also to the East, realizing
that our fate and future were inextricably linked to
the region around us, including the Pacific. The search
for modernization which is so often linked with westernization is, for Indonesia, no longer a looking to the
west in the traditional sense, but rather a looking to
the east, to those countries that surround the Pacific
and are located in the centre of the Pacific.

th
st

34
gr

m

A
w
p

in

10

27. Fiji, like Indonesia, is a nation which has arisen
from the colonial system. We congratulate the Fijian
people that they were not compelled to follow the
bloody path ofreyolution to attain their independence.
We are gratified that the metropolitan Power had the
wisdom to heed the lmock on the door, and to realize
that if it were not heeded it would not cease, and that
the door would be broken down by force. The independence of the Fijian Islands shows us that even the
smallest nations will ultimately regain their freedom,
that even though it is a small country economically
and militarily, Fiji's independence was inevitable.
28. In witnessing the admission of Fiji into the United
Nations, it is appropriate to note that it is on the basis
of sovereignty and full equality, and that it is not open
to bargaining. The small nations of the world belong
in this Organization and it is timely to recall tht it
is in defence of their rights that the United Nations
has its greatest obligation.
29. It is then in this spirit of brotherhood that the
Indonesian delegation extends its welcome to the Fijian
people and Governmrnt at this historic moment on
the eve of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations.
30. Mr. RAMPHUL(Mauritius): Mr. President, since
this is the first time my delegation is speaking from
this rostrum during this twenty-fifth session, I wish
to extend LV you my warm congratulations on your
election as President of this important session. We are
fOIlunate that our proceedings are directed by such
an eminent statesman and distinguished scholar. We
can express our satisfaction at the work which you
have already done and at the great ability you have
shown thus far. We are confident that you will continue
to guide this Assembly with wisdom and competence.
31. I should at the same time pay a well-deserved
tribute to Mrs. Angie Brooks-Randolph of Liberia, who
so ably presided over our last session.
32. On behalf of Mauritius, I congratulate the newest
Member of the United Nations, and look forward to
welcoming among us in the near future its head of
Government, Sir Kamisese Mara.
33. We rejoice at the birth of Fiji and its admission
to the United Nations because, at a time when we
are about formally to celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, we would like to

of

35
to
ar
M

sh
w

ca
eq
K

th
pe
p

36
ac
ab
m

be
ye
T

of
be
fo
to
ha
fo
ov
37
th
m

pe
va
38
of
wi
int
3

th
w

gr
in
U

M
c
w

de
rit
co

4

General Assembly - Twenty-fifth Session - Plenary Meetings

think that the process of decolonization has not
stopped.
34. In this twenty-fIfth anniversary session, we also
greet Fiji's accession to independence as the achievement of one of the purposes of the Charter, that of
Article 73 b regarding the dependent territories
whereby the administering Powers are requested to
"develop self-government, to take due account of the
political aspirations of the peoples, and to assist them
in the progressive development of their free political
in~titutions, according to the particular circumstances
of each territory and its peoples ...".
35. The particular circumstances of Fiji are similar
to those of my country, although the two countries
are situated in different parts of the world. Both
Mauritius and Fiji are multi-racial countries which can
show the lead in racial tolerance and prove to those
who believe in racial separation that different races
can live together and co-operate in full harmony and
equality. We trust that under the leadership of Sir
Kamisese Mara all the people of Fiji will unite to further
the economic and social progress of their country. The
people of Mauritius will follow with interest and sympathy the endeavours of the Fijian people.
36. On this occasion it is fItting to recall that Fiji's
accession to sovereignty is the latest step in the remarkable march to indepel1dence which has taken place
in a large number of those Territories which used to
be under British administration. During the twenty-fIve
years of existence of the United Nations, twenty-nine
Territories formerly under British responsibility, all
of them now represented in this Assembly, have
become independent, sovereign Stules. In addition, the
four Trust Territories for which Britain was responsible
to the United Nations under Trusteeship Agreements
have all attained independence. These thirty-three
former British Territories have a total population of
over 800 million.
37. This is, on all accounts, a remarkable record in
the fIeld of decolonization. But this record is somewhat
marred by Britain's failure to bring freedom to the
people of Zimbabwe in ensuring that majority rule prevails in that territory.
38. Once again, we welcome warmly the delegation
of Fiji amongst us. We iook forward to co-operating
with them in a spirit of friendship and community of
interests.

.i
"

39. Mr. ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil): On behalf of
the Latin-American group I wish to associate myself
with the speakers who have preceded me in congratulating Fiji on the occasion uf its accession to
independence and its accession to membership in the
United Nations. There is no greater pleasure for the
Members of this Organization than to welcome a new
country into the society of free nations. For Brazil.
which has been consistently in favour of
decolonization, the accession of a former colonial Territory to this world Organization is indeed a fitting
commemoration of the tenth anniversary of General

sI

Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). We hope this trend
will be encouraged and stimulated for it is in the field
of decolonization that the United Nations finds its best
area of achievement and of affirmation.

I

a
c

a

40. Auto-determination is one of the principles by
which the United Nations has been ruled, one of the
most important targets it has fought for, and it is particularly gratifying to have that goal attained through
a peaceful process based on understanding and compromise between national political parties on the one
hand and the collaboration and goodwill of the administering Power on the other.
41. We congratulate the leaders of Fiji on surmounting their early differences in favour of the national
interest and we compliment the Government of the
United Kingdom for the part it has played in the accession to independence of this new country.

4
0

£
p
P
4

e
c
L
i
s

...

t

r

42. We wish the people of Fiji a future of happiness
and prosperity and we wholeheartedly welcome it as
a Member of this OrganiLmtiorL We are certain, we
are positive, that Fiji will make a valuable contribution
to the cause of international peace and understanding.
43. Mr. BEAULNE (Canada) (interpretation from
French): It is always very pleasant to receive into our
Organization a State that has just acceded to independence. In the present case, the pleasure for Canada
is all the greater because of the ties which bind us
to Fiji, particularly as a member ofthe Commonwealth.
44. In offering our warmest wishes to the people of
these islands bathed by the Pacific-just as are the
shores of Canada-we would like to express our deep
admiration to the Prime Minister of Fiji, the Honourabie Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, and the Leader of the
Opposition, Mr. S. M. Koya. Their spirit of understanding, their devotion to public service and their faith
in their homeland will serve as an example to the people
of whom they are the worthy and respected leaders.

45. Fiji and Canada have certain points in common
which will help us to understand each other. We have
both passed from British colonialism to independence
while retaining the best of relations with the former
metropolitan country. Our complex countries bring
together two peoples whose mutual understanding is
essential to a prosperous future. The people of Fiji
are the heirs to a beautiful country, to the development
of which Canada contributes by giving its support to
the University of the South Pacific. This collaboration,
which isjust in the initial stages, heralds other broader,
fruitful exchanges. My delegation is convinced that
Fiji is a peace-Iovil1g State able and willing to comply
with the provisions of the Charter. Therefore, we
unhesitatingly supported Fiji's application for membership. Moreover, we were convinced that it would
meet with the unanimous appruval of the Organization.
46. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translatedfmm Russian): On behalf ofthe
delegations of the Byelor"';sian SSR, Bulgaria, Hungary, Pol&nd, Romania. the Ukrainian SSR, Czecho-

.

..

1863rd meeting - 13 October 1970
slovakia and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
I should like to congratulate most warmly the people
and Government of Fiji on the proclamation of that
country's independence and on the admission of Fiji
among the full Members of the United Nations.
47. The attainment of independence by the people
of the Fiji Islands is clear evidence of the irresistible
force of the national liberation struggle of oppressed
peoples and represents one more step towards the complete elimination of the vestiges of colonialism.
48. The States whose delegations have asked me to
express congratulations to Fiji are defending the just
cause of eliminating the evil of colonialism from the
face ..1fthe earth, both in the United Nations and outside
it, together with the other freedom-loving and lJrogressive forces ofthe world. In particular, they have consistently spoken in defence of the just and legitimate aspirations of the people of Fiji towards freedom and
national independence. That is why the delegations
of the Byelorussian SSR, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia,
Hungary, Poland, Romania, the Ukrainian SSR and
the Soviet Union are especially gratified, during these
days of rejoicing for the people of Fiji, to express to
it their best wishes for prosperity and progress along
the road of independent development and for every
success in building a new life and co-o.:e. ~ing constructively with the other countries of the world.
49. We also welcome the delegation of Fiji, wish it
success in its work in various United Nations organs,
and hereby express our willingness to co-operate
closely with it.
50. Mr. Surendra Pal SINGH (India): For the past
25 years we have on an average welcomed three new
Members to this Organization each year, and yet in
this special year of resolve and research we did not
have a single application for membership. Fortunately
three days ago Fiji became independent and
immediately asked for admission to the United
Nations. We are gratified, therefore, that Fiji has fulfilled one of our needs.

•

.

51. But that is not the only reason for our pleasure.
Fiji is not far from India and we Indians have many
special and intimate links with that country. India maintained the only foreign Commission in Fiji for years
before its independence and on the day of its independence the Speaker of our Parliament attended the celebrations and we established diplomatic relations the
same day.
52. Many Fijians are of Indian origin. But today all
of them-all the citizens of Fiji-irrespective of their
origin, are Fijians first, Fijians last and Fijians always.
This process of integration has not been smooth nor
has it been fully completed but it gives us great satisfaction that the leaders and the people of Fiji have united
in freedom to serve the needs and ideals of their new
nation.
53. Whenever a country becomes independent its
jubilation, its hopes and its fears cannot but be shared

5

by us. We ourselves went through the process not very
long ago, and we are anxious that all colonial Territories-large or small-should achieve their independence andjoin the United Nations. We have been working for that over the years and the success of Fiji is
a significant milestone on the hard road to the total
emancipation of the peoples still under colonial rule.
We welcome it.
54. Fiji is in Asia and we are Asians. And all Asia
must rejoice today when yet another country of that
continent achieves independence and becomes a
Member of the United Nations.
55. For those reasons we have been pleased,
privileged and honoured to co-sponsor the draft resolution for Fiji's admission to the United Nations. Sceptics
or men of small faith and smaller confidence have
recently developed a habit of denigrating the importance and usefulness ofthe United Nations. We deplore
it and Fiji's application disproves it. In our view, the
United Nations is the best and most imaginative
Organization mankind has yet devised for its survival
in peace, justice and progress. We are proud to open
its doors to Fiji.
56. A I,;ountry does not become indepen~ent by
merely wishing for it or by simply waiting for a favourable turn in the affairs of men. The people of Fiji have
deserved it and earned it through their leadership,
through their unity and through their sacrifices. We
must pay a tribute to them, particularly to the leaders
of the different political parties. A few mc-nths ago
the Prime Minister-then Chief Minister-of Fiji, Sir
Kamisese Mara, and the Leader of the Opposition,
Mr. S. M. Koya, visited the United Nations and
explained with clarity, courtesy and conviction the
situation in their country. We accepted their analysis
and welcomed their initiative, and today v.e see the
fulfilment of their dreams and the reward of their
wisdom.
57. In this task of bringing Fiji to independence the
Government of the United Kingdom has done its share,
and we appreciate its efforts. We hope that it will soon
terminate the colonial status of many other Territories
under its control and that the other colonial Powers,
notably Portugal and South Mrica, will draw timely
lessons from history even if they are not sensitive to
the sufferings of the people of Mrica they hold in servitude and contempt.
58. Much has been said about the natural beauty of
Fiji and its economic resources. But patriotism transcends these facts. We love our countries not because
they are rich or poor, not because they are like gardens
or like deserts, but because they are our own, because
we belong to them and they make us what we are.
Patriotism becomes almost sy,,:onymous with selfrespect.
59. In the years ahead Fiji will, we are confident,
grow in strength and wealth and just pride, and will
contribute effectively to the world's welfare and to
its civilization. They will face difficulties like all the

6

General Assembly - Twenty-fifth Session - Plenary Meetings

newly independent countries, but they will overcome
them through their work and devotion, skill and cooperation.

ment and the people of Fiji on their country's recent
accession to independence and on its admission to
membership of the United Nations.

60. The people and the Government ofIndia will cherish and strengthen their friendship with the people and
Government of Fiji in all possible ways for the mutual
benefit of our countries. Fiji's natural assets, tourist
trade and economic development not only promise
great advantages to it but will contribute effectively
to stability in that part of Asia. We look forward to
a great future for Fiji.

For some time I have had the special responsibility, as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on Fiji of
the Special Committee and as a member of the Special
Committee, to follow the last stages of Fiji's march
towards independence. Allow me to say that I have
been deeply impressed by the skill and magnanimity
which the leaders of the people of Fiji demonstrated
in overcoming internal divisions and in negotiating with
the former administering Power-qualities that have
already been demonstrated in organs of the United
Nations. The history of Fiji's emancipation is a lesson
in statesmanship from which we may all benefit.

61. In welcoming Fiji to the membership of the United
Nations I should like, on behalf of my country and
my delegation, to extend our warmest felicitations to
the Government and the people of Fiji and to convey
to them our best wishes for their independent future
and our deepest admira~ion for their achievement.
62. We are gratified, therefore, that the Assembly
has aooepted Fiji's application with total unity and full
acclaim.
63. Mr. TSURUOKA (Japan): On behalf of my
Government and on my ,",wn behalf it gives me great
pleasure to extend a very '.v arm welcome to Fiji as
the l27th Member of the United Nations. I am confident that, under the leadership of its Prime Minister,
Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, whose personal particip'ltion
in our anniversary celebration we look forward to, Fiji
will make many substant!al contributions to the work
of our Onranization.
64. In the view of my delegation, Fiji fully meets
the requirements of becoming a Member ofthis Organization as laid down in Article 4 of the Charter. As
an associate member of the Economic Commissiun for
Asia and the Far East and as a full member of the
Asian De~lopment Bank, Fiji has demonstrated its
ability to co'ntribute to the work of international organizations.
65. On behalf of the Government and the people of
Japan I wish to extend our heartfelt congratulations
to Fiji on its independence. It gives us particular
pleasure to welcome Fiji as a newly independent country of the Asian and the Pacific region to which Japan
also belongs. As evidence of our feelings of close relationship with Fiji, a special representative of my
Government has been participating in its independence
celebrations.
66. We have some trade with Fiji and every year
some 200 Japanese fishing boats visit the Port of
Levuka.
67. Now that the independence of Fiji has been
attained and Fiji has become a Member of the United
Nations, Japan sincerel) hopes that the relations
between our two countries will become even
closer-within the United Nations as well as outside
it.
68. Mr. ,RAVNE (Norway): It is with particular
pleasure that I offer my congratulations to the Govern-

6g.

70. On behalfof the delegations ofDenmark, Finland,
Iceland and Sweden as well as my own, I have the
honour of extending a warm welcome to the delegation
of Fiji as it joins us in this Assembly. We look forward
to working with ~he representatives of Fiji in common
endeavours for the fulfilment of the purposes of the
Charter.
71. Mr. LAMANI (Albania) (interpretation from
French): The delegation of the People's Republic of
Albania is happy to have this occasion today to salute
the birth of the new State of Fiji and to welcome its
delegation to the United Nations. The accession of
Fiji to independence after having thrown off the
centuries-old colonial yoke is further evidence that
nothing can halt the struggle of peoples for freedom
and independence and that all the efforts of the colonial
or imperialist Powers to prolong the exploitation and
occupation of peoples are doomed to fail. My delegation is convinced that the people of Fiji will go forward
in their struggle to uproot the last vestiges of colonialism in their country, to strengthen its independence
and to build a prosperous and happy life.
72. Sir Laurence t\.fcINTYRE (Australia): The Australian delegation has had great pleasure in cosponsoring the resolution by which the Assembly has
approved the application of Fiji for membership of this
Organization. The occasion is a most important as well
as a happy one. For more than 20 years, Fiji has been
the subject of discussion in the Assembly as a NonSelf-Governing Territory. Therefore, the Assembly
today witnesses the coming to fruition of the process
of political and economic development in Fiji, which
has culminated in the ending of the former relationship
between Fiji and the United Kingdom and the assumption of independence.
73. Secondly, Fiji is the first island community in
the vast Pacific Ocean to become a Member of this
Organization. Australia, a country ofthe South Pacific,
naturally takes a cteep interest in the growth and
development of the various island groups and peoples
which are scattered throughout that greatest of oceans.
From very tentative beginnings, dating from the time
when Australia itself w.:s a series of separate and scattered colonies, there have been in recent years growing
and important ties between the people of FijI and my
country.

l863rd meeting -'13 October 1970

7

74. We are therefore most pleased, havingjoined with
the Fijians three days ago in the celebrativn of their
independence, to extend now, as a Member of the
United Nations, the hand of friendship to a new
Member of this world community. We are sure that
the voice of a new independent nation in the South
Pacific will add needed experience and wisdom to the
delibera<ions of this Organization about the future of
small island communitie'i, particularly those in the Pacific.

"We considered that the first priority of need for
our peopk was understanding. We know this from
bitter experience. Without this understanding we
cannot tolerate one another, and without tolerance
we cannot create goodwill.

75. Finally, my delegation would like to pay special
tribute to the spirit !n which the negotiations fo' Fiji's
independence were carried out this year between representatives of Fiji and representatives of the Government of the United Kingdom. Some of us today were
privileged to hear the then Chief Minister, Ratl! Sir
Kamisese Mara, and the leader of the Opposition, Mr.
S. M. Koya, when they made an appearance before
the General Assembly's Special Committee on 12 May
1970 [742nd meeting). The occasion was remarkable
for the clarity and the precision with which the problems of Fiji were explained to us.

The wisdom of those words by Fiji's Prime Minister
augurs well for the future of the Fijian nation and for
what it may yet contribute to peace, understanding
and tolerance in the world. We n~;~ice, therefore, that
Fiji tas become a fellow Member- of this Organization
whose very life blood is the spirit of tolerance and
understanding.

76. My delegation would like to join in a r~spectful
.salutation to the leaders of Fiji and extend to them
our heartiest good wishes and congratulations.
77. Mr. YOST (United States of America): The
United States is pleased indeed to join in bidding a
warm and cordial welcome to Fiji, the newe<;t Member
of the family of nations. By admitting Fiji to member<:hip, the General Assembly confirras its conviction
th this new State is, in the language of the Charter,
"peace-loving" and "able and \villing to carry out"
the obligations contained in the Charter. This conclusion is well justified.
78. Fiji's population of half a million people is the
largest of any island group in the South Pacific. Its
economy is vigorous and its politic!,il development is
well advanced. Its accession to independence has come
about through a peaceful evolution which reflects great
credit on all concerned and which attests to the peaceful
ch:'lracter of the people of Fiji and their leaders.
79. The United States extends hearty congratulations
to the Fijian leaders, especially their Prime Minister,
Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, and to the United Kingdom
as the former administering Power. Thus, the principle
of national self-determination enshrined in the Charter
has reached fulfilment for still another nation. Yet,
the entrance of that new nation into membership in
this body is also an act of interdependence, a recognition by the people of Fiji and by the General Assembly
that, in very truth, no man is an islanc and no island
is really remote from the world.
80. i'lji, within its national realm, has already learned
well the lesson of human interdependence. Fiji is composed ofthree different racial and cultural groups which
have earned the right co be called a nation by their
determination to live and prosper together. As Sir
Kamisesc Mara said last May to the Special Committee
[ibid.], speaking both for himself and for the leader
of the Opposition, Mr. S. M. Koya:

"We know we must build olle nation. We must
build strong and we must build it to last."

81. Mr. ZAKARIA (Malaysia): The attainment of
independence by Fiji on 10 October 1970 marks another·
step in the achie,:cment of the implementation of
General Assembly re",olution 1514 tAV) on the granting
ofindependence to colonial countries and peoples. 1 his
historic event in the evolution of Fiji into a sovereign
and independent State also coincides with the year
in which the General Assembly will be celebrating the
tenth anniversary of that historic Declaration.
82. On this happy and auspicious occasion, my
delegation wishes to express our sincere congratulations to the Government and the people of Fiji for
their well-deserved independence. The successful
negotiations which resulted in this happy occasion
reflect the earnest and inherent determination of th~
people of Fiji to shape their own future destiny, as
well as the willingness of the administering Power to
reflect this inherent rigbt of the people of Fiji. My
delegation congratulates the parties concerned.
83. The people of Fiji and the people of Malaysia
are no strangers to each other. Close links offriendship
and mutual co-operation have existed between our two
countries for a long time. Malaysian leaders have had
the privilege on several occasions to meet and exchange
views with the Prime Minister of Fiji, Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, under whose wise leadership Fiji has attained
independer,ce.
84. I am happy to state here that the friendship that
has existed between the Government and people of
Malaysia and the Government and people of Fiji is
further strengthened by the constant exchange of visits
between the leaders of both our countries. My delegation looks forward to further strengthening this warm
and cordial relationship. It is with great pleasure and
honour that the delegation of Malaysia has joined with
other Commonwealth countries in co-sponsoring the
admission of Fiji as a full Member of the United
Nations.
85. Mr. MARMARA (Malta): Mr. President, since
this is tl-te Erst time my delegation has spoken at this
session, I wish to extend to you my sincere congratulations on your election as President of the twenty-fIfth
session of the General Assembly.

T·
8

General Assembly - Twenty-fifth Session - Plenary Meetings

86. On behalf of my Government I wish to extend
warm congratulations to Fiji on its attainment of
independence on 10 Oc!ober. We are glad to welcome
this island nation to membership of the United Nations,
and we look forward to the constructive contribution
Fiji will make to the Organization's work.
87. It was with great pleasure that Malta cosponsored the admission of Fiji with all the rights and
duties attached thereto. We are convinced that Fiji
is able and willing to fulfil its obligations under the
Charter, and it is with great pleasure that my Government extends to the people and the Government of
Fiji its warm welcome on its accession to membership
of this world Organization.
88. Mr. BAYOLKEN (Turkey): I .;hould like to
associate myself with the other speakers who have
preceded me to this rostrum in extending our warmest
welcome to Fiji as a Member of the United Nations.
My Foreign Minister, in his address to the General
Assembly on 24 September during the general debat~
[1849th meeting] expressed the great satisfaction that
Turkey feels on the accession of Fiji to independence
and pointed to the f':lct that the membership of this
country in our Organization would constitute another
constructive step in extending freedom and independence to peoples still under colonial rule and also would
enhance the principle of the universality of the United
Nations.
89. On behalf of my country and my delegation, I
should like to reiterate to the delegation of Fiji our
warmest congratulations and good wishes on this auspicious occasion and to wish the friendly people of Fiji
great prosperity and progress.
90. Mr. PANYARACHUN (Thailand): On behalf of
the Asian group. as well as of the Government of
Thailand, I should like to extend our very best wishes
and congratulations to Fiii and its representatives present here on its achievement of independence on 10
October. The Asian group nations welcome Fiji to
our august Assembly and are confident that, as a new
Member of the United Nations, it will play an active
role in furthering the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter and in strengthening the United
Nations in its important task of promoting peace, justice and progress all over the world.
91. The negotiations which culminated in Fiji's gaining its independence reflect credit both on the communities of Fiji and on the Government of the United
Kingdom. They all deserve our praise and gratitude.
92. I should aiso like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the Special Committee's
Sub-Committee on Fiji for the attention and interest
it devoted to this matter during the past few years.
The unstinting efforts have now borne fruits as Fiji
has gained its independence and is in the process of
being admitted to membership of the Uniied Nations.
93. The Fijian people have had a long, proud history
of civilization and self-go"ernment even before 1he col-

onial period. They possess a noble tradition and a distinguished history. Thus, I have every confidence that
Fiji's future contribution to this world Organization
will be an important and significant one.

103. M
comes t
admissi
onemor
in acco
and wit
We he
to the U
to it an
warmes
of Cypr

94. The Asian group welcomes Fiji whok·heartedly
and we all look forward to working with its n~presenta­
tives for the common benefit of us all.
95. Mr. SHAHI (Pakistan): On behalf of the Government and the delegation of Pakistan, I should like to
extend our best congratulations to the Government and
the people of Fiji on their peaceful accession to
independence and admission to membership of the
United Nations.
96. In Prime Minister Sir Kamisese Mara, Fiji has
an outstanding leader, whose participation in the past
in the activities of the United Nations in the field of
decolonization qualifies his Government for playing
a constructive role in this Organization.

104.

t ..

.. .. J

97. With the admission of Fiji the United Nations
has taken another step towards the goal of universality.
Pakistan has particular reason to rejoice in Fiji's membership of the international community as a sovereign,
independent State, because many of the kindred of
the people of Pakistan are citizens of the new State
and have been contributing to its remarkable development. Indeed, the spirit of communal harmony, religious toleration and multi-racial co-operation which the
people of Fiji have shown is an example to the world.

delegati
pleasur
ship of
come a
people
indepe
We loo
in othe
105.
trian de
and sin
United
sion to
peacef
May I
best wi
forah
and pe
Memb

98. Finally, I should like to congratulate the United
Kingdom for enabling the people of Fiji to emerge
peacefully into independence as the twenty-ninth
member of the Commonwealth and the 127th Member
of the United Nations.

106.
the ac
coloni
our pIe
pende
the pro
former
the U
manne
mediar
The f
and th
steepe
parlia
delega
work
tions.
tative
here i
his pe
and p

99. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): On behalf of the
delegation of the Socialist Feder:tl RepulJlic of Yugoslavia, I should like to extend our mL _~ncere congratulations to the. people and the Government of Fiji on .
the happy occasion of the assumption of independence
by the State of Fiji. Wejoin whole-heartedly in welcoming Fiji to the United Nations.
100. With the independence of Fiji and its admission
to membership of the United Nations we are witnessing
the further development of the process of decolonization which, we are sure, will continue to the tinal
end-the ultimate liquidation of all forms of colonial
rule in all parts of the world.
101. The people of my country have always supported the struggle ofcolonial peoples for their freedom
and full independence. We join also in their efforts
for economic and social development in order to complement their political independence with their
economic emancipation.

..

102. We are also ready to co-operate with the people
and the Government of Fiji in the United Nations and
in bilateral relations.
II

.1

107.
Frenc
tunity
indep
cil res
of the
admis
Fiji se
worki

I

{

J

I

1863rd meeting - 13 October 1970
103. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): My delegation welcomes the accession of Fiji to independence and its
admission as a Memher of the United Nations. It is
one more step towards the independence of all peoples
in accordance with our resolution of 1960 {I514 (XV)]
and with universal participation in the Organization.
We heartily salute and wdcome the delegation of Fiji
to the United Nations and to this Assembly and extend
to it and to the Government and people of Fiji the
warmest congratulations of the Government and people
of Cyprus.

,,)

104. Mr. MUNTASER (Libya): On behalf of my
delegation and all Arab delegations, it gives me great
pleasure to welcome the new State of Fiji to membership of the United Nations. We whole-heartedly welcome and extend our warmest congratulations to its
people and Government on the occasion of their
independence and admission to the United Nations.
We look forward to the liquidation of all colonial rule
in other parts of the world.
105. Mr. WOLTE (Austria): On behalf of the Austrian delegation I should like to extend a most friendly
and sincere welcome to the delegation of Fiji in the
United Nations. May I congratulate Fiji on its accession to independence and full savereignty and on the
peaceful evolution which has led to this joyful event.
May I combine this expression of welcome with the
best wishes of the Austrian Government and people
for a happy and prosperous future for the Government
and people of the one hundred and twenty-seventh
Member of the Udted Nations.
106. Mr. EILAN (Israel): Israel has always welcomed
the achievement of independence by peoples under
colonial tutelage. We have special reason to express
our pleasure at seeing Fiji entering the family of independent nations because ofthe exemplary way in which
the process of decolonization was accomplished in this
former Pacific colonial dependency. In this context
the Uni.ted Kingdom is to be congratulated for the
manner in which it has guided Fiji through all the intermediary stages to final sovereignty and independence.
The fact that this process was peaceful and orderly
and that Fiji enters upon its independence as a country
steeped in the traditions of democratic freedoms and
parliamentary rule augurs well, in the opinion of my
delegatk 1, for Fiji's ability to co~tribute fully to the
work of 'lle United Nations in all of its manv ramifications. We are all looking forward to seeing the representative ofthe Government of Fiji taking his rightful place
here in our midst. To him, to his Government and
his people, Israel extends its best wishes for a happy
and peaceful future.

..

107. Mr. BLANC (France) (interpreiation from
French): Three days ago my delegation had the opportunity to mark its pleasure at Fiji's accession to
independence and to give its support to Security Council resolution 287 (1970) recommending the admission
of the new State to the United Nations. Today this
admission is a fait accompli and we are glad to see
Fiji seated in this Assembly and, thanks to the fortunate
workings of the alphabetical order, we have it practi-

9

cally as our neighbour. The process at the culmination
of which the problems that some time ago still impeded
the exercise of full sovereignty by Fiji were solved
demonstrates both the will of the former administering
Power successfully to bring about, complete
decolonization, and the sense of understanding and
conciliation of the national leaders. We wish them the
utmost success.
108. The PRESIDENT: I take pleasure in inviting
His Excellency Mr. Semesa K. Sikivou, the Permanent
Representative Designate of Fiji, to address the
General Assembly.
109. Mr. SIKIVOU (Fiji): May I first express the
regret of my Prime Minister, Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara,
that he is unable to be with us here today on the historic
occasion "f Fiji's ::tdmission to the United Nations.
He is still host to His Royal Highness the Prince of
Wales who is representing Her Majesty the Queen at
the independence celebrations in Fiji. He will, however, be in New York later this week and will, I understand, have the opportunity of speaking in this Assembly early next week.
110. May 1, therefore, on his behalf and on behalf
of all the people of Fiji express to you, Mr. President,
and to all the representatives most cordial thanks for
the admission of Fiji to the United Nations? My special
thanks go to those Member States which have so generously sponsored and co-sponsored our application for
membership. I am also pleased to acknowledge the
warm welcome Fiji has received from Members of the
United Nations in taking its place in the comity of
nations as an independent sovereign State.
111. Although I represent a small country far away
in the Pacific, my Government and people warmly cherish the principles and ideals which led to the foundation
of the United Nations and which have made this great
Assembly, in its 25 years of existence, one of the main
hopes for the future of mankind. And we are fully
resolved to play our part, however humble, in helping
to maintain and foster the high purpose for which this
Assembly was established-the brotherhood of mankind.
112. Fiji differs from many colonial territories in that
we were not conquered or annexed. Our Chiefs freely
and unreservedly ceded our country to Queen Victoria
in 1874. This was an act of faith which has brought
many benefits, not only to the original people of Fiji
but also to those of other races who have come after
and have contributed so notably to our country's
progress.
113. It is in that same spirit that Great Britain has
readily and unreservedly granted Fiji independence on
10 October of this year, exactly 96 years after cession.
It would, therefore, be ungenerous were I not to pay
tribute to the United Kingdom for all it had done for
my country over the years and for the generous spirit
in which it has forwarded our progress to independence.

115.

Ar:,

all its re
ficulties,
in convo
us the g
hazards
make our
we hope,

Celebrat

116. Th
cussion 0
fifth Ann
Corr. 1]
the corn
speaker I
tion mad
should be
I should a
amendme
meeting.
make the
acceptanc

117. Mr
first duty
of the Co
the gener
Assembly
appreciati
efforts of
whomIw
tee's thre
Mr. Akw
chairman'
ment at
sideration.
we pay to
tee's inter
as well as
of the Co
118. The
the docu
::trrivedat
is an imp
being com
in some p
delegation,
country w
group of ...

10

General Assembly -

Twenty-fifth Session -

114. However, no country, however benevolent, can
provide a government from the outside which will meet
the aspirations of a people in the same way as government from the inside. It is only when a people assumes
responsibility for its own destinies through its own
elected representatives that it can achieve a full realization of its own nationhood and its own potential, within
the framework of its own history, culture and tradition.
115. A" our frail canoe embarks on this voyage, with
all its reefs and shoals, with its challenges and difficulties, it is a comfort to know that we shall be sailing
in convoy, and that there will be friends ready to show
us the guide lights and beacons to avoid the major
hazards and to enable us to choose a course that will
make our independence meaningful for ourselves and,
we hope, of benefit to others.

AGENDA ITEM 21
Celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
United NaHons (continued)
116. The PRESIDENT: We shall now continue discussion of the report of the Committee for the Twentyfifth Anniversary of the United Nations [A/8lO3 and
Corr. 1] on the preparation of the final document for
the commemorative session. Before I call on the first
speaker I should like to remind Members of the suggestion made yesterday that the proposed amendments
should be dealt with chiefly by the Committee itself.
I should also like to make the suggestion that no further
amendments be accepted after the end of this morning's
meeting. May I take it that the Assembly agrees to
make the end of this meeting the deadline for the
acceptance of amendments?

It was so decided.
117. Mr. THOMPSON (Guyana): My delegation's
first duty, in intervening in this debate on the report
of the Committee for the Twenty-fifth Anniversary on
the general declaration [ibid., annex] submitted to this
Assembly for approval, is to put on record our sincere
appreciation of the patient, courteous and untiring
efforts of our Chairman, Mr. Akwei of Ghana, under
whom I was very pleased to serve as one of the Committee's three Vice-Chairmen. It is largely as a result of
Mr. Akwei's untiring and good-humoured skill as a
chairman that the Committee is able to present a doe '1ment at all to the General Assembly for its con··
sideration. We should like to include in the tribute
we pay to those who worked selflessly in the Committee's interests our Rapporteur, Mr. MigIiuolo of Italy,
as well as Mr. Akashi, the devoted Assistant Secretary
of the Committee.

118. The delegation of Guyana readily concedes that
the document that has emerged from the consensus
arrived at with considerat:e difficulty in the Committee
is an imperfect one. My own delegation is far from
being completely happy with it, since we find it weak
in some parts and vague in others. In particular, my
delegation, coming as it does from a small, developing
country which numbers itself among the non-aligned
group of States, would be less than frank if we did

Plenary Meetings
familia
of the
sador
not rul
in a si
consid
and m
mandi
cation
tion or

not register our disappointment with the eventually
agreed wording of paragraphs 6, 7 and 9 of the
declaration, those dealing with colonialism, apartheid
and development respectively. In our view, the wording of those paragraphs should have been stronger and
less equivocal, and we ~ynjpathize with the views of
those delegations that have expressed their disappointment at the way in which they have been worded.
In particular, we would again draw the Assembly's
attention to the stipulation in the last sentence of paragraph 2 of the Rapporteur's report in so far as it relates
to an understanding that the last sentence of paragraph
9 of the declaration, in its present form, wiII be reexamined in the light of the discussions now proceeding
with respect to the Second United Nations Development Decade.
I

123.
submi
sympa
judge
comm
the sp
submi
intere
tion in
ments
to tho

~

119. Having said all that, my delegation feels bound
to add, especially in the light of our work on the Committee, that we really do not believe that, if we are
to proceed on the basis of consensus, it is possible
within the time available to us to achieve any really
material improvements on the present draft. Imperfect
though it may be, it reflects the political realities of
the situation in the United Nations in its twenty-fifth
anniversary year and it illustrates the well-known process of reduction to lowest common denominators
which, in the absence of a harmonized ideological outlook or an agreed political will, is the fate reserved
for deeply contentious questions which are to be solved
by consensus within the United Nations system.

tnat t
Com

120. My delegation suggests that the fundamental
question for this Assembly is whether it wishe~ to
achieve a solemn declaration adopted by consensus
or to have a simple General Assembly resolution
adopted by voting in the normal manner or to have
no general document at all. The preference of my own
delegation is quite clear: we believe that there should
be a solemn declaration of a general character adopted
in this Assembly by consensus and without voting.
We feel that the best way of achieving this objective
would be for delegations to refrain, as far as is practicable, from submitting formal amendments and to
content themselves instead with setting out their reservations in formal statements in plenary meetings for
the record.

125.
tious
cept
so ha
upwi
view,
be un
a dist
us in
all de
ofmo
to an
of se
remai

121. Of course we do not-indeed we cannot-challenge the sovereign right of delegations to submit formal amendments, if they are so minded.

Frenc

126.

122. Indeed, we know that already more than one
delegation has chosen this course of action. While my
own delegation, given its basic preference, remains
willing to work in the Committee, or in its working
group, as appropriate, to see whether such amendments as are submitted can be speedily and harmoniously incorporated into our present text, we feel
obliged to say that that can be the case only if such
amendments are reasonably short and relatively noncontroversial, within the context of the well-known
minimum positions of one or other member of the Committee, positions which all of us who have served on
the Committee will recognize as being depressingly

deleg,

anne

..

Com
Unite

...

127.
by se
the a
has b
h real

128.
to ha
the b
of it
ordt

1863rd meeting familiar. In this conte..<t, it seems to us that amendments
of the kind introduced in this hall yesterday by Ambassador Pinera of Chile [/862nd meeting)-and we do
not rule out the possibility of others being introduced
in a similar spirit-stand some chance of sympathetic
consideration by a large cross-section of the Committee
and may thus be thought of as being capable of commanding a consensus there, perhaps with some modifications which can be discussed with the Chilean delegation or other delegations.
123. Unfortunately, there are ot\1er amendments, also
submitted yesterday, which, however much we may
sympathize with them in principle-and we do-in our
judgement stand little or no chance of being able to
command a consensus in the Committee. We hope that
the sponsors of all such amendments, whether already
submitted or still to come, will be prepared, in the
interests ofexvediting the adoption of a solemn declaration in the plenary Assembly, to withdraw such amendments once it becomes clear, as it must already be
to those who have served actively on the Committee,
that they are unable to command a consensus in the
Committee.
124. If delegations could agree to abide by this broad
working procedure it might still be pC'~sible, even at
this late stage, to strengthen the document in marginal
ways that will make it more acceptabJ~ to a wider crosssection of delegations while retaimng intact the bulk
of the present painfully negotiated text.
125. The alternative, as we see it, is to vote on contentious alternative amendments, thus breaking the concept of consensus which the Committee has worked
so hard to preserve, or else run the risk of ending
up with no general declaration at all. In my delegation's
view, either of the latter alternatives would not only
be unfortunate and unhelpful in itself but would be
a distinctly unhappy augury for the work still before
us in the rest of this anniversary session. We urge
all delegations to choose the positive path of reason,
of moderation and of mutual accommodation leading
to an agreed declaration rather than the negative road
of self-destructive extremism. My own delegation
remains willing to build rather than to destroy.

..
...

126. Mr. ENE (Romania) (interpretation from
French): I should like to set forth the views of my
delegation on the draft resolution [A/8J03 and Corr./,
annex) which, thanks to the laborious efforts of the
Committee for the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the
United Nations, is now before the General Assembly.
127. We are gratified that the idea suggested last year
by several Governments including my own concerning
the adoption of a solerrm declaration at this session
has been accepted and that it is now about to become
"::t. reality.
128. Indeed, we would have preferred the draft text
to have been submitted to the plenary Assembly at
the beginning of this session to permit 2 'horough study
of it 'vith the participation of all MI..llber States in
ordl .0 arrive at a document the scope and significance

13 October 1970

11

of which would indeed correspond with the hopes this
anniversary session of the United Nations has aroused.
129. Our stressing the importance attached to the
adoption of the declaration at this session does not
mean that we are in favour of just any kind of
declaration. We feel that such a declaration should
reiterate in clear, precise terms the purposes and principles of the Charter and should lay down the major
objectives of the States Members of the United Nations
in the various areas of activity during the coming period
and set forth ways of improving the effectiveness of
the Organization's activities and of strengthening the
United Nations-role in the maintenance of international
peace and security and the promotion of broad cooperation among all the countries of the world. From
that standpoint we must observe that the draft before
us contains certain gaps and deficiencies which we
feel should be brought to the attention of the Assembly.
130. First of all we should like to point out that the
draft does not proclaim the determination of Member
States to abide strictly by the principles of the Charter;
principles that have lost nothing of their timeliness,
validity and importance. On the contrary: as the general
discussion has shown, the strict observance and
maintenance of those principles constitute the
paramount indispensable prerequisite for the
safeguarding of international peace and security and
the promotion of good relations among all States.
131. In the light of those considerations, my delegationfeels it is essential that in paragraph 1 some mention
be made of the faithful adherence of Member States
to the purposes and principles of the Charter. Similarly,
we feel it is important that the determination to uphold
all those principles governing international relations
among States should be clearly and explicitly mentioned in this paragraph. That is all the more necessary
since paragraph 2 deals only with certain principles
which might raise some question concerning the
attitude of Member States with respect to yet other
principles. Now, the principles of the Charter, which
are not subject to compromise, constitute an indivisible
whole and should be reflected as such in the body
of the declaration and for that reason we suggest that
at the end of paraf;raph 1 the following words should
be added: "and to uphold the principles ofinternationai
law concerning friendly relations and co-operation
among States". Thus the entire paragraph would read
as follows:
"In furtherance of the anniversary objectives of
peace, justice and progress, we reaffirm our dedication to the Charter of the United Nations and our
will to carry out the obligations contained in the
Charter and to uphold the principles of international
law concerning friendly relations and co-operation
among States. "1
132. Secondly, we are extremely surprised to see that
paragraph 3 mentions the development offriendly relaI The Romanian amendments were SUbsequently circulated as
document A{L.596 and eorr.!

12

tions a
whom

133. I
whatso
namely
matter
observ
sions,
among
134. I
reword

"I

135.
graph 4
make a
in acco
refrain
or use
When
that all

the C
in the
of fo
politi
mann
Natio
confli
Chart
inquir
cial s
relev
resort
peace"
138. P
rather w

General Assembly - Twenty-fifth Session - Plenary Meetings

12

tions and co-operation without specifying amongst
whom such relations would be e3tablished.
In all logic, when one spe~ ks of any relations
whatsoever, one must not omit the key element,
namely the parties involved. Bu. this is not only a
matter of logic. This concerns primarily the need to
observe the provisions of the Charter. Those provisions, as we all know, have always dealt with relations
among States as the subject of iaternational law.

133.

134. In order to remedy this situation, we suggest
rewording the first sentence of paragraph 3 as follows:

"In conformity with the purposes of the Charter,
we shall undertake maximum efforts to develop
among all States, regardless of their political,
economic and social systems, friendly and cooperative relations in all areas, based on the principles of international law. "
135. Thirdly, we must observe that although paragraph 4 refers inter alia to armed conflict, it does not
make any reference to the duty of all Member States,
in accordance with the provisions of the Charter, to
refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force. In our view, this gap should be filled.
When we read in the third sentence of the paragraph
that all Member States are invited, we ask why they
are invited and not urged to resort more often to the
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts. Then we
are led to ask why a formulation is used which is different from that of the Charter, which specifies that the
settlement of international disputes exclusively by
peaceful means is an obligation for all Member States.

136. Therefore, we feel that, rather than progress this
wording marks a certain withdrawal from the explicit
provisions of the Charter. Our delegation feels that'
this deciaration should not and cannot represent a step
back-yard with respect to the norms and principles of
the Charter. On the contrary, it should contribute to
the strengthening of these norms and principles.

prob!~m to mankind as a whole and the particular place
it has among the activities of the United Nati 'ns. We
note that its wording is less strong and less precise
than the provisions contained in many resolutions of
the General Assembly and in international agreements
that have been prepared with the assistance or under
the auspices of the United Nations. Furthermore,
rather than reiterating and highlighting the political will
of States to embark on the road to disarmament, it
refers to the fact that this involves a long and difficult
undertaking. In the view of my delegation, improvement should also be made to that paragraph so as to
take account of the importance of this problem.

natio
succ
ofw

139. With respt;~t to paragraph 11, it is highly regrettable that the present text does not reflect the concern
that has been expressed ever more clearly for the need
to achieve universality of our Organization. We feel
that we cannot confine ourselves to expressing a simple
hope in this respect, since it concerns an essential prerequisite to ensure the effective operation and
strengthening of the role of United Nations in internationallife. Furthermore, we must create all the necessary prerequisites so that all States may participate
in the activities of the Organization. We should therefore like to see this paragraph improved along these
lines.
147.

I have just given the substance of our views
concerning the draft declaration which is now before
the General Assembly. We are convinced that the proposed suggestions that we have just made will improve
the text and will make it a document which will truly
meet the legitimate aspirations of peoples and bring
about the necessary conditions for their free and independent development in a world of peace and security.
140.

",.

ith

wh
den
cou
gai

141. Naturally these observations do not mean that
we see only flaws in this draft that was prepared by
the Committee. On the contrary, the Committee has
carried out useful work which will facilitate the task
of the General Assembly.

148
25 y

zati,
thei
in r
inte
the

However, in the view of our delegation, every
effort must be made so that on the basis of the draft
before us we can prepare, bearing in mind the various
amendments and proposals already submitted or which
may be submitted during this discussion, a declaration
which would fully meet the purposes and principles
of the Charter and the requirements of present-day
reality and which would achieve a consensus among
all Member States.
142.

137. On the strength of the foregoing, we suggest that
the last sentence of paragraph 4 should be drafted as
follows:

"We urge all Member States, in accordance with
the Charter, to abide by their obligations to refrain
in their international relations from the threat or use
of force either against the territorial integrity and
political independence of any State or in any other
manner incompatible with the purposes of the United
Nations and to settle their international disputts and
conflicts by peaceful means as prescribed in the
Charter, particularly by means of negotiation,
inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration andjudicial settlement, makir.g use as appropriate of the
relevant organs of the United Nations, as well as
resort to regional agencies or arrangements or other
peaceful means of their own choice."
138. Paragraph 5 concerning disarmament is also
rather weak, if we bear in mind the importance of this

143. With respect to the suggestion made by the representative of Saudi Arabia to refer the proposals and
amendments to the Committee, we agree with that
proposal, it being understood that not only those
delegations represented in the Committee, but all
delegations having submitted amendments would participate in the discussions of the Committee.

asp
esse
role
perf
to t
the

149.

I·

whi
disc
res
dec
urit
Pri
Rei
ace
and
tion
to

f

144. Mr. SPACIL (Czechoslovakia) (translatedfrom
Russian): Twenty-five years have passed since the
peoples which joined together in the struggle against
the Hitlerite coalition decided to establish a new inter-

150

app
our
the

1863rd meeting - 13 October 1970
national organization and to vest in it the hope that
succeeding generations would be spared the horrors
of war.
145. The Charter of the United Nations became the
expression of the experience and conclusions reached
at the cost of much bloodshed by the victors over fascism, that monstrous foe of humanity and progress.
Hardly anyone would wish to assert that the post-war
world, particularly in its first decade, has reflected the
principles of the Charter. We remember times when
both the blue flag of the United Nations and the forum
of the Organization were being abused for purposes
of crude interference in the domestic affairs of certain
countries.
146. Still, our Organization cannot be denied its rightful place as one of the most important instruments
for safeguarding, and solving the problems of peace
and security. The Charter remains one of the most
important documents in contemporary international
relations. Moreover, it is generally recognized that
whenever the Charter and its principles have been violated in the course of the activities of the United
Nations, this has harmed primarily the Organization
itself.

".

147. Without wishing to ignore certain negative
aspects of our Organization's activities, we think it
essential at this time to stress its generally constructive
role in the modem world. The United Nations has
performed and continues to perform its task with regard
to the principal goal of mankind, that of preventing
the outbreak of a world atomic war. In recent years,
it has definitely promoted the emergence of new States,
whose peoples have attained freedom and independence. The concept of the peaceful coexistence of
countries with different social structures is steadily
gaining ground here, in our Organization.
148. The world of today is different from what it was
25 years ago, but the foundations on which our-Organization and its Charter were built are stable and have
their own strength; there is no need to change them
in any way. The maintenance and strengthening of
international peace and security are and will remain
the constant task of the United Nations.
149. These, in brief, are the few general ideas by
which we have been and are still being guided in the
discussion of those basic documents which will be the
result of our commemorative session, namely, the
declaration on the strengthening of international security, the resolution adopting the Declaration on the
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among ";tates in
accordance with the Charter of the Unit\. "Jations,
and the programme of activities for the full implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting ofIndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
150. It is with these same thoughts in mind that we
approach the draft declaration which is the subject of
our discussions at today's meeting. Our evaluation of
the work of the Committee for the Twenty-fifth

13

Anniversary of the United Nation!'> is favourable and
we advocate the adoption of the document submitted
to us by the Committee [A18lO3 and Corr. 1, annex),
although, like other delegations present here, we are
aware of a number of serious shortcomings in this text.

14
156.

151. Moreover, we would naturally have preferred
the ideas submitted in the draft declaration originally
proposed by the delegations of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic and the People's Republic of Bulgaria to be
reflected to a greater extent than they are in the present
text. In this connexion, we support the initiative of
the Bulgarian delegation Which, in yesterday's statement by Mr. Tarabanov, submitted an amendment to
paragraph 5 [AIL. 593) in an attempt to improve the
text.
152. In any case, it would be desirable for our document to state more specifically, as the distinguished
representative of Nigeria has proposed [1862nd
meeting), its support of the peoples of colonial and
dependent territories as a whole, especially of the
peoples of southern Africa, which are waging a
legitimate struggle for their independence. We also
agree with his view that our document should clearly
condemn the policy of apartheid as a crime against
humanity.
153. Even though we have been unable to make the
twenty-fifth anniversary ofthe United Nations coincide
with the complete elimination of colonialism throughout the world, this idea of the urgent and complete
achievement of the goal of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples should be reflected more specifically in the
declaration of the commemorative part of the twentyfifth session of the General Assembly.
154. We are aware that there are forces in the world
which are hampering such a development and are placing obstacles in the way of a more generally acceptable
formulation of our declaration. This reflects the actual
situation, which must be taken into account and from
which the necessary conclusions must be drawn. We
must therefore do our utmost to strengthen the
peaceful, anti-imperialist people's front, here in the
forum of this Organization, so that we may solve the
most important problems of modem international relations: strengthening international security, halting the
armaments race, achieving general and complete disarmament, completely eliminating the colonial system,
eradicating racism and all forms of inequality, and
achieving international economic, scientific and technical and cultural co-operation witJ,.out any discrimination and on the basis of equal rights for all members
of the international community.
1'55. Of course, the desire to incorporate 8.11 these
ideas In the document which will be adopted by our
meeting and to make it as comprehensive as possible
is perfectly understandable. In our opinion, the amendments of the Chilean delegation [AIL. 592 and Corr.l)
also contain some interesting ideas. There cun be no
doubt, moreover, that other delegations, too, may submit many other additions and ideas.

158..
been s
maket
policie
oursel
it cons
in con
is base
attemp
159.
insinu
West
indige
dence.
South
onlyth
nation
over t
160.
paragr
must d
to be t
a nega
to be t
graph
objecti
161.
are ot
declara
in the
steps t
namely
securit

163.
well as
are laid

14

General Assembly - Twenty-fifth Session - Plenary Meetings

156. But for all our desire to achieve the maximum,
we must be realistic and weigh all the possibilities.
Naturally, every effort must be made to improve the
text. But if it becomes evident that there is no longer
time for the Special Committee to make another
attempt to agree on a new text, then the only alternative
will obviously be, to use the Latin expression, a
restitutio in integrum, a return to the original text,
so ably introduced here by the Rapporteur and Chairman of the Committee, that is, if we really want the
document for the twenty-fifth anniversary ofthe United
Nations to be adopted. So far as our delegation is concerned, we hope that will be the case.
157. Mr. VON HIRSCHBERG (South Africa): South
Africa is a founder Member of the United Nations.
We would very much have wished, therefore, to have
been in a position to associate ourselves with a declaration commemorating the twenty-fIfth anniversary of
its birth.
158.. The draft declaration before us, however, has
been so drafted-deliberately I regret to say-as to
make this impossible. Paragraph 7 refers to our internal
policies which are the concern of no one other than
ourselves. We reject this paragraph not only because
it constitutes direct interference in our domestic affairs
in contravention of the Charter, but also because it
is based on a complete misconception of what we are
attempting to achieve in South Africa.
159. Paragraph 6 is equally nnacceptable. It
insinuates that our objectives in the Teniiory of South
West Africa constitute a denial of the rights of the
indigenous peoples to self-determination and independence. That is an absolute distortion of our aims in
South West Africa, as any representative who has given
only the most cursory attention to our numerous explanations of South African policy on South West Africa
over the years must conclude if he is at all objective.
160. Principally because of the inclusion of these two
paragraphs in the draft declaration we regret that we
must dissociate ourselves from it, and if a vote were
to be taken on the text we would be obliged to cast
a negative vote. If separate votes on paragraphs are
to be taken we would request a separate vote on paragraph 7 to enable us to register by a negative vote our
objections to that paragraph.
161. Our regret is the greater for the reason that we
are otherwise generally in sympathy with the draft
declaration. We endorse particularly the reaffirmation
in the fourth paragraph of the need to take concrete
steps to fulfil the central task of the United Nations,
namely, the preservation of international peace and
security.
162. We endorse also the invitation to Member States
to resort to peaceful means of resolving international
disputes in accordance with the Charter.
163. We ourselves are fully committed to these as
well as the other objectives of the Organization which
are laid down in the Charter and expressed in the draft

declaration. We shall continue to play our part in promoting their realization in future, notwithstanding our
inabilit~r to subscribe to the draft declaration as a whole.
164. Mr. SMIRNOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): In a few days
we shall be celebrating the twenty-fIfth anniversary
of the United Nations, which came into being as the
result of the victory won by the peoples in the struggle
for liberation from fascism.
165. The United Nations has made a valuable contribution to the implementation of the purposes and
principles proclaimed in the Charter. It has helped to
settle a number of acute international crises. We regard
such a record as a definite achievement of the peaceloving forces of our planet.
166. Where the Byelorussian SSR is concerned, we
want the United Nations to be effective and
authoritative, directing its efforts towards the maintenance of peace and international se_curity, in order to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
to reaffirm faith in fUi1damental human rights and in
the equal rights of nations large and small, to develop
friendly relations among nations, to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems
of an economic, social, or humanitarian character and
to implement the lofty purposes and principles solemnly proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations.
167. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR has
taken part in the activities of the Committee for the
Twenty-fIfth Anniversary ofthe United Nations, which
has done a great deal of work in disseminating information about the United Nations and its purposes and
principles, preparing and conducting the World Youth
Assembly, preparing the commemorative session of
the United Nations and drafting the final document.
As a result of this, the present plenary meeting has
before it the text of the final document [A/8103 and
Corr. 1, annex}, which is the outcome of lengthy and,
I would say, difficult deliberations· in the Committee.
Although there were many arguments, many different
points ofview were advanced at the Committee's meetings, the spirit of its work was constructive.
168. Accordingly, one of the most important provisions of the document before us is the expression of
the determination of States Members of the United
Nations to implement the purposes of peace, justice
and progress connected with this anniversary and to
reaffirm their faith in the United Nations Charter and
their willingness to carry out the obligations laid down
in that instrument.
169. Nevertheless, voices advocating the revision of
the Charter are often heard, at meetings of the Committee, in the plenary Assembly, in the Main Committees and especially in the corridors. We know perfectly
well what forces are inspiring the raising of such questions.
170. In this connexion, the Byelorussian delegation
considers that the effectiveness of the United Nations

I

I

.. I
;

..

17
wi
of

17

me
tio
Na
tio
tee
17
cu'
de
qui
co
the
tiv
of
the

17
qui
has
the
rit
Me

15

16

important part in the international arena. This is an
outstanding achievement of mankind. These particular
delegations and some others will not accept the fact
that all colonial peoples, large and small, have an
inalienable right to independence; the need to take
immediate and effective measures for the full
implementation of the Charter and of the Declaration
. on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples also does not accord with their aspirations.
The legitimacy of the struggle, including the armed
struggle, of colonial peoples for their independence,
arouses the indignation of these delegations. They ar~
opposed to the idea that the Governments and peoples
of all States and the international organizations should
provide to the peoples struggling against colonial and
racist regimes all the necessary moral and material
assistance and support they need. For example, the
proposal to include in the final document provisions
describing apartheid as a crime against humanity
aroused a storm of protest on their part. We are not
satisfied with the wording now used on this subject
in the document under discussion. Moreover, it in no
way supersedes. for instance, resolution 2506 B
(XXIV) of 21 November 1969, in which the General
Assembly "Reiterates its condemnation of the policies
of apartheid practised by the Government of South
Africa as a crime against humanity."

th

1863rd meeting - 13 October 1970
in maintaining international peace should be improved,
not by revising the United Nations Charter, but by
strictly and faithfully observing its fundamental provisions.

•
!

I

" I

..

171. Furthermore, the draft declaration under discussion, many parts of which are the result of mutual
concessions and of accommodation of the views of
all or most delegations, expresses certain important
ideas. These are the need to exert the "utmost efforts
to develop friendly relations and co-operation in all
fields on the basis ot the principles of international
law, irrespective of political, economic and social
systems", the appeal to "take concrete steps to fulfil
the central task of the United Nations-the preservation of international peace and security", the proposal
"to resort more often to the peaceful settlement of
international disputes and conflicts by the. means provided for in the Charter", and the hope for the early
conclusion offurther agreements on disarmament problems and for "moving forward from arms limitation
to reduction of armaments and disarmament
everywhere, particularly in the nuclear field, with the
participation of all nuclear Powers".
172. In this connexion, our aspirations coincide fully
with the following appeal which appears in the text
of the final document:
"We call on all Governments to renew their determination to make concrete progress towards the
elimination of the arms race and achievement of the
final goal-general and complete disarmament under
effective international control."
173. The document also provides for measures tl) promote the fulfilment of the purposes of the Charter relating to promoting respect for and observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms. At the proposal of
the Byelorussian delegation, formulae condemning
nazism side by side with racism and racial discrimination were submitted and were adopted unanimously.
We resolutely support those provisions of the document which reaffirm the need for the early implementation of the principle of the universality of the United
Nations. We also endorse the need for wider international co-operation in the utilization of scientific and
technical achievements.
174. When the text of the final document was discussed in the Committee, many delegations, in their
desire to complete the preparation of this text as
quickly as possible, made a considerable number of
concessions. Consequently. some of the provisions of
the final document are neither consistent nor exhaustive. This applies most particularly to the provisions
of the document which relate to decolonization and
the condemnation of the policy of apartheid.
175. The delegations of certain Western countries are
quite unable to understand that, during the period that
has elapsed since the United Nations was founded,
the peoples of a considerable number of colonial territories have achieved independence, have become
Members of this Organization and are now playing an

176. That is why the provisions of the document
which relate to the questions of the elimination of colonialism and apartheid should be examined in the light
of earlier decisions of the General Assembly and of
the special programme of activities in connexion with
the tenth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting ofIndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
adopted yesterday by the General Assembly [resolution 2621 (XXV)].

177.
Furthermure, the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR notes with regret that, during the preparation
of the text of the final document, certain delegations
did not always adopt an attitude of understanding with
regard to our position on the Second United Nations
Development Decade, which is set out in the joint statement of the socialist countries of 21 September 1970
lA /8074Jand constitutes a broad programme ofprogressive political, social and economic measures, designed
to be taken at the national and international levels for
the solution of the most acute social and economic
problems.
178. The Byelorussian SSR will continue to use the
position set out in this statement as its basic premise
and supports the document on the international
development strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade [A/7982, para. 16] in so far as
it corresponds to this position of ours.
179. In the light of the above considerations, the
delegation of the Byelorussian SSR considers that the
amendment submitted yesterday by the representative
of Bulgaria [A/L.593) considerably improves paragraph 5 and that the amendments of the representatives
of Algeria, Cameroon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Libya,
Mali, Mauritania, Nigeria, the People's Republic of

U

6
th
W

1
t

Genera l Assembly - Twenty-fifth Session - Plenary Meetings
182. The PRESI DENT : I call on the Chairm an of
the Congo, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Tunisia,
the Comm ittee for the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the
Ugand a and Zambia [A/L.59 4] improve paragra phs
United Nation s, Mr. Akwei of Ghana.
6 and 7. We also have some other ideas which we
think would improve the text of the final docum ent.
183. Mr. AKWE I (Ghana): I should like to inform
We consid er that some of the Chilean deleg;ltion's
cone
deserv
l
Con·.I
members of the Committee for the Twenty-fifth
aQ1endments [A/L.59 2 and
not
do
ments
amend
other
its
of
some
Anniversary of the United Nations that in accord ance
sideration. while
with the decision which you, 1k President, so wisely
improve the wording of the relevant paragraphs. Many
guided the Assembly into taking yesterd ay [I862n d
amend ments which were submitteu today deserv e
may
als
propos
rthy
notewo
of
r
attentio n, and a numbe
meeting], at the conclusion of the debate s in the Assemced.
introdu
be
yet
bly this afterno on, hopefully, I propos e that the Committee might meet to consid er the various proposals
the
to
new
is
ments
amend
or amend ments which have been made during the
180. But none of all these
the
of
rsary
Annive
-fifth
Twenty
the
for
Committee
course of the debate .
United Nations. That is why we share Mr. Barood y's
view that the final docum ent can be adopte d, if we
184. I make this announ cemen t in order to inform
agree with the text submitted by the Comm ittee. The
the membe rs of the Committee who may have made
most rational course would seem to be for all those
other arrange ments for this afterno on that they should
who have submitted amend ments to withdr aw them,
make adequa te adjustm ents to be able to attend the
for then we could adopt the final docum ent. Otherw ise,
meeting of the Committee.
in view of the time factor and of the polariz ation of
the ideas contain ed in the amend ments, we shall be
185. The PRESI DENT : There are still 10 speake rs
overwhelmed by propos als and shall be unable to adopt
our list for this item this afternoon. We will continu e
on
a document.
discussing this item during the first part of the afternoon
of
on
morati
meeting, and if there should not be a great numbe r
181. At the time of the solemn comme
the
s,
Nation
United
the
of
of additional speake rs, it should be possible to terthe twenty-fifth annive rsary
its
s
reaffirm
ic
Republ
st
minate that item in time for the Comm ittee to mee.t
Sociali
Soviet
Byelorussian
their
all
in accord ance with the wish just expres sed by Ambasresolve and calls upon all other States to bend
e
observ
to
and
earth
on
sador Akwei. It should be possible then to deal with
efforts to ensure a lasting peace
down
laid
les
princip
the two other items on our agenda before the conclusion
and
es
purpos
unremittingly the
of the meeting,
in the United Nation s Charte r. It expres ses its firm
convic tion that the activities of the United Nation s
will promo te the advanc e of human society along the
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.
road to peace, democ racy and social progress.

16

Litho in United Nations. New York

nOOI-Fe bruary 1973-2.20 0

•

,

.
