A/58/PV.87

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-eighth session

87

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 6 May 2004, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Agenda item 38 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolution (A/58/L.61/Rev.1)
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia to introduce a revised draft
resolution on this item (A/58/L.61/Rev.1.
Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): As I informed the
General Assembly this morning, the sponsors of draft
resolution A/58/L.61 have made some revisions to the
text following further consultations and in keeping
with the spirit of cooperation and compromise in
multilateral negotiations. The revised text is contained
in document A/58/L.61/Rev.1. I believe the text is
available in all languages and it has been distributed to
all delegations.
Allow me to point out the revisions made to the
text. First, the sixth preambular paragraph has been
shortened to make reference to the need to enable the
Palestinian people to exercise sovereignty in general.
Secondly, operative paragraph 1 now makes reference
to “relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
including Security Council resolutions”, and the words
“their territory” replace the previous wording, “this
territory”. Additionally, the paragraph makes reference
to the duties and obligations of Israel as an occupying

(Saint Lucia)

Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention and the
Hague Convention of 1907.
Thirdly, the last preambular paragraph of
A/58/L.61 has now been made into operative paragraph
2 in the revised text, with the words “pre-1967
borders” replacing the words “Armistice Line of 1949”.
The sponsors of draft resolution A/58/L.61/Rev.1
would like to thank our partners, in particular the
members of the European Union, for their cooperation
and support. We hope that with these revisions the
Assembly will be able to adopt this draft resolution by
an overwhelming majority.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/58/L.61/Rev.1.
Before giving the floor to delegations wishing to
speak in explanation of vote before the vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Pamir (Turkey): The Assembly is on the
verge of taking another decision on the Palestinian
question, which lies at the core of the conflict in the
Middle East. The Turkish delegation aligns itself with
the statement of the European Union (EU).
Given Turkey’s deeply rooted historical, cultural
and traditionally friendly ties with all the countries and
peoples of the Middle East, I am taking the floor to
explain some considerations that shape our position
today. In our view, draft resolution A/58/L.61/Rev.1 is

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-35271 (E)

*0435271*

A/58/PV.87

the outcome of recent initiatives and developments in
the region. It is indicative of the extremely crucial
issues which are at stake.
The final status negotiations are to be conducted
directly between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Those negotiations are designed to settle the core
issues between the parties, which are defined in
relevant United Nations resolutions and are commonly
accepted by the international community. The parties
should desist from any unilateral actions or moves that
have the potential to cause further deterioration in the
situation on the ground.
We shall cast our vote in favour based on the
understanding that the draft resolution should in no
way be construed as constituting a basis for prejudging
the parties with regard to final status negotiations.
Final settlement issues must be mutually agreed by the
parties through peaceful negotiations, based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including the
principle of land for peace, as well as subsequent
agreements reached between the two parties.
Turkey strongly supports the Quartet road map
and the most recent statement of the Quartet, of 4 May,
along with other initiatives that may guide the parties
to reach a final settlement based on the vision of two
States living side by side within secure and recognized
boundaries. We stand ready, as we have in the past, to
assist all the parties to reach a peaceful and final
settlement.
Mr. Smirnov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The text of the draft resolution before us
does not conflict with international legal instruments
regarding the final settlement of the conflict between
Palestinians and Israelis. The basis for such a
settlement, recently reaffirmed at the ministerial
meeting of the Quartet of international mediators on
the Middle East, is formed by Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2001) and
1515 (2003). The latter was adopted at the initiative of
the Russian Federation, and in it the international
community recognized the road map as the key
instrument for settling the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The Quartet has strongly rejected any actions that
run counter to the road map; any initiatives at this stage
should be in keeping with the Quartet peace plan and
should lead to the end of the occupation of Palestinian
territory.

2

Russia expects that the Palestinians and the
Israelis will implement fully their commitments under
the road map. All Israeli actions against civilians must
end, and the Israeli side must take no steps that would
prejudge final status, use force or contravene
international humanitarian law.
A political settlement should lead to the
establishment of two equal States living in peace with
each other. There should be no doubt that any political
settlement will remain mere words unless it is
implemented through the collective efforts of the
Quartet, whose representatives will soon return to the
region to resume work with the parties to implement
the decisions of the New York Quartet meeting.
Russia’s position has not changed: we believe
that the entire range of final status issues — refugees,
territorial disengagement and East Jerusalem — must
be resolved on the basis of mutual consent by the
parties themselves through negotiations. That is why
the Russian delegation will vote in favour of draft
resolution A/58/L.61/Rev.1.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the
European Free Trade Association countries Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union reaffirms its commitment to
a negotiated two-State solution, agreed between the
parties, which would result in a viable, contiguous,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State existing
side by side in peace with an Israel living within
recognized and secure borders. The Union reaffirms its
belief that the road map represents the only route to
achieving such an outcome. The Union is determined
to pursue vigorously the course set out in the road map
and calls on both sides to fulfil their obligations under
the road map.
The European Union recalls its established
position, restated by the European Council on 25 and
26 March, that the Union will not recognize any
changes to the pre-1967 borders other than those
arrived at by agreement between the parties. The Union
emphasizes that no declared views on the possible

A/58/PV.87

shape of a final settlement can pre-empt the negotiation
of that settlement.
The European Union also notes that the refugee
question and the manner in which the right of return
may be realized also constitute a final status issue and
that the road map states that a final and comprehensive
permanent status agreement that ends the IsraeliPalestinian conflict must include an agreed, just, fair
and realistic solution to that question.
The European Union emphasizes the principle
that final status issues are a matter for negotiation and
agreement between the parties themselves and must not
be prejudged.
The European Union notes that secure and
recognized borders should emerge from negotiations
between the parties in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Those
and other relevant Security Council resolutions must
form the basis for a just and lasting settlement of the
conflict.
The European Union welcomes the prospect of
Israel’s withdrawal from the Gaza Strip. The European
Council has stated that such a withdrawal could
represent a significant step towards the implementation
of the road map, provided that it is carried out in
accordance with certain conditions. This is an
opportunity which the international community, led by
the Quartet, should seize. The proposed withdrawal
should be properly orchestrated with the international
community so as to ensure that an orderly situation in
Gaza results, which will permit the maintenance of
security as well as rehabilitation and reconstruction.
The Union urges all parties to undertake urgently
preparations towards that end.
On that basis, the European Union reiterates its
readiness to support the Palestinian Authority in taking
responsibility for law and order as well as to continue
the Union’s existing aid to the Palestinian Authority
and to examine possible future needs which may arise
in the context of a new situation in Gaza. The Union
stresses the need to avoid a political vacuum and the
dangers which that would involve in the interim period
between now and the beginning of any withdrawal. It
recalls that there are a number of measures which need
to be adopted in the period immediately ahead in the
political, security and humanitarian spheres in order to
prevent further deterioration and to resume progress.

The European Union urges an end to violence and
terrorism as well as the resumption of a ceasefire
embracing all parties and groups. It calls on both sides
to resume negotiations on the peace process without
further delay.
The European Union recalls that a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace must meet the legitimate
aspirations of both the Israeli and the Palestinian
peoples and must include Lebanon and Syria.
The European Union also calls on all States in the
region to exert every effort to promote peace and to
combat terrorism.
The European Union welcomes the outcome of
the Quartet meeting held in New York on 4 May. The
European Union underscores its commitment to work
actively within the Quartet in pursuing the goal of a
comprehensive regional peace and to encourage the
parties to move ahead vigorously on the basis of the
principles just outlined.
The European Union has decided to support the
draft resolution, as it is consistent with European
Union positions.
Mr. Balarezo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
considers this to be a subject of utmost importance;
naturally, it supports the peace process and the road
map. It awaits the realization of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people and the attainment of a
negotiated, just and comprehensive peace agreement in
the Middle East. We hope to see the two States,
Palestine and Israel, living peacefully within secure
borders.
However, there is a procedural point which is the
reason why Peru must abstain in the vote on draft
resolution A/58/L.61/Rev.1. I am referring not just to
the fact of the failure to respect the 24-hour rule and
the failure to distribute the draft resolution in all
languages, but also to the fact that we have to confront
a fluid situation. We have to react very quickly to a text
that was negotiated not necessarily in the most
transparent manner. Not all delegations — and this is
the case of Peru — are able to react in this type of
situation. It is due to those circumstances — related not
to the content but rather to the process — the Peruvian
delegation will abstain. Of course, Peru is not among
those countries that are prepared to paralyze a process
of such importance, because we consider it is truly of
great importance.

3

A/58/PV.87

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/58/L.61/Rev.1, entitled “Status of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belarus,
Belgium,
Belize,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina,
Botswana,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece,
Grenada,
Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:

4

Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Australia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic,
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Peru, Serbia
and Montenegro, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu
Draft resolution A/58/L.61/Rev.1 was adopted by
140 votes to 6, with 11 abstentions (resolution
58/292).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Turkmenistan
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation wishes to make the following
explanation of vote in connection with the draft
resolution that has just been put to the vote.
Ecuador maintains its traditional position of
encouraging a peaceful and negotiated settlement of the
Middle East question, in the light of the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council in that regard, taking
into account the rights of the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples in the framework of international law.
For that reason, it expresses its full support for
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), as those resolutions
constitute the legal and political framework for the reestablishment of the peace negotiations. Ecuador
recognizes Israel’s right to live in peace within secure
and recognized borders within the framework of
international law, as well as the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to build their own State, in
accordance with United Nations resolutions. For that
reason, the Government of Ecuador, in keeping with
what has been the constant policy of the Ecuadorian
State, will continue to support United Nations efforts to
seek a peaceful and negotiated solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli problem which maintains the rights
of both peoples, in accordance with international law.
Bearing in mind the fact that draft resolution
A/58/L.61/Rev.1 is consistent with principles that

A/58/PV.87

Ecuador has supported in the international arena, such
as the self-determination of peoples and the rejection of
occupation and annexation of territory by force, my
delegation voted in favour of it.
Mr. Rock (Canada): Canada regrets to see the
addition of yet another resolution to an already lengthy
list of resolutions on the Middle East. Canada firmly
supports Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002), including the requirement of
Israeli withdrawal from territories occupied in 1967.
Canada also supports both the full realization of
the legitimate right of Palestinians to selfdetermination and to the creation of a Palestinian State
through direct negotiations between the parties, leading
to a just, comprehensive and sustainable peace, and the
vision of a region where there are two States — Israel
and a Palestinian State — living side by side within
secure and recognized borders. In our view, while the
international community can provide essential support
for their efforts, final status issues can be resolved only
through a negotiated settlement between the parties. In
that regard, we welcome the statement made by the
members of the Quartet on 4 May.
Mr. Matsuura (Japan): Japan voted in favour of
resolution 58/292. The position of the Japanese
Government on the Middle East issue is that peace
should be sought in accordance with the road map and
that final status, including borders, should be resolved
strictly through negotiations between the parties.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Israel objected to this
futile resolution not because we oppose a negotiated
two-State solution to the conflict, as envisaged in the
road map, but because we support it. We objected to
this resolution because of what it ignores, because of
what it misrepresents and because the motive of its
primary sponsor in submitting this text was to
undermine and prejudge the negotiating process, not to
further it.
This resolution totally ignores the Quartet
statement made two days ago and violates the central
tenet of the peace process, reiterated in the Quartet
statement: to avoid prejudging the outcome of
negotiations. If borders and settlements are expressly
reserved as a matter for negotiations, how can it be that
the Assembly should presume to affirm rights and
express positions on the conflicting claims of the
parties? There is a clear contradiction between the
Quartet statement and this resolution, and, in that

regard, the failure of the resolution to even refer to the
Quartet statement issued just 48 hours ago is a telling
sign.
The resolution blatantly misrepresents reality. It
is a simple matter of fact and of law that the 1949
Armistice Lines have never represented and do not now
represent borders, as this resolution can be taken
mistakenly to imply. That is precisely why Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and
every other agreed term of reference for the peace
process have affirmed that secure and defensible
borders are a matter for negotiation, not for
predetermined answers.
Perhaps worst of all, this resolution once again
sends the message to the Palestinian side that their
failure to live up to their responsibilities will have no
impact on the General Assembly. The longer the
Assembly continues to pander to these self-serving
initiatives and avoid the hard issues, the more it will
continue to undermine the very negotiating process it
claims to promote, and in the process harm its own
reputation and claim to legitimacy.
Let us not pretend that, as some speakers have
claimed, this political body is engaged in dispassionate
legal analysis. This body, which brought us the
Zionism-is-racism resolution, condemned the peace
agreement between Israel and Egypt and introduced
many other farcical texts on the Middle East, has not
been famous of late for its objectivity regarding this
conflict.
If this text or any other of the countless
Palestinian texts were genuinely concerned with legal
principle, we would have seen long ago a
condemnation of the legal support and complicity of
the Palestinian leadership and other regimes in the
region in the murder of innocent civilians. We would
have seen a concern for the human rights of Israelis,
not just of Palestinians. And we would have heard calls
for the Palestinian leadership to finally pursue the
welfare of their own people rather than siphon donor
money for their personal corrupt prosperity.
Let us also not pretend that all the evils of the
conflict can be blamed on occupation, as the
Palestinian Observer is so intent on marketing. If this
conflict were just about occupation, a Palestinian State
would have been created between 1948 and 1967. If
this conflict were just about occupation, then Yasser
Arafat would not have rejected the two-State solution

5

A/58/PV.87

in favour of a campaign of terrorism of the most brutal
kind. And if this conflict were just about occupation,
Israelis would not get the message we get every time a
suicide bomber massacres innocent civilians with the
blessing and complicity of the Palestinian leadership.
The message broadcast loud and clear from all of this
is a continuing rejection of the right of the Jewish
people to self-determination in their ancient homeland,
side by side with their Palestinian and Arab
neighbours.
If we are serious about solving the conflict, we
cannot avoid mutual recognition and mutual
compromise. This resolution is about the precise
opposite. It is about maximalist claims and ignoring the
rights of the other side. It is about claiming a monopoly
over law, rights and victimhood. It continues the recipe
of failure.
Israel is ready, and has been for a long time, to
recognize the rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination in a State of their own, side by side with
Israel, as envisaged in the road map. Is the Palestinian
side willing to affirm today, or any day, the right of the
Jewish people to self-determination in their ancient
homeland? Is it willing to educate its people and the
region about that right and to act accordingly? In all
the statements made by the Palestinian Observer, we
have never heard those simple words of peace and
reconciliation. I wonder if we ever will.
Mr. Paolillo (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay decided to vote in favour of the resolution
that we have just adopted because we believe that its
content simply reiterates the principles and conclusions
already adopted by the General Assembly and other
United Nations bodies. Thus, the resolution does not in
any way prejudge the basis, principles or outcome of
the Middle East peace process.
We also believe that by adopting the resolution,
the General Assembly is helping encourage the two
parties to this long conflict to shoulder their
responsibilities once and for all, and to embark on the
peace process in order to arrive as soon as possible at a
just and comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.
In addition, I wish to note that in our
consideration of the draft resolution, a procedure was
followed that, unfortunately, has been used repeatedly.
Indeed, this is not the first time that many members of
the Assembly are in the position of having to consider,
and take a position on a draft resolution, when the final

6

draft text has been circulated only a few hours before
its being put to the vote. That does not allow enough
time to examine the content and the consequences with
due care. Sometimes there even is not enough time to
consult with our capitals.
In such cases, the draft resolutions are almost
always negotiated among the sponsors and certain
groups of countries. Large sectors of the Assembly are
left out of those negotiations. Thus, when an agreement
is reached it is logical that those involved in the
negotiations are not taken by surprise and that they are
entirely ready to vote.
But it seems unfair to oblige the many States that
have not been invited to participate in the negotiations
to take a decision on texts of which they have become
aware just a few hours previously. We see in that
process an attitude of disdain for such States on the
part of those who press for the speedy adoption of draft
resolutions that have not been distributed far enough in
advance. We hope that this process will not recur in the
future.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala abstained in the vote on draft resolution
A/58/L.61/Rev.1 because it is our understanding, in
spite of the constructive amendments made to the
original texts, that it touches on subjects which,
pursuant to Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), are to be resolved through negotiations
between the parties as final status issues.
Nonetheless, we reiterate our commitment to the
right of self-determination of the Palestinian people,
and we resolutely share the vision of a region in which
two viable, sovereign and independent States, Israel
and Palestine, live side by side in conditions of peace,
harmony and security.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the vote. I now give the floor
to the Permanent Observer of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to express our sincere and profound thanks
to all States Members of the United Nations that
supported today’s resolution. We thank in particular the
sponsors of the resolution, including Malaysia, and the
other States that supported it from the outset, such as
the members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement, including
States from Africa, Asia and Latin America and the

A/58/PV.87

Caribbean. We would also like to thank the European
Union, including the Irish presidency, for its
cooperation during the rather difficult negotiating
process.
Today’s resolution is undoubtedly an extremely
important one. It reaffirms basic issues, including the
status of the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem, as territory under military
occupation. It also reaffirms that the Palestinian people
have the right to self-determination and to exercise
sovereignty over their territory. The resolution also
affirms that Israel, the occupying Power, must comply
with its duties and obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the Fourth Hague Convention.
Those are all very important matters that pertain
to the core of the conflict and to the foundation of
rights of our people. All of those matters are nonnegotiable, in the same way that the existence of Israel
is non-negotiable. What is negotiable is the process
that will lead to the establishment of two viable,
independent and sovereign States — Israel and
Palestine — based upon the pre-1967 borders.
What transpired today is of great importance,
particularly because it occurred with such an
overwhelming majority reflecting the position of nearly
the entire international community. Most notably, it
took place after grave negative developments that —
had it not been for the efforts of the international
community — could have destroyed the entire peace
process.

I will spare the Assembly any reply to the last
intervention by the Israeli representative, since such a
reply would take quite a long time, and also because it
is a hopeless issue. The representative of Israel is
incapable of understanding that the problem does not
lie with the international community; the problem lies
in Israeli policies and measures against the Palestinian
people. He is incapable of understanding that the
General Assembly is not against Israel. On the
contrary, the Assembly created Israel and is the same
organ that adopted resolution 181 (II), on the partition
of Palestine. But the General Assembly adheres to
international law and supports the rights of the
Palestinian people that the Israeli representative denies.
In any event, this is the international community; we
must learn to respect its will.
In that context, I would like to refer to the total
isolation of the Israeli-American position. But I fully
understand that the objective is not to achieve such
isolation, but rather to change erroneous positions and
to move towards a consensus that would bring about
just, lasting and comprehensive peace and security in
the Middle East.
The Palestinian people are grateful to you,
Mr. President, for the letter of assurances and
guarantees that you sent to them today.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 38.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

7
