UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/82
22 December 1994
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3485th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 December 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Burundi", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council continues to follow closely developments in
Burundi. It is concerned about the escalation of violence in Burundi, both
in Bujumbura and in the countryside, which threatens to further destabilize
an already fragile situation and could endanger the stability of the
subregion. It calls on all those concerned to refrain from violence. It
supports fully the efforts of the Burundi authorities in seeking to ensure
that those committing or inciting the commitment of acts of violence are
held accountable for their actions and that the militias that are still
operating both in Bujumbura and in the countryside are disarmed.
"The Security Council encourages the Government, the National
Assembly, the political parties and all others concerned in Burundi, and in
particular the army, to respect and give support to the Convention of
Government of 10 September 1994 and thus avoid jeopardizing the delicate
balance and relative stability in place since its implementation.
"The Security Council welcomes the continuing efforts being made to
bring about further political progress in Burundi and underlines the
importance of continuing to resolve all outstanding issues through dialogue
on the basis of the agreements reached thus far by the political parties.
It urges all sides to reject confrontational tactics, violence or
extremism, and to work towards compromise and conciliation in a spirit of
national unity which transcends ethnic origins.
"The Security Council commends the Secretary-General for his efforts
and expresses appreciation for the work done by his Special Representative,
and the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the High Commissioner for
Refugees and the High Commissioner for Human Rights, for their efforts
within their respective competencies, to contribute to the resolution of
the problems of Burundi.

94-51317 (E)

221294

/...

S/PRST/1994/82
English
Page 2

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it fully
informed of developments in Burundi.
"The Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
