General Assembly- Fortieth Session

l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Turks
and Caicos Islands; 20
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
Turks and Caicos Islands to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);

3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to the Turks and
(',aicos Islands;
4. Reiterates that it is the obligation of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to create such conditions in the
Turks and Caicos Islands as will enable the people of the
Territory to exercise freely and without interference their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
in accordance with resolution 1514 (XV), as well as other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter of the United Nations to
develop its dependent Territories economically and
socially, and urges the administering Power, in consultation with the territorial Government, to take the necessary
measures to promote the economic and social development of the Turks and Caicos Islands and, in particular, to
intensify and expand its programme of assistance in order
to accelerate the development of the economic and social
infrastructure of the Territory;
6. Emphasizes that greater attention should be paid to
diversification of the economy, which will benefit the
people of the Territory;
7. Recalls that it is the responsibility of the administering Power, in accordance with the wishes of the people of
the Turks and Caicos Islands, to safeguard, guarantee and
ensure the inalienable right of the people to the enjoyment
of their natural resources by taking effective measures to
guarantee their right to own and dispose of those natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
8. Takes note of the statement of the administering
Power to the effect that the military facility in the Turks
and Caicos Islands was closed in 1984, that the territorial
Government now has complete control over the disposition of the land vacated by the base and that the land is
now being used for various activities which are beneficial
to the economy and the people of the Territory;2 1
9. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, as well as such
regional institutions as the Caribbean Development Bank,
to continue to pay special attention to the development
needs of the Turks and Caicos Islands;
10. Requests the administering Power, in consultation
with the territorial Government, to continue to provide
the assistance necessary for the training of qualified local
personnel in the skills essential to the development of various sectors of the economy and the rnriety of the Terntory;
20 Ibid.. chap. XXlll
21 /fiid., para. Q_

11. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the Turks and Caicos Islands at an
appropriate time should be kept under review;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the
Turks and Caicos Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985

40/48. Question of Anguilla
l'he General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Anguilla,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 22
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Anguilla, including in particular its resolution 39/39 of 5
December 1984,
Noting the stated position of the administering Power
that it will respect the wishes of the people of Anguilla in
determining the future political status of the Territory,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Noting with appreciation the continued participation of
the administering Power in the work of the Special Committee in regard to Anguilla, thereby enabling it to conduct
a more informed and meaningful examination of the situation in the Territory with a view to accelerating the process
of decolonization for the purpose of the full implementation of the Declaration,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the administering
Power to promote the economic and social development
of the Territory,
Noting that during the period under review the economy
of Anguilla remained buoyant,
Noting that, as a result ofa comprehensive review of the
civil service and police force undertaken during 1984, salaries and allowances were increased,
Welcoming the contribution to the development of the
Territory by the United Nations Development Programme, specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system operating in Anguilla, and
noting the separate illustrative indicative planning figure
established for Anguilla by the Programme for the period
1982-1986,
Reiterating the view that the participation of Territories
as associate members in organizations of the United
Nations system is a part of the overall strategy of accelerating the decolonization process,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of Anguilla, and bearing
in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening
further its economy as a matter of priority in order to promote economic stability.
Recalling the dispatch in 19R4 of :,1 United Nations vi~it-mg mis<iion to the Temtor\

VII.

Resoludou adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories, and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Anguilla; 23
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Anguilla to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to Anguilla;
4. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to create such conditions in Anguilla
as will enable its people to exercise freely and without
interference, from a well-informed standpoint as to the
available options, their inalienable right to self-determination and independence in accordance with resolution 1514
(XV), as well as all other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of
Anguilla themselves to determine their future political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration, and, in that
connection, reaffirms the importance of fostering an
awareness among the people of the Territory of the possibilities open to them in the exercise of their right to selfdetermination and independence;
6. Calls upon the administering Power to continue, in
co-operation with the territorial Government, to
strengthen the economy of Anguilla and to increase its
assistance to programmes of diversification;
1. Notes that, although the Territory was no longer in
need of a grant from the administering Power to balance
its recurrent budget for 1984, the Government of the
United Kingdom agreed to provide a special grant to clear
the deficit accumulated between 1977 and 1983;
8. Urges the administering Power to take effective
measures, in co-operation with the territorial Government, to safeguard, guarantee and ensure the rights of the
people of Anguilla to own and dispose of their natural
resources and to establish and maintain control over their
future development;
9. Urges the administering Power to continue, in cooperation with the territorial Government, the assistance
necessary for the increased employment of the local population in the civil service, particularly at senior levels;
10. Reiterates its request to the administering Power,
in the light of the observations, conclusions and recommendations of the United Nations Visiting Mission to
Anguilla, 1984, 24 to continue to enlist the assistance of the
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system, as well as other regional and international
bodies, in the development and strengthening of the economy of Anguilla;
l l. Calls upon the administering Power to continue to
facilitate the participation of Anguilla in the Economic
23 Ibid., chap. XXIV.

24AJAC.109/799, sect. IV.

267

Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and its
subsidiary body, the Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee, and in other organizations of the
United Nations system, including the Caribbean Group
for Co-operation in Economic Development;
12. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to Anguilla at an appropriate time should
be kept under review;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to
Anguilla at an appropriate time and in consultation with
the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985
40/49. Question of the United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembl}',
Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 25
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
the United States Virgin Islands, including in particular its
resolution 39/38 of 5 December 1984,
Noting with appreciation the continued active participation of the administering Power and the representative of
the territorial Government in the work of the Special
Committee in regard to the United States Virgin Islands,
thereby enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of the situation in the Territory with a
view to accelerating the process of decolonization for the
purpose of the full implementation of the Declaration.
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power that the Territory of the
United States Virgin Islands enjoys a large measure of selfgovernment through its elected representatives, namely,
the Governor, members of the Legislature and the Territory's non-voting delegate to the United States House of
Representatives, and noting the recent general elections in
the Territory,
Noting with concern that the economy of the Territory
was, as described by the Governor, "temporarily
depressed", particularly in the tourist, construction and
industrial sectors, as well as in the delivery of government
services, and noting that the Territory's industrial development programme would suffer a setback as a result of
the announced plan of Martin Marietta Alumina, Inc. for
the closure of its aluminium plant in the Territory in 1985,
Welcoming the continued participation of the United
States Virgin Islands, as an associate member, in the work
of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean and its subsidiary bodies, including the Caribbean Development and Co-operation Committee, and
noting the participation ofa representative of the Territory
as a member of the delegation of the administering Power
at annual meetings of the Caribbean Group for Co-operation in Economic Development since 1982,
25 Offu:ial Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session. SupplemRnt

No. 2.f(A/40/23), chaps. II, IV-VI and XXV.
