United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.14

General Assembly

Official Records

Tenth Emergency Special Session

14th meeting
Friday, 20 October 2000, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
The President:
Secretary-General.

I

give

the

floor

to

the

The Secretary-General: I am glad to have this
opportunity to report to the General Assembly on my
recent mission to the Middle East. I am also grateful to
you, Mr. President, for adjourning the proceedings on
Wednesday to await my return to New York. My main
purpose was to try to help the Israelis and Palestinians
to resolve the current crisis by reaching an agreement
with the following elements: disengagement, an end to
violence and a return to normalcy; a resumption of the
peace process; and the establishment of a mechanism to
inquire into recent tragic events and ways of avoiding a
recurrence.
To this end, over a period of 10 days, I had a
series of meetings with Prime Minister Barak in Tel
Aviv and Jerusalem and with Chairman Arafat in Gaza.
During this period, I also attended the Sharm el-Sheikh
summit, jointly chaired by President Mubarak and
President Clinton. In addition, I paid a visit to Lebanon
to discuss regional issues and the capture of three
Israeli soldiers from the Shaba area of the occupied
Golan.
Throughout my visit, the situation on the ground
in Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza was extremely

tense. While I was in the region, more than 50
Palestinians were killed, and two Israeli reservists were
lynched in Ramallah. Feelings on both sides were at a
fever pitch and there was a real danger of the situation
spiralling out of control. I found each side deeply
mistrustful of the other’s true intentions. Both were
talking, privately as well as publicly, the language of
war.
This is the backdrop against which my peace
efforts were set. The situation had, in my view, reached
the brink of the abyss. My primary objective was
therefore to get the two leaders to address public
appeals to their respective populations for calm, and to
ask them to indicate some specific measures that they
were prepared to take in order to de-escalate the
tension. To this end, I was in frequent telephone
contact with international leaders such as President
Clinton, President Mubarak, President Chirac, Prime
Minister Amato of Italy and the Foreign Ministers of
Turkey, Norway and Germany. While in the region, I
also met with the Foreign Ministers of the Russian
Federation and the United Kingdom and the European
Union representative, Mr. Javier Solana, as well as the
Foreign Minister of Norway.
Unfortunately, it became apparent that the rapidly
deteriorating situation on the ground, and the
consequent hardening of public opinion on both sides,
had made it impossible for the two leaders to make
statements that could be interpreted as conciliatory. In
close consultation with President Clinton and President
Mubarak, I devoted all my energies to persuading
Prime Minister Barak and Chairman Arafat to attend

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-70082 (E)
`````````

A/ES-10/PV.14

the summit that was to be held at Sharm el-Sheikh.
This involved further intensive shuttling between the
two sides.
Neither leader was enthusiastic, and Chairman
Arafat in particular expressed reluctance to go to
Sharm el-Sheikh at a time when, in his words, his
people were under military occupation, economic siege
and repeated missile and artillery attacks. I was
accordingly glad when, on the morning of 14 October,
just as I was preparing to leave for Egypt, Chairman
Arafat informed me on the telephone that he was
accepting my appeal for him to attend the summit.
During the 48 hours in Sharm el-Sheikh prior to the
opening of the summit, I met the President and the
Foreign Minister of Egypt and I had many telephone
conversations, including with the Presidents of the
United States, France, and Tunisia, the Kings of Jordan
and Morocco and the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia. I
also spoke to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
of the United Arab Emirates, so that he could pass on a
message to the head of State, as well as with senior
Israeli and Palestinian officials.
The summit itself was in keeping with the
atmosphere and events leading up to it. That is to say, it
was clear that there was a lack of confidence between
the two sides. Emotions were running high, and at
times the proceedings became turbulent — especially
in negotiating sessions at the Foreign Minister level. In
procedural terms, the formal talks were focused largely
on the agenda. But it was clear to all that this was a
negotiation about substance. What in specific terms
was to come out of the summit? Would it be possible to
break the cycle of violence and return to the
negotiating table? To put the issue in the starkest terms,
would it be peace or war?
The Sharm el-Sheikh summit unfolded at two
distinct levels. My senior advisers took part in the
negotiating sessions of Foreign Ministers. Meanwhile,
apart from the plenary sessions to open and close the
summit, heads of delegation met on the margins, in
intensive bilaterals. I myself took part in a series of
meetings with the co-Chairmen, Presidents Mubarak
and Clinton, and their respective foreign policy teams,
and Prime Minister Barak and Chairman Arafat, as
well as with other leaders of the two parties. I also met
with His Majesty King Abdullah of Jordan and Mr.
Javier Solana of the European Union.

2

My aim throughout was to support the efforts of
the co-Chairmen to promote an outcome of the summit
that met the minimum needs of the two sides, in terms
of an end to violence and restoration of the status quo
ante, a renewed effort to revive the peace process and
the establishment of a mechanism to inquire into the
tragic events.
At times, the gap between them seemed
unbridgeably wide. But throughout, I believed that
nevertheless there would be an agreement. For in the
end, peace remains the only strategic option for Israel
and Palestinians. The difficult questions are, how long
will the journey take, and how hard will the road to
peace be?
Here I would like to pay a heartfelt tribute to the
extraordinary efforts of President Clinton. He stepped
off an overnight flight and straight into action. Over
the next 28 hours, the President worked continuously
with the parties, late into the night and early morning.
It is very largely due to his own personal efforts that
President Clinton was able to announce on 17 October,
at the end of the Sharm el-Sheikh summit, that Prime
Minister Barak and Chairman Arafat had agreed on
three basic objectives and steps to realize them.
What was agreed at Sharm el-Sheikh can be
summarized as follows. First, both sides agreed to issue
public statements unequivocally calling for an end of
violence. They also agreed to take immediate, concrete
measures to end the current confrontation, eliminate
points of friction, ensure an end to violence and
incitement, maintain calm, and prevent a recurrence of
recent events. It was agreed that, to accomplish this,
both sides would act immediately to return the situation
to that which existed prior to the current crisis, in areas
such as restoring law and order, redeployment of
forces, eliminating points of friction, enhancing
security cooperation and ending the closure of and
reopening, the Gaza airport. The United States
undertook to facilitate security cooperation between the
parties.
Secondly, it was agreed that the United States
would develop with the Israelis and Palestinians, as
well as in consultation with the United Nations
Secretary-General, a committee to undertake factfinding on the events of the past several weeks and to
seek ways to prevent their recurrence. The committee’s
report will be shared by the United States President
with the Secretary-General and the parties prior to

A/ES-10/PV.14

publication. A final report will be submitted under the
auspices of the United States President for publication.
Thirdly, it was agreed that, if we are to address
the underlying roots of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
there must be a pathway back to negotiations and a
resumption of efforts to reach a permanent status
agreement based on Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and subsequent understandings.
President Clinton announced that, towards this end, the
leaders had agreed that the United States would consult
with the parties within the next two weeks about how
to move forward.
In my view, the agreements reached in Sharm elSheikh are a vital first step back from the brink and
towards a resumption of the peace process. It is
essential that they should be faithfully implemented in
their entirety by both sides. They may contain elements
to which one side attaches more importance than does
the other. But both parties need to demonstrate good
faith — above all by their actions. It is not going to be
easy. Mutual mistrust is deep. There are wounds in the
families and communities concerned that may take a
generation to heal. But we must move forward, painful
though it is, so that the children and youth of today —
angry and frustrated as they are — can have a better
world to live in.
One of the lessons of the past few days is that
there can be no lasting security without lasting peace.
That is why we need to look beyond the violence and
bitterness, the pain and the hurt, to a future in which
Israelis and Palestinians can live side by side in a just
and lasting peace.
This leads me, if I may, to end by addressing a
few words to the wider international community, and to
you, the Ambassadors of the Member States. It is only
natural that the events of the past few weeks should
arouse strong feelings. I myself have strong feelings
about those events. I believe deeply that every life lost
is a human tragedy, and that all human life is of equal
value. My thoughts and prayers are with the families
and communities on both sides that have endured such
pain and suffering. I want to see the violence ended and
the peace process back on track. That is why I went to
the region at such short notice and with such uncertain
prospects of success.
But I also believe that the General Assembly can
make a real difference. We are not yet certain whether
or not normalcy will be restored. We can only wait and

hope. The next few days are vital. Meanwhile, we
should remember that, as I said in Sharm el-Sheikh,
words can inflame or soothe, and everyone needs a
restoration of calm and quiet so as to create the best
possible atmosphere for a resumption of peace talks.
Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I have
listened with interest to the Secretary-General’s
statement. His presence among us at this resumed
emergency special session is of great significance. He
spoke of the contacts he undertook during his last visit
to the Middle East and the much-appreciated role he
has played in trying to defuse the real crisis that
threatens not only the occupied Palestinian territory but
also the entire Middle East.
This emergency session has a very clear
significance. It has been convened, first, pursuant to
the inherent responsibility of the General Assembly on
matters pertaining to the maintenance of international
peace and security, as stipulated in the Charter.
Secondly, this session is no more than normal
procedure, given that the Security Council has ceased
to fulfil its responsibilities on this important and
crucial matter. Hence the importance of reverting to the
general membership of the Organization, putting the
matter before it and being appraised of its collective
position regarding Israel’s actions against the occupied
Palestinian people.
What happened on Monday, 12 October, is no
light matter, and here I speak of the Israeli
bombardment of Palestinian cities with helicopters and
tanks. Let me wonder, before this body, what would
have been the reaction of the international community,
and of the United Nations in particular, if these events
had taken place between two neighbouring States,
Members of the United Nations? What would the
Security Council have done in the event of blatant
aggression by one State against another?
The answer to that question lies in the Charter,
and the Charter is quite clear on this matter. The
precedents are also clear. The Security Council
compels the aggressor to retract the actions it has
taken — even if such actions were taken under the
pressure of a military threat. The Council also compels
the aggressor to compensate the victim of the
aggression for its losses, to bring to justice those
responsible for the violations and offences that
occurred and to take action that would guarantee the
non-recurrence of such aggression. The situation today

3

A/ES-10/PV.14

is one of shameful aggression by an occupying Power
against a defenceless, unarmed people under its
occupation. Since the State of Palestine is yet to be
officially established and is yet to become a member of
the United Nations, the present situation has to be dealt
with under international humanitarian law — the
Fourth Geneva Convention — in a clear manner. That
Convention calls such behaviour on the part of an
occupying Power a grave violation of the Convention.
This Assembly must, therefore, stand up for
humanitarian values, justice, law and human security,
condemn Israel’s actions and call on Israel to
immediately cease this behaviour and these actions.
At the root of the bloody events that occurred in
the occupied Palestinian territory in the past weeks is
the ongoing Israeli occupation of Palestinian land and
peoples. This is the crux of the matter. We are awaiting
the day when Israel relinquishes all occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem, which have been
occupied since 1967, restores to the Palestinian people
their rights, and realizes that unless these elements are
fully realized its presence in the region will not be
accepted by a number of countries in the region and it
will not have the legitimacy that it aspires to within the
region. If Israel fulfils these conditions, it will then be
accepted as a fully qualified member of the region.
It is with this in mind that we have decided to
resort to the international community so it can tell
Israel that the logic of procrastination in negotiations
under whatever pretext is unacceptable, and that there
will be no just peace unless Israel deals with the crux
of the matter. The crux of the matter is the inevitability
of Israel’s withdrawing from all the territory it has
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, and
accepting the return of the Palestinian refugees or
compensating those who choose not to return and
abandoning its aggressive behaviour, which depends
solely on the logic of military power. Only then may
Israel have the legitimacy it desires and aspires to, and
only then will our peoples enjoy the end of the conflict
that has ripped our region apart for the last half
century.
Comprehensive, full and just peace in the Middle
East has essential requirements that must be met.
Foremost among these is the achievement of a final and
just settlement of the Palestinian question. This
settlement must be based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as on
the following points. The first is complete withdrawal

4

by Israel from all the Palestinian lands in the West
Bank and Gaza occupied since 1967. The second is
restoration of full legal sovereignty over East
Jerusalem, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The third is
the cessation of Israeli settlement-building in the
occupied territories, the dismantling of the settlements
and the departure of settlers. It should be evident to
everyone that the presence of this abnormal and
deviant element — that is, the settlers and the
settlements — is one of the factors leading to
continued tension between the Palestinian and Israeli
sides. Thus, if the solution to the problem is to endure,
without any provocations or clashes, everyone must be
mindful of the importance of rectifying the abnormal
condition caused by the presence of settlers in those
territories.
The fourth point is that Israel must desist from
placing any unrealizable conditions or sovereigntyrelated restrictions on the emerging Palestinian
aspirations to a legal status similar to that enjoyed by
all peoples and Member States of the United Nations.
As for attempts to place conditions and restrictions,
they are all unacceptable and must not be allowed
under the pressure of occupation or any other context.
The fifth and final point is securing neighbourly
relations and cooperation between the Palestinian and
Israeli sides in a manner that fulfils the equal interests
of both parties in development, progress, sovereignty
and mutual respect.
The invitation by President Mubarak to host the
Sharm el-Sheikh Summit was but one more step among
a number of vigorous efforts that Egypt has made with
major partners who have had influence on the peace
process in order to quell the victimization of the
brotherly Palestinian people, end their suffering and
reduce their human and material losses following an
uprising sparked by the provocative visit of an Israeli
political party leader to Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The
Israeli authorities could only deal with this uprising by
using excessive military force, as was confirmed by
Security Council resolution 1322 (2000).
Egypt hopes that the Sharm el-Sheikh
understandings will stand up to the test of time —
although we have heard today that eight Palestinians
have been killed and forty-five wounded — even if
they do not live up to the expectations of the
Palestinian and other Arab peoples. We also hope that
Israel will fully and sincerely implement all its

A/ES-10/PV.14

obligations under the understandings reached, foremost
among which is the complete lifting of the siege of all
Palestinian-controlled areas, cities and villages,
including Gaza, and the withdrawal of its heavy
weaponry from Palestinian areas.
What is needed from this resumed emergency
special session of the General Assembly is to convey a
clear message to Israel that genuine security cannot be
achieved by sheer military force and that the use of
such force to quell the aspirations and hopes of a
people desiring dignity and independence will not
benefit it in any way. Israel may succeed in delaying
the attainment of hope, but it will never suppress it;
Israel may try to hinder it, but it will never be able to
prevent its achievement. Egypt, its people and
leadership, will never rest until plundered Palestinian
rights are fully restored to the Palestinian people.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): The Palestinian issue is the key element of
peace and stability in the Middle East. There will be no
just and therefore lasting peace until there is an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. The path to peace inexorably involves the
return of all the occupied Arab territories, including the
Syrian Golan Heights, and the exercise of its
inalienable rights by the Palestinian people.
For as long as the United Nations fails to assume
the direct and irreplaceable responsibility assigned to it
by the Charter and the will of the international
community, and so long as the course of negotiations is
determined by hegemonic and narrow domestic
political objectives, peace will not exist. Nor will there
be peace if the Israeli Government does not change its
policy of colonial occupation and flagrant, massive and
systematic violations of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and allows the forces of the extreme
right, which are opposed to the peace process, to
impose their interests.
It would be difficult to be sure today that the
peace process will survive the present crisis. After the
current situation emerged from the provocation of the
Israeli extreme right on 28 September, Israel attacked
Ramallah and Gaza with missiles and targeted civilians
with combat helicopters and tanks. Over 100
Palestinian civilians, including 30 children, have been
killed and more than 3,000 wounded, of whom more
than 1,000 have been children. Arab Israeli civilians
have also been killed. The territories under the

Palestinian Authority’s control have been militarily
blockaded and the Gaza international airport was
closed.
The Israeli military and security forces have
unleashed savage repression, unprecedented since the
heroic intifadah, using excessive and unjustified force
and flagrantly violating international humanitarian law,
the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
international law and the Charter itself. The violence
continues to this day and the most recent
understandings reached in Sharm el-Sheikh seem to be
precarious. The Government of Israel has the urgent
responsibility to stop the escalation of the conflict and
to re-establish the peace process.
The Cuban delegation is pleased to recognize the
wide-ranging peace efforts of the Secretary-General
and deeply appreciates the valuable report submitted by
him to this emergency special session. Our country
wishes success to the Arab summit to be held
tomorrow at Cairo and is certain that it will make a
substantive contribution to resolving the current crisis
and conflict.
Episodes such as the current ones have taken
place cyclically over the past 50 years as a result of the
irresponsible partition of Palestine and the subsequent
Israeli occupation of Arab territories. The General
Assembly and the Security Council have discussed the
Palestinian issue dozens of times, including at several
resumptions of this emergency special session, and
numerous resolutions have been adopted.
It can been affirmed with the utmost certainty that
such resolutions, especially Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), chart the path
to peace. And yet, they have not been implemented.
The Security Council, which frequently oversteps its
powers and resorts to force, sometimes in a hasty and
even ill-considered way, has done nothing to date to
implement the resolutions it has adopted, including its
most recent, resolution 1322 (2000), which resulted
from the massive and fruitful effort of the non-aligned
caucus. The Security Council has not even been able to
meet to consider recent events.
The current paralysis of the Security Council, due
to the threat of veto of the United States, creates a
double-standard approach to the work of the Security
Council that is unacceptable and demonstrates the
urgent need for a profound reform of that body, in

5

A/ES-10/PV.14

particular regarding the despotic and obsolete privilege
of veto.
The tragic events that have taken place are
therefore also the responsibility of the United States,
whose historic and current behaviour, subject to
electoral vicissitudes, actually serves as a cover and
shield for Israeli acts and policies and prevents the
Security Council from acting while presenting itself as
the great mediator and advocate of peace. Peace will
not be possible until the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council are
implemented.
The international community can no longer
remain silent. We have followed with a deep interest
the procedures for the convening of a special session of
the Commission on Human Rights; the report of the
Special Rapporteur, including the results of his visit
from 11 to 15 October 2000 to the occupied Palestinian
territories; and the deliberations and negotiations that
led to the adoption yesterday in Geneva of an important
resolution co-sponsored and voted in favour of by
Cuba.
It was significant and useful that the Commission
on Human Rights, which is frequently manipulated and
selective, acted properly in spite of the remarkable
change observed in some of the speakers, who were
reluctant to describe the situation as a massive, flagrant
and systematic violation of the human rights of the
Palestinians, whereas they are usually militant and
outraged in judging the developing countries, and also
in spite of the negative votes of those who frequently
prescribe humanitarian intervention.
The resumption of the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly is fully justified, not
only because of the neglect and silence on the part of
the Security Council but also because of the urgent
need for the General Assembly to recover the broad
powers vested in it by the Charter and fully exercise
the authority that derives from its universal
composition and democratic procedures.
The Cuban delegation is convinced that only a
clear message of condemnation of the inhumane
actions of the Israeli forces and an objective and
immediate investigation of events, as well as
international action to bring about negotiations on a
fair basis, can now save the peace process.

6

Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The drastic aggravation of Palestinian-Israeli
relations underscores once more the necessity of
reaching a stable and comprehensive political
settlement in the Middle East.
From the onset of the clashes, Russia has been
making active efforts aimed at stopping the escalation
of violence and normalizing the situation. Mr. Igor
Ivanov, Minister for Foreign Affairs, has been in
constant contact with the leaders of the Palestinian
National Authority, Israel and Egypt, as well as with
another sponsor of the peace process, the United States.
When it became evident that the situation was
worsening, on the instructions of the President of the
Russian Federation our Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Russia went to the Middle East to hold emergency
consultations with the parties concerned and with the
United Nations Secretary-General, with the purpose of
finding ways out of the crisis and creating the
necessary conditions for the renewal of the PalestinianIsraeli talks.
Subsequent arrangements achieved at the Sharm
el-Sheikh meeting inspire hope that it will be possible
to stop the bloodshed and stabilize the situation in the
Palestinian territories and in the region as a whole. The
most important thing now is to take practical steps
directed at the fulfilment of the obligations assumed by
the parties and to ensure the impartial and objective
work of the fact-finding commission in order to
exclude the possibility of such tragic events recurring
in future.
Moscow is firmly counting on the leaders of
Israel and the Palestinian National Authority to
manifest their political will and to do their best to
normalize the situation, which remains extremely tense
and dangerous. The implementation of the
arrangements concluded in Sharm el-Sheikh would
contribute to clearing the path to the resumption of the
peace process in the Middle East. Russia is convinced
that there is no rational alternative to talks. A
constructive dialogue is the only way to achieve a
comprehensive and just settlement in the region on the
basis of the existing resolutions of the Security
Council.
The current crisis has highlighted the
interdependence of different aspects of the Middle East
entanglement and the necessity to move to a settlement
on all the negotiating tracks — Palestinian, Syrian and

A/ES-10/PV.14

Lebanese. It is evident that any attempts to break this
interdependence will lead only to additional
aggravations. That is why now, while striving to put an
end to violence and normalize the situation, it is also
necessary to work out the mechanism for subsequent
talks. As a sponsor of the peace process, Russia is
resolved to continue acting in accordance with the
mandate of the Madrid Conference and Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). On that
basis, Russia is open for cooperation with all countries
interested in establishing peace and stability in the
Middle East. The Russian Federation deeply hopes that
the forthcoming summit meeting of Arab States in
Cairo will affirm a final choice in favour of a peaceful
future for the Middle East.
For now, it is important to apply joint efforts in
order not to give the enemies of peace a chance to
undermine the peace process. The international
community should concentrate its attention on
establishing a favourable political atmosphere for the
achievement of a comprehensive settlement in the
Middle East.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): My delegation
thanks you, Mr. President, and the Secretariat for
resuming at such short notice the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly to consider the
item “Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the occupied Palestinian Territory”. The
incidents that the world has witnessed since
28 September 2000 in occupied Palestine are shocking.
The situation in the region has once again become
volatile.
At the outset, our special tribute goes to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his leadership and
commitment and, above all, the initiative he took in
bringing about the emergency summit at Sharm
el-Sheikh on 16 and 17 October 2000. We appreciate
the efforts made by President Clinton and President
Hosni Mubarak before and during the summit to stop
violence in Palestine. We know that the process of
reconciliation has started and that Palestine and Israel
have agreed on an accord to end the three weeks of
bloodshed in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. While
we welcome this development, we are only too aware
that we have to be vigilant and cautious, for on the one
hand there is an armed aggression with helicopter
gunships and armoured vehicles and on the other hand
there are people fighting for their inherent rights — the
unarmed people of Palestine.

Twenty-six years ago the Father of our Nation,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, standing at this
rostrum, spelled out in clear terms Bangladesh’s
unequivocal support for the just and legitimate cause of
Palestine and peace in the Middle East. As a nation we
had to suffer the depredations of occupation. For nine
months we had to fight our liberation war, during
which 3 million lives were lost and 250,000 of our
womenfolk were dishonoured. It is therefore only
natural that our heart heaves with the people of
Palestine and that our sentiment goes out to them, and
indeed it shall continue to do so until a just and lasting
peace is found. The present Government, headed by
our honourable Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina,
daughter of the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, remains committed in
upholding our unflinching support to the Middle East
peace process and to the people of Palestine.
On 3 October 2000, we deliberated in the
Security Council on the prevailing situation in the
region. My delegation made a statement in that meeting
expressing our deep concern at the escalation of
violence in the occupied territories and the use of
excessive force against Palestinian civilians by Israeli
troops, resulting in heavy casualties. This is most tragic
and most uncalled for. We strongly condemn this.
When the Middle East peace process reached a crucial
stage, an Israeli leader’s calculated provocation
threatened to put the whole process in jeopardy.
We extend our heartfelt condolences to the
families of all those killed and wounded in the recent
violence. We also call for an appropriate inquiry into
the events, including possible violations of the Geneva
Convention. We must ensure that those responsible are
brought to justice. We urge all parties to act with
utmost prudence and restraint, to refrain from acts of
provocation and to make all efforts to restore calm.
During the course of the last few weeks, we have
witnessed a series of acts of repression unleashed by
Israeli forces on the unarmed civilians of Palestine.
Even children could not escape the repression. The
world has witnessed this tragedy. The terror-stricken
image of 12-year-old Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra,
before he was brutally shot dead, should call out to the
conscience of the international community.
We believe that the cycle of violence in the region
can end only through a just and comprehensive peace
agreement based on the relevant United Nations

7

A/ES-10/PV.14

resolutions and the various international agreements
signed between the parties concerned in the Middle
East. In this connection, we emphasize the need for
immediate and full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including the recently
adopted resolution 1322 (2000).
Bangladesh reiterates its total support for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
their right to establish an independent State with
Jerusalem as its capital, and the right of the Palestinian
refugees to return to their ancestral homes to live in
dignity and honour. We urge Israel to refrain from all
activities, including the building of new settlements in
occupied Arab territories, that seek to alter the
religious, political and ethnic character of these
territories.
In conclusion, Bangladesh reaffirms that the
United Nations has a permanent responsibility with
respect to the Palestinian and Arab territories under
Israeli occupation until a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement is reached.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Mr. President, my
delegation is grateful to you for reconvening this tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly to
consider the item “Illegal Israeli actions in occupied
East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian
Territory”. This special session is most timely, indeed,
in the light of the grave situation obtaining on the
ground. We are equally grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Iraq for requesting, on behalf of the
member States of the Arab League, the resumption of
this emergency special session. That request was
supported by the Chargé d’affaires of South Africa, in
his capacity as Chairman of the Coordinating Bureau of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, to whom we
also express our appreciation.
My delegation expresses its gratitude to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his important
address just now, which is pertinent to our
consideration of the subject. We are pleased with his
active participation in the emergency summit meeting
at Sharm el-Sheikh. This demonstrates the SecretaryGeneral’s serious concern over the grave situation
affecting human security, as well as international peace
and security, arising from the conflict. His participation
clearly manifests his readiness to utilize the institution
of the good offices of the Secretary-General in
situations that warrant his personal involvement. It also

8

underlines, in an important way, the continued
relevance of the United Nations in the efforts towards
finding a peaceful settlement of the Middle East
conflict.
Malaysia has always believed that it is right and
proper for the United Nations to be concerned and
involved in the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine. This Organization and its
Member States cannot afford to be neutral in the face
of the continued blatant violations of the rights of the
Palestinian people living under occupation, of which
the current onslaught against them is merely the latest
manifestation of a consistent policy of harassment and
intimidation pursued for decades. When human rights
are violated, neutrality simply means condoning such
actions, which is tantamount to penalizing the
unfortunate victims.
As a member of the community of nations, Israel
cannot continue to turn a deaf ear to the
pronouncements of the international community, of
which the latest was the resolution adopted by the
Commission on Human Rights in Geneva, which Israel
has rejected. For the continued credibility of this
Organization, and all that it stands for, all of its
Member States must observe and be governed by the
same rules. There should be no exception.
My delegation welcomes the understanding
reached a few days ago in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt,
between the Palestinian and Israeli leaderships, which
addressed the issue of the immediate need to deescalate the violence that has erupted in occupied East
Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory. My delegation fervently hopes that the
understanding reached in Sharm el-Sheikh will be
implemented so that a modicum of normalcy will be
restored as soon as possible. We commend the two
leaders for the understanding reached and pay special
tribute to the host, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt,
President Bill Clinton of the United States and His
Majesty King Abdullah of Jordan, as well as SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan and Mr. Javier Solana of the
European Union, for their constructive roles in the
Sharm el-Sheikh talks.
However, the understanding reached in Sharm elSheikh, while welcome, should not distract us from our
consideration of why this resumed emergency special
session of the General Assembly was called in the first
place. It was called because the Security Council was

A/ES-10/PV.14

not able to follow up on its resolution 1322 (2000) in
the light of the further deterioration of the situation on
the ground for reasons that are well-known. It was
called to enable the larger membership of the
Organization to pronounce itself on the grave situation
affecting the Palestinian population in the wake of the
illegal actions taken by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. This
forum is not, as portrayed by some, an “Israel-bashing”
session. No Member State of this Organization enjoys
criticizing another Member State without any good
reason. This emergency session is called for the
purpose of pronouncing ourselves, singly and
collectively, on how the Member States of the
Organization view the situation and what ought to be
done by the parties concerned, particularly Israel, the
occupying Power, and by the international community.
As a member of the community of nations, Israel
should listen carefully to the pronouncements made in
the Assembly and heed the call of its fellow Member
States.
Many Members of this Organization, including
my own country, await the day when we can all stand
up here to praise Israel’s good deeds. But until that day
comes, I am afraid Israel must continue to stand in the
dock of the court of international public opinion,
distasteful though that may be to Israel.
The Permanent Observer of Palestine has
movingly described the current sad situation in his
homeland. I will not add to what he has already said.
To date, over 90 Palestinians have been
killed — most of them innocent civilians, including
children — and over 3,000 wounded as a result of the
relentless use of deadly force by Israeli security forces.
The image of 12-year-old Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra,
who was felled by an Israeli bullet, as witnessed by the
entire world, is one of the most heart-rending images of
this conflict. The fate of the boy and his father summed
up the plight of Palestinians living in the occupied
Arab territories: caught haplessly in situations of
violence and being subjected to the Draconian policies
and practices of the armed forces of the occupying
Power. As a member of the Special Committee of the
General Assembly to monitor Israeli practices affecting
human rights in the occupied Arab territories, I am all
too familiar with the plight of people living under
Israeli occupation. Malaysia mourns these senseless
deaths and offers its profound condolences to the
families of the fallen. We strongly condemn the actions

of the Israeli security forces against defenceless
Palestinian civilians in Palestine and the Occupied
territories.
To any objective, unbiased observer of recent
events, there is no doubt that there was
disproportionate — indeed, excessive — use of deadly
force against stone-throwing Palestinian civilians, who
were mostly youths angered by the provocations and
deeply frustrated after years of living under oppressive
Israeli rule. Also to the objective, unbiased observer,
there was not a shred of doubt that the premeditated
and provocative visit of Likud Party leader Mr. Ariel
Sharon to the Muslim holy site of Al-Haram Al-Sharif
sparked the violence. He knew precisely what he was
doing there and the likely consequences of his action.
But instead of being blamed for his provocation, he has
been staunchly defended and rewarded by an offer of a
high cabinet position. It is difficult for the objective
observer, much less a Palestinian, to appreciate the
appropriateness of Israeli actions to defuse the
explosive situation. The images tell the story, and the
toll of the dead and wounded is eloquent testimony to
the tragedy which we, the international community,
cannot ignore.
My delegation calls on the Israeli authorities to
rein in the high-handed actions of its security forces
and to bring to justice those directly and wilfully
responsible for these tragic deaths. These actions
constitute grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, which is applicable to all the
territories occupied by Israel since 1967. This
Organization has a clear responsibility to put an end to
violations of the Convention, as well as to ensure the
safety and protection of civilians, especially of
innocent children. We should strongly support the
immediate establishment of an impartial and objective
inquiry into the recent tragic events so that all
appropriate actions can be taken by the parties
concerned to address this highly contentious issue and
to prevent a repetition of these incidents. This is an
essential step that must be taken towards normalizing
the current highly tense situation.
A just and lasting peace can be achieved only
with the complete withdrawal of Israeli armed forces
and illegal settlers from all Arab and Palestinian lands
occupied since 1967, including the city of Al-Quds AlSharif and the occupied Syrian Golan. The people of
Palestine have the inalienable right to establish an

9

A/ES-10/PV.14

independent and sovereign State of their own, with AlQuds Al-Sharif as its undisputed capital. We therefore
once again call on Israel to comply with Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1322
(2000), and all other relevant resolutions.
Surely every reasonable Israeli must realize that a
policy of continued hostility and confrontation is a
recipe for future disaster. Israel cannot reasonably
expect to keep an entire people — proud and resilient
as the Palestinians are — under subjugation for ever. It
is in Israel’s own self-interest to restore calm as soon
as possible and to resume in earnest the peace process
that will lead to a final settlement of the Palestinian
issue within the context of a comprehensive and just
peace in the Middle East. It is in its own interest to
pursue policies that will lead quickly to an
independent, sovereign home for the Palestinian
people. The investment made for peace over the years
must be saved, and serious efforts must be made to
salvage the peace process. This is the ardent hope and
expectation of the international community.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): The
General Assembly is convened in special session today
to consider the particularly serious situation of the
Palestinian civilian population, which has been
subjected in the course of the last few weeks to
unrelenting and repressive attacks by the Israeli
occupying forces. At the request of Arab countries and
the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Security Council held an urgent meeting at the
beginning of this month to discuss this very issue.
After a debate in which the international community
was unanimous in denouncing and demanding an end
to the repression, the Security Council adopted a
resolution on 7 October in which it condemned the use
of excessive force against Palestinians. That resolution
also demanded that Israel, the occupying Power, adhere
scrupulously to its legal obligations and responsibilities
under the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Despite that universal condemnation, Israel
decided to do what it has always done in the past: to
ignore the will of the international community as
expressed in the latest Security Council resolution and
as expressed over many years in the General Assembly
and the Council. The repression did not end; in fact, it
has continued and worsened. Dozens of Palestinians,
including schoolchildren — whose lifeless bodies have
been shown in all the world’s media — were felled as
cameras rolled, their bodies ripped open by Israeli

10

bullets, while they had nothing with which to protect
themselves from the killers but their naked fists and
frail chests. Today, as I address the Assembly, dozens
of Palestinians are falling on the field of honour,
victims of the unbridled use of force by Israeli soldiers.
Worse yet, while every effort was being made to try to
stop the repression and bring back calm and safety, the
occupying authorities decided to escalate the violence
by shelling with impunity the offices of the Palestinian
Authority, wounding dozens of people and
administering what may well be a fatal blow to the
peace process, which today is in tatters.
Faced with that disproportionate war — but can
we even speak of it as war when the stones thrown by
young protesters are met with Israel’s combat
helicopters, warships and sophisticated weaponry? —
and faced with the serious risk of general conflagration
that this war entails, efforts were redoubled in the last
few days to try to put an end to repression and the
massacre of the civilian population, and to make
possible a return to a situation of calm that would be
more propitious to the resumption of negotiations.
In this regard, we should pay a well-deserved
tribute to the President of Egypt, Mr. Hosni Mubarak,
for all his efforts, as well as to Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, who took the risk of going to the tormented
region of the Middle East and who, with courage and
determination, worked successfully to bring the two
parties together and tried, patiently and doggedly, to
find a way to restart dialogue. The full and extensive
report the Secretary-General has just presented to the
Assembly shows the immensity of the task he had to
carry out in a region where wounds are still fresh and
where emotions are very hard to contain and control.
The situation of the Palestinian people is tragic, and its
list of martyrs grows longer with each passing day.
That report is an eloquent testimony to the fragile
nature of the situation, which could explode at any
moment and put us on the path of no return.
The Secretary-General’s involvement in easing
the tension marks the return of the United Nations to
the process of settling the Middle East problem, a
process in which it had long been marginalized —
unjustly and unacceptably. Algeria welcomes this, and
is gratified also at the involvement of the European
Union, which we have constantly encouraged to play a
more active role in the Middle East.

A/ES-10/PV.14

Now we must ensure that the measures agreed
upon by the parties to the conflict are speedily and
fully implemented. Similarly, Security Council
resolution 1322 (2000) of 7 October 2000 must be
immediately implemented. Here, it is crucial that the
use of force and of weapons against unarmed
Palestinian civilians cease, that Israeli security forces
be withdrawn completely and as soon as possible from
Palestinian towns and villages, and that the blockade
imposed on the Palestinian territories, including AlQuds Al-Sharif, be fully and finally lifted.
It is also imperative for Israel, the occupying
Power, to respect the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, and to cooperate without
reservation or restriction with the investigative
mechanism agreed upon by the two parties, for whose
establishment the Security Council, in its resolution
1322 (2000), stressed the need in order to carry out a
speedy and objective inquiry into the tragic events of
recent weeks with a view to preventing a repetition of
similar events.
Finally, it is also imperative, when conditions
permit, that the peace process be resumed with a view
to reaching a just and final settlement of the IsraeliArab conflict based on international law and on respect
for the principle of land for peace, and predicated on
the full realization of the national rights of the
Palestinian people, including its right to establish an
independent State of its own with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
its capital. But a just and comprehensive solution to the
Middle East problem requires that Israel scrupulously
respect the territorial integrity of Lebanon and abandon
its remaining enclaves there, and that it withdraw
completely from the occupied Syrian Golan Heights.
The tragedy in which Palestinian civilians have
been swept up demands that the Assembly, which over
the years has consistently reaffirmed its support for the
just cause of the Palestinian people and for its
inalienable
right
to
self-determination
and
independence, once again shoulder its responsibility
towards that people, whose homeland is still occupied
and whose rights are still trampled underfoot. The
Assembly must use all its political and moral authority
to ensure that this unspeakable ordeal comes to an end
and that justice and right finally prevail at the turn of
this new millennium.

Algeria is more than ever convinced that peace is
a strategic choice, and we therefore remain firmly
committed to a peaceful, just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict,
at whose core clearly lies the Palestinian question. We
wish here to express our profound sympathy with the
families of the martyrs who have fallen victim to
Israeli repression, and our full support and active
solidarity with the Palestinian people, our brethren, in
its combat for freedom and dignity.
Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I have the privilege, on behalf of the
delegation of the United Arab Emirates, to convey to
you, Mr. President, our appreciation for your having
convened this resumption of the tenth emergency
special session because of the escalation of the grave
crimes perpetrated by the Israeli Government against
the Palestinian people. Our thanks go also to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, for
his statement earlier this afternoon, which very clearly
set out the political factors of the very serious situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories, as well as the
potential consequences of that situation for regional
and international peace and security.
Over the past three weeks, the international media
have been depicting very sad events — the reckless
murder of defenceless Palestinians — and images of
deliberate, arbitrary destruction of Palestinian property
and infrastructure by the Israeli war machine, causing
the martyrdom, to date, of more than 160 Palestinians
and the wounding and maiming of thousands. This
amounts to an undeclared war waged by the Israeli
Government with the goal of exterminating the
Palestinian people, and thus of consecrating the
occupation of their territory in the framework of a
policy of imposing the status quo by force.
In Security Council resolution 1322 (2000), the
Council called upon Israel, the occupying Power, to put
an end to all acts of excessive force and provocation
against the Palestinian people. But unfortunately, rather
than implementing that resolution, the Israeli
Government has continued its past habit of defying the
relevant United Nations resolutions, and has persisted
in escalating the violence and the deliberate
bombardment and killing of innocent Palestinian
civilians, particularly women and children. Moreover,
they have given free rein to heavily armed extremist
Jewish settlers, under the protection of the Israeli army,
to kill, to burn, to destroy and to loot the homes, farms

11

A/ES-10/PV.14

and other property of Palestinians. That is an
unprecedented defiance of international humanitarian
law and norms, of internationally binding resolutions
and of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949.
Israel has refused to honour its commitments
undertaken at the recent Sharm el-Sheikh summit, at
which Israel was called upon immediately to cease the
violence and end the siege against the Palestinian
people.
Israel’s lack of cooperation in agreeing to an
independent international inquiry that would assign
responsibility for the recent events in the Palestinian
occupied territories is a clear indication of its direct
and central involvement and responsibility. Those who
have followed the events can clearly see that they were
deliberate and planned in advance by the Israeli
Government, starting with attempts to impose illegal
and unjust solutions concerning the final status of the
city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the fate of the
Palestinian refugees during recent peace negotiations
between the Palestinians and Israelis.
If we add to that the sudden and provocative visit
by Mr. Ariel Sharon, whose aim was to desecrate the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, and the excessive acts of aggression
perpetrated against those who were praying at the holy
site, we can see clearly how all of this has led to a great
deal of frustration and sparked angry confrontations on
Palestinian streets, shocking the international
community in the process.
The United Arab Emirates holds the Israeli
Government fully responsible for the negative
consequences of its serious violations of the rights of
the Palestinian people. We call on the international
community once again, and on the United Nations in
particular, to assume its historical, political and
humanitarian responsibility to put an end to the present
situation by bringing political pressure to bear on
Israel, thereby prompting it immediately to cease its
violations and to respect the agreements reached at
Sharm el-Sheikh; by calling for the immediate
withdrawal of all its heavy weapons and other arms
from Palestinian cities and villages; and by putting an
end to the siege and lifting all the closures that prevent
the free movement of Palestinian citizens and keep
them from their jobs, thus allowing for the delivery of
medical and humanitarian assistance.

12

Also, Israel must immediately release all
prisoners, those arrested in the course of the events and
prior to them, in implementation of the bilateral
agreements between the Israelis and the Palestinians
and other relevant international agreements.
In this context, we would like once again to stress
the importance of ensuring the transparency and
comprehensive nature of the mechanism through which
an inquiry will be conducted into recent events, as
agreed upon at Sharm el-Sheikh under the auspices of
the Secretary-General. Those responsible must be
brought to trial, and the Palestinian people must be
compensated for all the harm and damage they have
suffered.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
once again its absolute and full support of the
Palestinian people in their trials and tribulations. It
would like to stress the importance of an international
mechanism to protect the Palestinians, based on the
Fourth Geneva Convention, the Hague Convention and
international humanitarian law, and is in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and
the principle of land for peace. This will allow the
entire region and its peoples to emerge from a state of
violence, tension and instability and create a situation
conducive to the achievement of peace, security and
sustainable development, so that the Palestinian people
can realize their right to self-determination and to the
establishment of their own state, with Al-Quds AlSharif as its capital.
Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
We resume our meeting once again, within the
framework of this emergency special session of the
General Assembly, to consider the dangerous and
volatile situation that has prevailed in the Palestinian
territories since September last, when the leader of
Israel’s Likud party, under the protection of the
authorities, violated Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
That incident triggered the deterioration of the
political and security situation and aggravated the
anger and tension of the population in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The situation had been very
tense and very frustrating, especially since Israel
declared very clearly at Camp David its intention to
use a policy of fait accompli in the occupied city of
Jerusalem and not to attach any significance to the
peace negotiations.

A/ES-10/PV.14

The occupied Palestinian territories are now
caught up in a fresh spiral of violence and
confrontation, with severe repercussions. Israel has
used excessive force against Palestinian civilians who
were demonstrating their rejection of Israel’s policy of
fait accompli, which has led to more than 100
casualties and to the wounding of 3,000 Palestinians.
At the same time, Israel has continued its usual
policies of coercion and persecution against the
Palestinian people in occupied East Jerusalem and
other occupied Palestinian territories, in clear violation
of the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
There is a great deal of testimony from many
sources on these Israeli practices. We would like to
point out in particular what the Rapporteur on human
rights said upon his return from a mission of inquiry to
the occupied territories. He emphasized that the victims
of Israel’s coercive policies in the Palestinian
territories have exceeded in number those who fell
during the first four months of the 1987-1988 uprising
of the Palestinian people. The Rapporteur also
expressed his concern at the behaviour of certain Israeli
settlers belonging to military militias.
Despite all these victims and casualties, the
Palestinian side responded to the call of the
international community, represented by the Security
Council, the Secretary-General, the sponsors of the
peace process, the European Union and many sisterly
countries and agreed to help put an end to the
deterioration of the situation in the occupied Arab
territories.
Many news reports emphasize the respect of the
Palestinian party for its obligations agreed upon at the
last Sharm el-Sheikh summit. The Palestinian side has
declared its intention fully to uphold its commitments
and to stop all forms of violence in order to defuse
tensions and to calm the situation. Regrettably,
however, the Israeli side has suspended the
implementation of its commitments. Israel has issued
warnings and has set conditions in order to impose its
will on the Palestinian people and to continue its siege
of Palestinian territory.
Many Palestinians are falling victim not only to
the Israeli forces but also to the settlers, who are
working with the Israeli forces and are using weapons
to attack the Palestinian population.

The prevailing situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory is very volatile. We must not look
at the situation from a security perspective only, but
concentrate on the causes of the tension and
confrontation. The Sharm el-Sheikh conference was a
serious attempt to defuse the situation, and we hope
that the understandings reached at the summit will lead
to the rapid resolution of the situation on the ground
and will put an end to the serious security situation
there. This is an urgent request addressed to both
parties.
However, the conference dealt with the results,
not the causes of the conflict, as the situation in the
Palestinian territory, which is still under Israeli
occupation, is first and foremost a political matter, not
a security issue. It is an unbalanced political situation
that requires a political resolution to resolve all volatile
issues within a comprehensive framework, as called for
by the international community, within the context of
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. If we are to end the confrontation and
prevent it from recurring, therefore, it is essential for
the international community to take up its
responsibilities once again by emphasizing the basis of
the peace process. All forms of prevarication must end
if we are to achieve a true resolution of the Palestinian
question that will guarantee the legitimate, inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian people, prominent
among which is the right to set up its own State with
Jerusalem as its capital. There can be no
comprehensive solution if Israel does not give up all
the occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan.
Once again, the international community is called
upon to protect the Palestinian people in accordance
with international law and norms, including those of
the Fourth Geneva Convention. It is also called upon to
redouble its efforts to bring about peace, to exert
pressure on Israel to take its responsibilities seriously
and stop prevaricating, and to demonstrate the political
courage and will necessary to bring about a
comprehensive, just and permanent peace.
Before concluding, I should like to express my
full appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, for the efforts he made during the mission he
undertook to the region. The fact that he took up his
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter and
contributed to ending the crisis shows the central role
played by the United Nations in the maintenance of

13

A/ES-10/PV.14

international peace and security and in ensuring
stability and peaceful coexistence between peoples,
particularly in the Middle East. This is the first
responsibility of the United Nations. The resolutions
that it has adopted since the beginning of the crisis
constitute the legal and political framework that
establishes the basis for finding a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. We call for
the continuation of these efforts by the United Nations
and request the General Assembly to remain seized of
the matter.
Mr. Ling (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
President and the Government of the Republic of
Belarus were fully convinced that the General
Assembly, as the most important body of the United
Nations, could not remain passive in the face of the
events that we are witnessing. In this context, I should
like, first of all, to express my sincere hope that after
the series of failures that we have seen, the Sharm elSheikh meeting will open up a new opportunity for
revitalizing the peace process. We welcome the efforts
of all the participants in the difficult negotiations in
Egypt. Of particular significance for us is the fact that
the United Nations was represented by the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan, and that he was able to make
an important contribution to the settlement process.
Under the present circumstances, the withdrawal of
Israeli forces and the establishment of a joint
committee aimed at investigating the acts of violence
and preventing their repetition in the future, should
achieve the major goal, which is to stop the bloodshed
in the Middle East.
Belarus strongly condemns any action that could
result in further victims. We are convinced that the
General Assembly, at this special session, will
reconfirm the position that a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace can be achieved only with the complete
withdrawal of Israel from all Arab and Palestinian land
occupied since 1967, including the city of Jerusalem
and the occupied Golan. The establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, with Jerusalem as its
capital, and the implementation of all international
legal measures, including resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) and other Security Council documents, are
the only guarantees for lasting peace between Israel
and Palestine. From our strategic perspective, we are
convinced that there is no alternative solution. Support
for the draft resolution submitted to United Nations
Member States should provide a new, encouraging

14

impetus to move towards this goal. Belarus does not
share the view that the involvement of different bodies
and institutions of the United Nations, including the
office of the Secretary-General, the Security Council
and the General Assembly, could create obstacles for
future progress. The opinions and assessment of all
United Nations Member States should be heard and
taken into consideration.
We also welcome the recent steps taken by the
Security Council in the light of the provocative actions
of the leader of Likud Party, Ariel Sharon. The
provisions of resolution 1322 (2000) should be
implemented immediately. Belarus, together with the
entire international community, expects the Security
Council to be seized of this matter and to take all
necessary steps to ensure that its decisions are put into
effect.
Belarus, together with the entire international
community, has witnessed with deep sorrow the deaths
of dozens of people, including children, in the Middle
East. In the context of the commitments made by our
heads of State or Government during the Millennium
Summit, all concerned should forget their political
ambitions and guarantee appropriate protection and
security for the people in the region of the conflict.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): The tenth emergency
special session has been resumed to consider the illegal
Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest
of the occupied Palestinian territory at a critical and
explosive moment in the Middle East. Recent
developments on the ground in the occupied territories
are a searing and grim reminder to the international
community that the peace process, with all its promise
and hope for a better future, is beginning to unravel,
and the violence and bloodshed of past decades are
tragically becoming the reality of today. In the past two
weeks, the unconscionable use of force against the
Palestinians has taken the lives of scores of unarmed
civilians — in contrast to the handful of Israelis who
have died — and shows the stark and brutal nature of
the policies pursued by the occupying Power. No
Palestinian town has been left untouched by the
violence that is spiralling out of control. The deaths
and material devastation in the occupied territories
demand an international investigation and firm action.
It is of deep concern to my delegation that Israel
continues to flout the numerous resolutions adopted by
the emergency special session of the General Assembly

A/ES-10/PV.14

in accordance with resolution 377 A (V) of 1950. This
is an unacceptable situation, for no country should at
will reject the voice of the international community
and, in the face of such condemnation, continue to take
illegal measures with impunity.

rather than taking firm action forthwith on the killings
of the innocent Palestinians. This is in stark contrast to
the Council’s recent swift action in adopting a
resolution when three humanitarian workers were
killed during the tragic incident in Atambua.

The provisions of those resolutions are clear.
Among other things, they reaffirm the position of
Member States on the status of Jerusalem and the
illegal Israeli settlements, while reiterating the de jure
applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
and the need to comply with all relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Mr. Fall (Guinea), Vice-President, took the Chair.

The occupied territories are bearing the brunt of
untenable acts of aggression, such as blockades and
military action. The international community cannot
stand idly by in the face of such provocative actions.
We therefore call upon Israel to withdraw its forces
immediately and unconditionally from all Palestinian
territory.
Peace will continue to elude the region so long as
the Palestinian people are unable to fulfil their
aspirations, including the right to self-determination in
an independent homeland, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. Indonesia, for its part, has consistently
maintained that the peace process must be based on the
full implementation of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on the land for peace
principle. Any diminution of these basic requirements
is doomed to failure. Furthermore, Israel should cease
from taking action in contravention of past agreements
and commitments. It is only in this way that mutual
trust and respect will be fostered between the parties
concerned to overcome the decades of policies of
repression and occupation.

In other words, there can be no justification for
the Council to single out for immediate action a few
situations in another part of the world, while
hesitatingly adopting a resolution on a situation that
was fraught with much more dangerous consequences
for the region and beyond. For the United Nations, and
especially the Security Council, to be judged, the
criteria can only be based on the fairness and just
treatment of all its members. Thus, military power and
industrial affluence must never be used as the criteria
for resolving national and international conflict.
Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
end of last year, the international community observed
the evolution of the peace process in the Middle East
with cautious and hopeful optimism. The signing of the
Sharm el-Sheikh memorandum of 4 September 1999
had given a fresh impetus to the negotiations between
Israel and the Palestine Authority, and it made it
possible to establish a frame of reference for the
solution of pending issues regarding the final status.
In subsequent meetings in Oslo and in Camp
David, the parties continued with that intense and
constructive process of dialogue. Less than three
months after the Camp David Summit, those positive
prospects seem to have been reversed, and the fragile
balance achieved at the negotiating table has been
altered by violence on the ground.

It is our earnest hope that the outcome of the
Sharm el-Sheikh summit on 16-17 October 2000 will
give peace another opportunity to take root and grow in
the region. This calls for an immediate cessation of
violence and the use of force in order that political
wisdom prevail.

The Argentine Republic has observed with grave
concern and profound sorrow the acts of violence that
have stirred the Palestinian and Israeli territories since
28 September. The Government of Argentina extends
its solidarity to all the victims of these tragic events
and to their relatives; we are referring both to the
Palestinian and Israeli victims.

Furthermore, it is imperative for the Security
Council, as the body charged with the maintenance of
international peace and security, to take prompt and
resolute action by not only condemning the excessive
use of force against unarmed Palestinian civilians, but
also by not failing to name the aggressor and the
perpetrator of wanton violence. Even when confronted
with escalating violence, the Council procrastinated,

In light of the gravity of the situation, my
Government, in the course of these weeks, has made
urgent and emphatic appeals that every effort be made
in order urgently to obtain a cessation of the
confrontation, and it has also condemned the excessive
use of force. I would like to emphasize that the Jewish
and Arab communities of Argentina, summoned by

15

A/ES-10/PV.14

President de la Rúa to his office, have joined my
Government’s appeal for the prompt return of peace to
the Middle East, showing the spirit of peaceful and
harmonious coexistence of the two communities, and
stating in a joint declaration their wish that the Jewish
and Arab families live in a climate of peace and
security in the Middle East, “one of the areas that have
fashioned our age-old culture”.
Fortunately, the parties heard the calls of the
international community, of the Security Council and
of the Secretary-General, and they met again in Sharm
el-Sheikh on 16 and 17 October to reverse the
deterioration of the situation and to recreate the
conditions to put the peace negotiations back on track.
May I say how pleased the Argentine Government is at
the result of that summit meeting, as a result of which
Israel and the Palestinian Authority have pledged to
take concrete measures to put an end to the dangerous
escalation of violence, to resume the peace process and
to investigate the tragic events of the past weeks.
We recognize, and we are particularly grateful,
for the role played in those negotiations by United
Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and by
Presidents Clinton of the United States and Mubarak of
Egypt. We also appreciate the efforts made by His
Majesty King Abdullah of Jordan, by Mr. Javier Solana
on behalf of the European Union and other leaders of
the world and of the region so that that meeting could
conclude on a positive note.
Argentina wishes to commend in particular Prime
Minister Barak and Chairman Arafat for having
returned to the negotiating table. Their efforts give us
renewed hope that peace will at last triumph in the
region.
We are aware that it is, as yet, premature to
consider that the peace process will indeed be put back
on track. The road ahead for the parties is extremely
arduous and complex, and the obstacles to be overcome
are many and difficult. For this reason, my delegation
wishes to call on Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
persevere on the path of dialogue and to strengthen,
through concrete actions, the necessary climate of
mutual confidence, refraining from committing or
tolerating acts of provocation, such as taking unilateral
measures that could destroy the fragile balance on the
ground.
I would like to reiterate that peace in the Middle
East must, in our view, be achieved on the basis of the

16

complete implementation, in good faith, of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
agreements signed by the parties over the years. Only
in the framework of strict compliance with the
provisions of those instruments can the delicate
questions covered in the final status be resolved
satisfactorily.
Argentina affirms the need to comply
scrupulously with the obligations and responsibilities
that stem from the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, dated 12
August 1949.
As we did in the Security Council on 3 October, I
believe it is timely to reiterate on this occasion my
country’s substantive position with regard to this
conflict. The Republic of Argentina has traditionally
recognized the right of Israel to live in peace with its
neighbours
within
secure
and
internationally
recognized borders. Likewise, it recognizes the right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination, including
the creation of an independent and sovereign State. The
sooner these legitimate aspirations are enshrined in a
treaty that recognizes them, the better it will be for
international peace and security in this region that is so
dear to our country.
The peace process in the Middle East has entered
one of its most difficult stages. This is why Argentina
believes it is necessary to act with the utmost prudence
and not to allow emotion and distrust, however
legitimate and understandable they may seem, to fuel
the rhetoric of confrontation, opposition and blame. We
also ask the parties to act with moderation in order to
restore calm and relieve existing tensions. We ask them
to return to the negotiating table and to continue to
make progress on the path of agreement, through
compromise and mutual understanding, in order to
resolve this conflict in a just, lasting manner and to
achieve genuine reconciliation among the peoples of
the region.
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset I would like to extend my profound thanks to the
President of the General Assembly for reconvening this
emergency special session to consider the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. I would like also to extend my thanks to the
Secretary-General for his successful initiative of
visiting the region and contributing to the reduction of

A/ES-10/PV.14

tensions and the creation of the appropriate climate for
holding the Sharm el-Sheikh summit.
This special session resumes its consideration of
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories at a
moment when the confrontation between the
Palestinians and the Israeli occupying forces has
reached a climax. In the last few days more than 100
Palestinians, most of them children, have been
martyred. The Palestinian people have been exposed to
all forms of coercion and torture, including the
deployment of Israeli tanks in their cities and the
closing of the Gaza airport and the entry points to the
cities. Therefore, it is not strange that the Palestinian
people have resisted Israel, the occupying Power,
which demonstrates every day that it does not want
peace.
Indeed, the peace process has reached a dead end,
because
Israel
has
repeatedly
shirked
its
responsibilities and obligations and continues to pursue
its expansionist settlement policies. The present crisis
erupted because of the notorious visit of General Ariel
Sharon to Al-Haram Al-Sharif. This visit provoked the
Palestinians — in fact, all Muslims — and led to the
Palestinian uprising against the occupation in general.
Things got particularly worse because this rash act
found supporters and justifiers in the present
Government of Ehud Barak.
Two weeks ago the Security Council met and
adopted resolution 1322 (2000), which condemns all
violent Israeli acts and calls for the establishment of a
commission of inquiry to consider all these criminal
acts. The Council resolution reflected the desire of the
majority of its members, as well as the position of the
international community and world public opinion.
Only yesterday the Commission on Human Rights
in Geneva adopted a decisive resolution condemning
the Israeli forces and calling for the establishment of a
commission of inquiry to look into the violation of the
human rights of the Palestinian people. Then there was
the Sharm el-Sheikh summit, to back up the Security
Council resolution and to reaffirm the importance of
conducting an inquiry as a means of getting beyond
this crisis and of resuming the peace process, which
has stumbled so many times.
The General Assembly is called upon today to
adopt a draft resolution that strengthens the position
taken by the Security Council, as well as the efforts
undertaken in Sharm el-Sheikh. It is aimed at getting

Israel to refrain from committing any more aggressive
acts against the unarmed Palestinian people and at
creating the necessary conditions so that the peace
process can be resumed on the basis of the resolutions
of international legitimacy, in particular resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). As is well known, these
resolutions emphasize the importance of a complete
and total Israeli withdrawal from all Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including the Arab Golan. We
look forward to this draft resolution being adopted as
quickly as possible so that it can contribute to calming
the atmosphere and so that we can move to another
stage.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Since late September, ongoing violent clashes and
bloodshed have taken place in Jerusalem and the
occupied territories. We express our deep concern
about the continuation and escalation of the conflict
between Palestine and Israel and about the resulting
deterioration of the situation in the region. We
condemn the use of force against Palestinian civilians
and any violent acts detrimental to the Middle East
peace process.
We have been shocked by the large number of
civilian casualties, which have included women and
children. We express our deepest sympathy to the
families of the victims. The Chinese Red Cross Society
is now working to provide Palestine with emergency
humanitarian assistance in order to help wounded
civilians.
We have always favoured the resolution of
differences through negotiation and dialogue so as to
achieve a political settlement of the question of
Palestine. This is not only in accord with the
fundamental interests of the countries of the region,
including Palestine and Israel, it would also be
conducive to peace and stability in the region and in
the world as a whole. We believe that the legitimate
national rights of the Palestinian people, including the
right to establish an independent State, should be
restored. We also believe it necessary to safeguard the
sovereignty and security of the relevant countries of the
Middle East region. Only in this way will it be possible
to achieve comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East region.
We have always supported the negotiations for
peace in the Middle East. We appreciate the efforts
made at the Sharm el-Sheikh multilateral summit to de-

17

A/ES-10/PV.14

escalate the Palestinian-Israeli clashes and to resume
the Middle East peace negotiations. We welcome the
understanding reached at the summit. We greatly
appreciate the fruitful efforts made by the parties
involved, especially Secretary-General Kofi Annan.
Regrettably, however, violent clashes are
continuing and casualties are mounting. The situation
remains very tense. We strongly urge the parties
involved to exercise maximum restraint, immediately
to adopt effective measures to stop the violence and to
refrain from saying or doing anything to prejudice the
peace process. We hope that Palestine and Israel will
continue to follow a flexible and pragmatic approach,
resume peace talks as soon as possible and work to
resolve the question of Palestine on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions at an early date so
as to achieve definitive peace and stability in the
Middle East.
We sincerely hope that the Arab summit will
contribute to the peace process in the Middle East.
China is willing to join the international community in
an ongoing effort to advance the Middle East peace
negotiations.
Ms. Wensley (Australia): The Australian
Government is deeply concerned at the loss of life,
injury and the damage to mutual confidence between
Israel and the Palestinians that has occurred as a result
of the violence in the West Bank, Gaza and Israel in
recent weeks. After an encouraging period, when a
final settlement to outstanding issues in the peace
process appeared increasingly close, recent events have
cast the shadow of a bleak future over Israelis and
Palestinians alike.
In previous years, Australia has consistently
questioned whether the emergency special session
mechanism can in any material way be of assistance to
the situation in the occupied territories. Our concern is
particularly relevant now, when both parties are
seeking to implement the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement
to stop the deaths and injury. Direct negotiations
between the parties themselves, in our view, provide
the best prospect for putting a final end to the cycle of
violence and returning to a process that can deliver a
comprehensive agreement — an agreement that
recognizes the right of the State of Israel to exist in
secure, defined boundaries and the legitimate rights of
the Palestinians to a homeland. It is imperative that the

18

commitments
made at Sharm
implemented as soon as possible.

el-Sheikh

be

The peace process cannot be abandoned. There is
no real alternative for either side to a negotiated
settlement based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace.
Despite the severe blow of recent events, the
Sharm el-Sheikh agreement shows that the leaderships
of both sides remain committed to resolving the
dispute. They deserve the support of their people and
of the international community in their efforts to build
a lasting peace and an opportunity to do so without
being undermined by terror or by provocation.
Australia has, like others, contributed funds for
emergency medical assistance to help those in the
Palestinian territories affected by the recent violence.
We hope, like others in the international community,
that the recent violence will act as a spur to encourage
the conclusion of the peace process. I repeat, however,
that peace and stability can be ensured only through a
negotiated settlement between the two parties
themselves.
Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of
Iran): I would like to begin by offering the fraternal
people of Palestine our most sincere condolences on
the continued loss of life and the injury of Palestinian
civilians inflicted by the Israeli forces in the occupied
territories in recent weeks. The people and the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran are
enraged not only by the atrocities committed against
the defenceless Palestinians, but also because some
still try to defy world public opinion and to cover up or
justify the perpetration of crimes against the
Palestinians in the occupied lands.
The General Assembly has resumed for the fifth
time this tenth emergency special session under the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 377 (V),
entitled “Uniting for peace”. The Assembly is
rightfully intent on fulfilling its responsibility in the
face of the Israeli regime’s continuing total disregard
of the demands of the international community, as
represented by this Assembly, with regard to the
cessation of its illegal activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
The resumption of this session is a clear
indictment of Israel’s intransigent policy of totally
disregarding the rule of international law and the
demand of the international community that it cease its

A/ES-10/PV.14

illegal actions and practices in occupied Palestine, in
particular its recent campaign of terror against the
Palestinians. The resolutions adopted at this special
session in the course of the past three years have
explicitly condemned Israel for failing to comply with
the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention and
the decisions of this Assembly. Moreover, the
resumption of this session is promising in the sense
that it demonstrates the determination of the general
membership of the United Nations to follow up the
Palestinian question.
While noting the efforts made by the Security
Council leading to the adoption of resolution 1322
(2000), we regret the fact that it has not yet responded
to the call to convene immediately a new meeting and
to take action vis-à-vis the continued violence against
Palestinian civilians. We hope that the Council will
follow up its resolution 1322 (2000) and take steps to
address the non-compliance of the Israeli regime with
its provisions. We also hope that the tragedy unfolding
in the occupied territories, shown partly on our
television screens, will move those who try to obstruct
the fulfilment of the Council’s responsibility with
regard to the Palestinian question.
At the present time, acts of provocation, the
desecration of holy shrines followed by a campaign of
terror, resort to violence against the peaceful protesters
and the excessive use of force figure prominently
among the illegal and criminal activities perpetrated by
the occupying Zionist Power in the territories under its
occupation. I do not feel the need to discuss here the
ongoing oppression against the Palestinians. We have
all seen the sad and tragic pictures of Palestinian
children, adolescents and men being gunned down by
the Israeli forces. Even today, despite recent efforts
aimed at putting an end to violence against the
Palestinians, the Israeli troops shot to death eight more
Palestinians in the occupied territories.
The obligations of withdrawing the Israeli heavy
weaponry and refraining from the use of excessive
force against unarmed Palestinian civilians are yet to
be fulfilled. Moreover, the Israeli army continues to
restrict the right of the Palestinians to worship in
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, as occurred today in Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, and it continues to isolate the city from the
rest of the occupied territories.
All of the above proves once more the
untrustworthiness and irresponsible nature of the

Israeli regime, which have been demonstrated time and
again over the years through the violation of many
agreements despite the fact that the terms were clearly
in its favour. We believe that under any circumstances
it is absolutely necessary for the international
community, represented by the United Nations, to look
into the massacres committed by the Israeli forces over
the past few weeks with a view to bringing the
perpetrators to justice and preventing a recurrence of
such crimes in the future. In this respect, I would like
to refer to the resolution adopted yesterday in Geneva
by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights,
which, among other things, condemns Israel for
widespread, systematic and gross violations of human
rights and sets up an international commission of
inquiry to investigate the violence in the occupied
territories.
Moreover,
media
reports
and
official
announcements indicate that the severe restrictions
imposed by the Israeli regime on the movement of
persons and goods is still in place, especially as it
relates to the movement of persons. There is no doubt
that such restrictions amount to imposing collective
punishment on an entire population, severely
damaging, inter alia, the efforts made by the Muslim
and Arab peoples to provide emergency medical
support to more than 3,000 Palestinians injured by the
Israeli forces. The consensus opinion expressed and
maintained by the international community over the
last decade expresses explicitly the applicability of the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War of 1949 to all the Arab
and Palestinian territories. The continuation of illegal
acts by the Israeli regime constitutes an international
and complete violation of this Convention, as well as
of numerous United Nations resolutions and
international legal and political instruments. The
excessive use of force by the occupiers and the killing
of Palestinian civilians are the latest in a long list of
grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention by
Israel as the occupying Power.
The Israeli actions and policies are undoubtedly
the main source of instability and insecurity in the
region, creating an atmosphere of fear and anxiety
among nations of the region, as well as in the entire
international community. The agony is deepened when
the world sees that Israel even disregards its
obligations and commitments arising from agreements
which it has willingly entered into, despite the

19

A/ES-10/PV.14

acknowledged fact that they have been designed mostly
in its favour.
The question of Palestine remains the
responsibility of the United Nations as the only
universal and most representative body of the
international community, and we therefore cannot and
must not fail the people of Palestine. The Middle East
region has been marked with enduring crisis, constant
tension and destructive confrontation for more than
half a century. This requires that the international
community, represented by this Organization,
effectively tackle the Palestinian issue with a view to
bringing durable peace and justice to the Palestinian
land and tranquillity to the region as a whole.
We believe that the only way to restore calm to
troubled Palestine is to stop the brutal Zionist
suppression of the Palestinians, to make the occupying
regime pull out of the occupied land and to allow the
Palestinian people to decide their fate freely. The
international community should bring pressure to bear
on Israel to halt its violent acts, which have claimed so
many precious Palestinian lives.
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): The General Assembly is
meeting today in a special emergency session to review
the situation in the Middle East, particularly against the
backdrop of a provocative act of certain Israeli
elements in the vicinity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which
has been followed by sustained and relentless violence
against Palestinians throughout the occupied territories.
Violence has begot violence. In his statement this
afternoon, the Secretary-General highlighted the
seriousness of the situation when he said, “feelings on
both sides were at a fever pitch and there was a real
danger of the situation spiralling out of control.”
(supra.)
Almost a hundred innocent lives have been lost,
including those of children, in addition to injuries
sustained by thousands of others. We deplore all the
deaths which have occurred. We express our deepest
sympathies to the families of those who have been
killed or injured in these tragic events.
It is a matter of concern to us that the demands
made recently, in Security Council resolution 1322
(2000) of 7 October 2000, are not being complied with.
As a result, the situation has continued to deteriorate. It
is therefore imperative to bring to an end the excessive
and disproportionate use of force against the
Palestinian people and to ensure Israel’s compliance

20

with its legal obligations and responsibilities as an
occupying Power, under the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 12 August 1949.
We support the call for the establishment of a
mechanism of inquiry into the recent tragic events,
with a view to finding the precise facts and preventing
the recurrence of such events in the future. Above all,
we believe that all possible efforts must be made for
the resumption of the negotiations within the Middle
East peace process on the already agreed basis, with
the aim of achieving an early and final settlement
between the two sides.
In this regard, we appreciate the efforts of the
Secretary-General and of other Member States, and
hope that the recent developments at Sharm el-Sheikh
will bring about an end to the current violence against
the Palestinian people and pave the way for durable
peace. Earlier, the leaders of both sides had agreed to
take the path of peace. This arduous journey is now
threatened with failure because of the ongoing
violence. It is our hope that the process can once again
be resumed and that peace, which had recently come so
tantalizingly close and yet remains so excruciatingly
far, can be finally achieved.
What is clear is that no amount of force can
suppress the determination of a people to free itself
from foreign occupation. All legitimate struggles are
rooted in the will of the people, and, if the history of
freedom struggles all over the world is any guide,
ultimately it is the will of the people that always
prevails and triumphs.
Pakistan has steadfastly and unequivocally
supported the just struggle for the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, as it supports those of all people
suffering under alien occupation or foreign domination.
We have consistently stated that Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) continue to
provide a viable and just framework for a durable and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The United
Nations must implement Security Council resolutions
with regard to those people who are struggling to take
back what is rightfully theirs — their land and the
freedom to choose their destiny. For the international
community, there is no alternative and there cannot be
any exception. The seeds of durable peace, and not just
in the Middle East, lie in the realization by peoples of
their legitimate right to self-determination.

A/ES-10/PV.14

There can be no lasting peace in the Middle East
without the attainment of the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people. These include the return of all
occupied territories to the control of the Palestinian
Authority, the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with Holy Jerusalem as its capital and
the exercise of their full sovereignty over Al-Haram
Al-Sharif.
We join the international call on Israel to resume
dialogue with sincerity and to resolve all pending
issues in order to lay the foundation for a permanent
peace in the Middle East based on the implementation
of all relevant United Nations resolutions as well as the
agreements already reached between the two sides.
We agree with the Secretary-General that there
can be no lasting security without lasting peace, and
lasting peace must be predicated on justice and
international law.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): We had hoped that the
announcement three days ago in Sharm el-Sheikh that
the bloody turmoil that had been threatening to destroy
the progress made so far in the peace process between
Israel and the Palestinians would come to an end and
thus give a new fillip, a new lease of life, to the Oslo
process. The situation remains volatile.
Botswana has always supported the peace process
between Israel and the Palestinians, because the
alternative is unthinkable and too ghastly to
contemplate. The events of the past few weeks leave no
doubt about this alternative. Enough blood has already
been shed, the blood not only of Palestinians and
Israelis, but of the people of the Middle East as a whole
over the years and decades. The words of the late
Prime Minister of Israel, Mr. Yitzhak Rabin, uttered
seven years ago in Washington on the White House
lawn still echo in our ears:
“Let me say to you, the Palestinians: We are
destined to live together on the same soil, in the
same land. We, the soldiers who have returned
from battle, stained with blood, we who have
seen our relatives and friends killed before our
eyes, we who have attended their funerals and
cannot look into the eyes of their parents, we who
have come from a land where parents bury their
children, we who have fought against you, the
Palestinians, we say to you today in a loud and a
clear voice ‘Enough of blood and tears.
Enough’”.

Chairman Arafat, in his remarks at the signing of
the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip in Washington in 1995 stated:
“we must condemn and forswear violence
totally ... Enough killing and enough killing of
innocent people”.
We echo these words here today in the General
Assembly: Enough, enough of the bloodshed, the
hatreds, the endless cycles of mayhem which benefit no
one in the Middle East except the fanatics and the
terrorists on both sides of the conflict.
We recognize the sometimes shuffling pace at
which the negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians are progressing. The aspirations of the
Palestinian people to have a homeland of their own
have been frustrated for too long. Part of their nation is
in exile enduring without end the indignities and agony
of refugee life. Their frustration is understandable.
Their impatience is only human. Botswana supports
and will always support their right to selfdetermination in their own country.
Equally, we cannot ignore the facts of history.
The people of Israel have their own tragic experiences
to inform or influence their actions and dispositions as
they contemplate making peace with their neighbours.
They have no choice but to make peace with their
neighbours, the Palestinians in this instance, to take
risks for peace for their own sake, but we would not be
helping the peace process if we thought that it was easy
for an Israeli, even the most daring one, to make peace
with a neighbour or neighbours he has grown to regard
as a sworn enemy or enemies.
This special session will therefore serve a good
and useful purpose if its raison d’être is to coax, cajole
and encourage the Israelis and the Palestinians to return
to the path of negotiations, to abandon and forswear the
destructive logic of confrontation and war, and not to
apportion blame against one side and give the
impression that there were any angels in the bloody and
chaotic confrontation we have just seen in the Middle
East.
Each side of the conflict between Israel and the
Palestinians has to grapple with advocates of nihilist
solutions to the conflict. The advocates of peaceful
negotiations on both sides are often considered sellouts at best and, at worst, guilty of apostasy. We must
not encourage nihilism in the Middle East conflict by

21

A/ES-10/PV.14

giving the rejectionists the comfort of thinking that
their indecent and zealous readiness to resort to armed
confrontation at the slightest provocation is an act of
positive heroism.
It must be stated, however, that provocations like
the continued construction of Israeli settlements in the
occupied areas and the insensitivity shown by both
sides towards sites holy to Jews and Arabs are actions
that can only be antagonistic to the peace process. I
ask: how can the peace process thrive in an
environment punctuated by the commotion and rumble
of bulldozers clearing plots for the construction of
settlements in areas that are the subject of
negotiations? Israel would do well to discontinue the
provocative and unhelpful practice of creating facts on
the ground. This practice is inimical to the negotiation
process. It compromises the process, in addition to
being illegal.
Finally, let me say once again that Botswana is
one with all those who condemn the violence, the
destruction and the brutality we have seen on television
and have read about in newspapers in the past two
weeks. An urgent return to the peace process is the
only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian problem.
Much has been achieved so far. It should not be
sacrificed on the altar of fanaticism and brinkmanship.
Mr. Johan Thani (Brunei Darussalam): Brunei
Darussalam is pleased to participate once again at this
resumed emergency special session to reaffirm its
longstanding support for the right of Palestinians to
self-determination and for the establishment of a
Palestinian State. Like most speakers who have spoken
before us, we are deeply concerned with the recent
developments in Palestine, particularly in East
Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip. The situation over the
past few weeks has the potential to unravel the efforts
and progress made over the years. In the light of these
developments, the convening of this session at this
particular juncture is therefore timely and crucial.
Brunei Darussalam believes that Israeli policies
in East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territories are an obstacle to real progress in
the peace process. We would therefore like to join in
the call being made by Member States that Israel
should respect and implement its commitments,
pledges and agreements concluded through the various
peace processes, and to comply with all previous

22

resolutions, including resolution 1322 (2000), which
was recently adopted by the Security Council.
Brunei Darussalam has consistently supported all
efforts to find a comprehensive settlement in the
Middle East. To that end, we commend the efforts of
all the parties concerned aimed at helping to bring the
peace process back on track. My delegation also
commends the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts
to help facilitate the emergency summit at Sharm elSheikh.
In conclusion, Brunei Darussalam would like to
reiterate its strong commitment, unwavering support
and continued solidarity with the Palestinian people in
their struggle for a just and lasting peace and for an
independent Palestinian State.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to join previous speakers in extending our
congratulations to the President for his commendable
efforts and profound understanding of the dimensions
of the problem we are facing today in the Palestine
area. Moreover, we would like to thank him for
reconvening the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly to consider item 5 of the agenda,
entitled “Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East
Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian
Territory”. Furthermore, we would like to extend our
thanks to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his efforts
to prevent the situation from further deteriorating and
sliding to the brink of an unpredictable abyss.
The rapid deterioration of the situation in the
region has made it necessary for us to resort to this
forum to express our fears and concerns in an effort to
seek a mechanism that would allow a way out of the
present grave impasse. This predicament not only
threatens security in the Middle East, but it may also
extend to other countries of the world. It is within this
tragic context that I will refrain from going into the
details of the events currently unfolding in the Middle
East. I am certain that all of us are well aware of those
events, as well as of their underlying causes and the
elements that contributed to their widespread
expansion.
The experience of recent days has proved that the
escalation of events in occupied Palestine has
contributed significantly to inflaming emotions on
Arab streets, where people can no longer put up with
Israel’s procrastination and its failure to comply with
its obligations under the peace process. The prevailing

A/ES-10/PV.14

situation signals a serious backlash from people who,
in the absence of effective action to safeguard their
historical and natural rights, have begun to harbour
serious doubts about the credibility of our international
Organization. It is consequently imperative that we
take serious, effective and rapid steps to guarantee the
region’s security and stability by putting an immediate
stop to Israeli military violations, by calling on the
Israeli Government to comply seriously and strictly
with all international resolutions and by asking it to
stop supporting any further provocative violations of
the holy places in Palestine, which could inflame the
sentiments of millions of Muslims all over the world.
My country would welcome any effort to restore
stability and security to the region, be it within the
United Nations or outside it, provided it preserves all
the rights of the Palestinian people. In a statement
issued on 18 October 2000, the Qatari cabinet
conveyed its view that, if implemented by Israel, the
outcome of the emergency Middle East summit held at
Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, while insufficient vis-à-vis the
aspirations of the Palestinian people, would provide a
suitable basis for the resumption of negotiations and
for reviving the Palestinian track of the peace process.
That statement further called upon Israel to halt its
aggression and to implement the outcome of Sharm
el-Sheikh and the agreements reached with the
Palestinians in earlier stages of the peace process. That
is what is needed to prevent the collapse of the peace
process.
All peoples came away with a positive impression
of last month’s Millennium Summit; they were
particularly encouraged by the fact that, in paragraph 1
of the Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2), the
heads of State or Government reaffirmed their faith in
the Organization and its Charter as indispensable
foundations of a more peaceful, prosperous and just
world. To maintain the credibility generated by the
Summit, we must not limit ourselves to standing idly
by and expressing our abhorrence of flagrant
aggression against innocent old men and women,
children and babies. We need to take specific, practical
steps to secure the rights of the Palestinian people,
provide them with the safety and the security they
need, and protect them from the attacks of the Israeli
occupiers, as well as protect the holy places at Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.
Hence, the State of Qatar supports the draft
resolution on this agenda item, and will vote in its

favour, since it is aimed at securing the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1322 (2000). I am confident that peace-loving
States Members of the United Nations will not hesitate to
support fully any measure that is conducive to peace
and stability in the Middle East.
Mr. Powles (New Zealand): New Zealanders
have been shocked by the violence that has been
occurring in the Israeli-occupied territories for more
than three weeks now. The images we have seen have
been a stain upon humanity. I wish to convey my
Government’s deepest sympathies to the bereaved and
the injured on all sides. New Zealand has responded
promptly to an appeal by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
for emergency medical supplies.
I have taken the floor today primarily to express
my Government’s strong support for the important role
undertaken by the Secretary-General in his tireless
efforts to help broker an end to the violence. We
greatly welcome the commitments made by Chairman
Arafat and Prime Minister Barak earlier this week at
Sharm el-Sheikh. It is essential that the focus now
should be on the implementation of those
commitments. In that regard, we share the concerns of
others in this Hall about the timing of this resumption
of the tenth emergency special session and about the
impact of the rhetoric it may evoke.
The key steps agreed at Sharm el-Sheikh include
a committee of fact-finding on the events of the past
several weeks, which will also examine ways to
prevent their recurrence. No one should seek to
prejudge the findings of that committee. But in
circumstances in which it appears that neither party is
blameless, we cannot ignore the particular obligation
that Israel has as the occupying Power to protect the
lives of civilians in the territories it occupies.
We hope that the committee of fact-finding will
be able to carry out its work soon and with due
objectivity. The truth must be known, responsibility
accepted and a way back to the negotiating table found
so that a final settlement, which has seemed so
tantalizingly close at times, can be achieved. We join
others in urging the parties to commit themselves anew
to this process. It is the only way to ensure a just and
lasting peace in the region.

23

A/ES-10/PV.14

Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to begin by thanking the President of the General
Assembly for convening this resumption of the tenth
emergency
special
session.
The
international
community wished to resume its consideration of the
item before us: The illegal Israeli actions in occupied
East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territories, which flagrantly violate the entire
foundation of international humanitarian law and
norms.
We wish also to thank the Secretary-General for
the constructive role he has played; by virtue of the
responsibilities vested in him by the United Nations
Charter, he has contributed to the ultimate resolution of
this crisis.
The tragic events we have seen in the occupied
territories resulted from the provocative September
visit by the leader of the Likud party, Ariel Sharon, to
the mosque at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, accompanied by an
official body guard. Despite the intensive diplomatic
efforts undertaken, the situation got out of control.
Such efforts took place both within and outside the
area, and Kuwait was among the countries that did
their utmost in this regard. We hope for a successful
outcome to all the endeavours towards an immediate
halt to Israeli actions in the occupied territories. For
that reason, we welcomed Security Council resolution
1322 (2000) of 7 October 2000, which clearly
condemned the excessive use of force against civilians
in Palestine, and which called for its immediate
cessation. The Council demanded that blind force no
longer be used against defenceless Palestinian
civilians. Israeli soldiers are committing crimes against
humanity and flagrantly violating the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.
The international community, as represented in
the Security Council and the General Assembly, is
doing everything it can to counter Israel’s actions, for
Israel has turned its back on international law. Urgent
measures must be taken to bring about the following
things.
First and foremost, illegal actions committed
against civilians in the Israeli-occupied territories must
be halted. Houses have been bulldozed and whole areas
have been put to the torch.
Moreover, the fact that we now have a
commission of inquiry to investigate these events and

24

how they happened should give us a clearer idea of the
situation and offer a measure of protection to the
Palestinian people. These measures are preliminary and
essential in character. What is important is that once
the situation is calmer, we should prepare for a return
to the negotiating table and to the peace process.
But for that to happen, the Israeli Government
must be made aware of the fact that its repressive
measures and practices will never provide it with the
security it seeks. As long as it continues to occupy
Palestinian territories and to violate the agreements
signed with the Palestinians during the peace process,
and as long as it remains obstinate in its aggression, it
will achieve only one end: the undermining of stability
in this vital but troubled region, which, over the course
of the last 40 years, has been a theatre for confrontation
and an obstacle to the progress of the peoples of the
region, who are forced to devote their resources to
defence rather than to development. A peace that is
just, lasting and comprehensive must be based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and the principle of land for peace. Israel must
withdraw from all the Arab territories that it has
occupied since 1967, including the Syrian Golan
Heights, and must complete its withdrawal from
southern Lebanon.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate Kuwait’s
firm support of and solidarity with the Palestinian
people and their justified demand to recover all their
national rights, including the right to establish their
own state, with Jerusalem as its capital.
Mr. Shihab (Maldives): Mr. President, my
delegation would like to express its deep appreciation
to you for resuming this emergency special session,
which is both timely and essential. The international
community must take heed of the current crisis in the
Middle East, which has the potential for disastrous
consequences, not only for the region but also for the
peace and security of the whole world.
Over the past years, we have witnessed a number
of promising breakthroughs in the Middle East peace
process. The international community, particularly the
sponsors of the peace process, was glad to see the
progress made towards a comprehensive and lasting
peace in a region which has seen nothing but violence
for over five decades, as a consequence of the denial of
the rights of the Palestinian people and the occupation
of Arab land by Israel. But it was conscious that the

A/ES-10/PV.14

path to peace was strewn with numerous obstacles,
daunting challenges and treacherous conspiracies. It
was aware that the Palestinians and the Israelis were
traversing a very delicate and crucial bridge in the
peace process. Hopes were high despite fears of a
possible setback. We watched with optimism, as did the
whole world, as the process moved in the right
direction, until the ill-conceived visit to Al-Haram AlSharif by Mr. Sharon on 28 September left the peace
process aflame.
Today, once again, the Middle East is the focus of
the attention of the world. Provocation and humiliation,
frustration and violence have dragged the region not
only into wanton bloodshed and destruction, but also to
the brink of war and towards the death of the peace
process. The Maldives has followed the recent
developments in the occupied territories with grave
concern and anxiety. We have seen innocent blood
spilled. We have seen brutal beatings, and we have
seen the use of excessive force against an unarmed
civilian population in its own land. We have also seen
indiscriminate assaults against innocent civilians and
the death of over 100 of them. Israel has committed all
these cruel acts against the Palestinians. We are
appalled and angered by these inhuman and dastardly
acts, and we condemn these as vehemently as possible.
Admittedly, there was Palestinian fury over the
provocative visit to Al-Haram Al-Sharif by some
Israeli extremists, challenging the legitimacy of efforts
for peace. But the justifiable fury drew a
disproportionate and violent response from Israel.
We strongly and forcefully condemn these acts of
violence and reject the inhuman policies of Israel. We
stress that violence will only breed more violence,
fuelling tension and increasing regional instability and
insecurity. We call upon the international community to
take urgent measures to put an end to Israeli acts of
provocation and aggression against the people of
Palestine and to ensure the swift implementation of the
agreements reached between the Palestinians and Israel
and within the broad spectrum of the peace process,
most recently at the Sharm El-Sheikh summit. We must
also ensure that an objective international inquiry is
made into the recent events.
To achieve a just and comprehensive peace based
on international legitimacy, Israel must carry out its
commitments and immediately withdraw from all
territories, including Jerusalem, that have been

occupied by force. The continuation of the policy of
settlements on occupied lands by the Israelis and their
flagrant violations of the rights of the Palestinian
people can only jeopardize the peace process.
The rights of the Palestinians have always been
very close to the heart of every Maldivian. The
Government of Maldives continues to express its
solidarity with the Palestinian people and to support
the Palestinian cause. We believe that a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East can be
achieved only through unconditional Israeli withdrawal
from all the Palestinian and Arab territories occupied
since 1967, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. We have time
and again raised our voice in support of the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and to
establish their own independent state on their national
soil, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. In this
context, we recall Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which provide legitimacy for
such action.
The Maldives is a peace-loving country, and we
shall remain firm in our resolve to support peace
anywhere and everywhere in the world. We believe that
there is no alternative to peace. The Palestinian people
have chosen the path of peace with courage. That is an
irreversible choice which the United Nations must help
them realize. That responsibility should not be shirked
by the international community.
The President returned to the Chair.
Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to extend my profound gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for reconvening this emergency
special session of the General Assembly in the context
of the resumption of the discussion of the injustices
faced by the Palestinian people in their occupied land. I
should like in particular to thank the Secretary-General
for his invaluable statement to this special session, in
which he gave an assessment of the tragic situation in
the occupied Arab territories. For our part, we should
like to express our appreciation for his efforts and his
participation in the Sharm el-Sheikh summit, the
objective of which was to achieve a peaceful resolution
of the struggle.
The practices of the occupying Israeli authorities
against defenceless and unarmed civilians in the
occupied Palestinian territories and the use of
oppressive, violent measures and military force in
dealing with the legitimate Palestinian resistance

25

A/ES-10/PV.14

against Israeli occupation, are totally unjustified under
any circumstances. These practices are sure to mobilize
the international conscience to take a firm position,
condemning these actions and calling upon Israel to
remove all forms of injustice from the aggrieved party,
put an end to all forms of violence against the
Palestinian people, adhere to its pledges and
obligations and to implement internationally binding
resolutions.
We were greatly astonished by Israel’s attempt to
lay the blame on the Palestinian National Authority by
alleging that the Palestinian leadership provoked these
acts of violence. We all know — Israel itself knows
very well — that the conflagration was ignited after the
provocative visit by the leader of the Likud Party to
Al-Haram Al-Sharif in Arab Jerusalem. This
provocative act, undertaken with Israeli military
protection, stirred up and disregarded the feelings of
Muslims.
We are deeply concerned about the Israeli
escalation of violence, which seems to be deliberate,
against the Palestinian people. We are also deeply
concerned by the insistence of the Israeli Government
on imposing a policy that it believes to be a solution by
using military force and by killing dozens, wounding
hundreds and displacing thousands of Palestinians who
demand nothing but the justified right to liberate their
occupied territory, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, and
achieve their inalienable rights.
My country urges the international community to
fulfil its responsibilities to protect the Palestinian
people, to urge Israel immediately to abide by Security
Council resolutions; to respect human rights,
international conventions, particularly the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, which guarantees the
protection of civilians in time of war, and Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973); and to
implement its commitments undertaken in the
agreements relevant to the peace process.
Mr. Pham Binh Minh (Viet Nam): At the outset,
my delegation would like to commend your efforts,
Mr. President, to resume in a timely manner the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly to
consider illegal Israeli actions in occupied East
Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory.
In September last year, the world community was
elated at the signing of the Sharm el-Sheikh

26

Memorandum, which ended a prolonged deadlock in
the peace process in the Middle East and reawakened
hopes for a final settlement of the Palestine-Israel issue
and, beyond that, for a resolution of the entire
Arab-Israeli question. But just one year later, those
earnest hopes of the international community are being
dashed by the outbreak of brutal violence on 28
September after the provocative visit to Al-Haram AlSharif. Tragically, as always, the Palestinians are the
ones who suffer most severely from this dangerous
situation.
We are deeply shocked by the unjustified killings
of more than 100 innocent people and the excessive use
of force by Israeli troops in Jerusalem, the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip. We call for the immediate cessation
of violence and of the excessive use of force against
Palestinians and for a return to the situation that
existed prior to the current crisis. It is incumbent upon
Israel, the occupying Power, to fulfil its duties and
obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War. In this regard, we welcome the 17 October
ceasefire agreement in Sharm el-Sheikh between
President Yasser Arafat and Prime Minister Ehud
Barak, and wish to see its implementation without
delay. We believe the Sharm el-Sheikh summit is a
positive step towards defusing tensions and creating
the necessary conditions for the resumption of the
Middle East peace process.
It is our conviction that the United Nations plays
an essential role in the maintenance of peace and
security in this region. In this regard, we welcome the
current efforts of the Secretary-General in the quest for
peace. We call for the full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1322 (2000) of 7 October 2000.
Failure to implement this resolution would cast doubt
on the credibility of the Security Council.
As a nation which experienced numerous
sacrifices and great suffering to gain national
independence and freedom, Viet Nam, as always,
strongly supports the Palestinian people’s struggle for
their inalienable rights, including the right to selfdetermination, the right to return home and the right to
establish an independent State of Palestine, with
Jerusalem as its capital. We believe that the ArabIsraeli conflict in the Middle East cannot be resolved
peacefully without a just resolution of the question of
Palestine. We welcome every initiative and effort by
the regional and international communities to break the

A/ES-10/PV.14

deadlock, remove obstacles and put the peace process
back on track with a view to reaching a peaceful, just
and lasting settlement of the conflict on the basis of
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and other Security
Council resolutions and of the land-for-peace principle.
It is our fervent hope that the voices in favour of
peace will prevail in the Middle East. The Government
of Viet Nam will work with the international
community to continue to strive for a just and
reasonable settlement of the question of Palestine.
Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I am going to address the mind today. I do not
intend to talk about the possibility of adopting draft
resolutions, because resolutions express power. What I
am going to talk about is history, geography and
sociology. I am going to focus on three issues.
First, what is the nature of the question that we
are discussing? It is a question on which the
international community has scored an unbelievable
zero by failing to find any solution whatsoever to the
question.
Secondly, what is going on now? And why are we
witnessing these recent developments?
Thirdly, what is the peace process about, and is
there really a peace process?
On the first point, history and geography, we can
go back to everything that has been written and
recorded in history and geography through the ages —
including maps prior to 1947 — but we will never find
anything on the ground, either historically or
geographically, called Israel. Israel is the name of the
prophet Jacob. It was not the name of any land at any
point in history anywhere on earth. Palestine is the
name. That is the name of the land where a Palestinian
population lived — Muslims, Christians and Jews.
If I worship God through Mohammed, then I am a
Muslim; through Moses, then I am a Jew; through
Jesus, then I am a Christian. This is religion. But
citizenship and nationality are a totally different
question. Shimon Peres is Jewish. The fact that he
worships God through Moses does not cancel out the
fact that he is from Belarus. That is his country, his
citizenship and his nationality. Menachem Begin
worshipped God through Moses too. This does not
mean that he was not Polish — he came from Poland.
He was Polish and he had Polish citizenship. Benjamin
Netanyahu believes in God and worships God through

Moses, but this does not mean that he is not American.
He is from this city, New York City. If all followers of
religions could go back to the same place where the
divine message was delivered, they would find that all
these messages descended on Arab land. These are
called the revealed messages. Christ received the
message of God in Palestine. Therefore, all Christians
on earth could go and live in Palestine, and all Muslims
on earth could go and live in Mecca or in Saudi Arabia.
Citizenship and nationality are one thing, and religion
is another. Religion comes from God. A homeland is
for the people.
We Muslims are not believers until we believe in
the following five things: first, God; secondly, his
angels; thirdly, his books; fourthly, his prophets; and
lastly, the day of reckoning. We believe in Moses; we
believe in Jesus; and we believe in Mohammed. If not,
then our belief is diminished and incomplete.
Palestine is for Palestinians — Jews, Arabs or
Christians. It is for Palestinians who have lived there
for ages, not for those who emigrated deliberately or
were sent from every corner of the Earth to inhabit the
land of Palestine and to depopulate the area of its
original population. These are the facts.
It then becomes a question of occupation. If some
Jews have suffered somewhere else on earth, the
Palestinian people must not pay the price of the plight
of Jews in other corners of the earth. It is then a
question of occupation. It should be dealt with on that
basis; otherwise, it should not be dealt with and there
will never be a solution.
I know about political niceties and the pressures
that are exerted every day on all capitals and missions.
It has been done before; it is being done in the Security
Council; and it will be done again. This will not lead to
objective thinking. Even if Security Council members’
convictions were such, they would not lead them to
adopt a position and a resolution in consonance with
history and geography.
Libya, as I said yesterday, worships only God and
fears nobody but God. It is indeed interested in
revealing all historical, geographical and sociological
facts. Libya was the only country that stood with
Germany when it was divided into two Germanies.
Perhaps we will experience political circumstances that
would change geography and lead to a redrawing of the
map, as happened with Germany after the Second
World War. But those historical and geographical

27

A/ES-10/PV.14

circumstances were consistently outweighed by the
sociological factor. When there are different historical
circumstances, sociological facts such as redrawing the
map of Germany and then the reunification of Germany
become more pronounced. Germany is one social unit.
Muammar Al-Qadhafi said that in Belgrade at the NonAligned Movement summit, eight years before the fall
of the Berlin Wall. People laughed; some mocked that
statement, because they were ignorant of history and of
the correct basis for analysis.
Eight years later — a very short period in the
course of history — Germany was reunified. The social
factor triumphed over the historical and geographical
factors. Viet Nam was also divided, because of
historical circumstances, but the social factor once
again came to outweigh the other factors, and Viet Nam
was unified again. This is exactly what will happen
with Korea, where the social factor will take over again
and outweigh other factors.
Let us go to the second point. What is happening
these days? What is happening is that one of the
parties — the occupying party — is using its helicopter
gunships to bombard and its tanks and guns to shoot at
civilian Palestinians; then it expects the other party not
to respond, not even with stones. We then call this
response violence? This does not go by the name
“violence”, my friends. This is self-defence, the least
possible manifestation of self-defence. Would any of us
allow another person to slap us and not even try to
ward off that slap? Is simply trying to ward off such a
slap called violence? Is protecting oneself considered
violence?
This is a severe injustice. This injustice is what
moved the masses in the Palestinian streets, the Arab
streets and many streets all over the world, including in
American cities. This injustice reached unprecedented
proportions and the result was an explosion. And when
an explosion takes place, neither the United Nations
nor non-united nations, regional summits, the Sharm
el-Sheikh summit or the Camp David summit can
check the consequences of the explosion.
Why can we not be reasonable and rational and
try to find a correct solution before the Arab region
explodes? The Arab region is pregnant with the
possibility of exploding, and it will give birth to such
an explosion very soon. We do not know if the baby
will be healthy or sick. No one can predict this. I

28

believe that it will be a very sick baby, and then we
will have a disaster on our hands.
Thirdly, what is it that we call the peace process?
Palestinian land is occupied. The Palestinians also
suffer from the diseased reality in the Arab world, from
the deteriorating situation of the Arab nation. Official
Arab regimes are weak and sick. The Arab masses have
accepted what their regimes have accepted, not because
they were satisfied, but because it was a necessity.
They accepted the occupation of Arab territory in 1967.
Why does the occupier not leave these territories and
give the land back to its people so that they can live a
normal life there?
The occupiers refuse to do this. They have
established settlements. Where are these settlements?
Around every single city or village in the West Bank
and Gaza there is a circle of settlements, and another
circle of settlements. And so all Palestinian cities and
villages have become islands in an ocean. Where is
peace then?
This is the territory that was occupied in 1967.
The dialogue goes like this: “Give it back to me.” “No,
I will not. I will give you the village that is encircled
by settlements of occupiers. I will give you the city that
is encircled by settlements.” So the territory will not be
given back. These are the facts on the ground.
The Palestinian population was forced to leave
Palestine — more than 4 million Palestinians. The
doors were opened for them to emigrate; they were
given money and jobs, so long as they left Palestine.
These people are in Canada, Australia and the United
States. They want to go back. The occupiers say “no,
they cannot come back”. So the Palestinians cannot go
back. The land cannot be given back, or if it is given
back, it will be a village encircled by a block of
settlements. So, where is this peace? The land will not
be given back; the person who has been forced to
emigrate cannot return: where is this peace?
These are the facts. Any other philosophy,
political declaration or statement will not cancel out
any of the facts that I have mentioned. What kind of
peace does the Assembly expect as a result of this kind
of process?
There was a child whom all members of the
Assembly saw on their television screens: a child
taking refuge next to his father, behind a small rock
that was not large enough for him and his father, a

A/ES-10/PV.14

child asking for mercy and finding no mercy —
instead, he was shot dead. Do Assembly members
believe that peace can be achieved between a
defenceless population, armed only with stones, and
another people that bombards that unarmed population
by land, by sea and from the air, and with settlers who
have occupied the land and houses of that defenceless
Palestinian population for years and years?
Arabs are not against the Jews. In the Arab nation
we believe in Moses. But we are against the occupiers
who came from every corner of the Earth to occupy
Palestine. There is not a single justification —
geographical, historical or otherwise — for Jews to be
in Palestine.
Let me explain this. It is in the history books; I
have not invented it. In Libya the Green Mountains —
Jabal al Akhdar — were a candidate for a homeland for
the Jewish people. Argentina was another candidate.
Uganda was yet another. I urge Assembly members to
read their history books. Those countries were
candidates. But when the geology of the Green
Mountains was studied, it was seen that there were
geological fault lines, which meant that all the rain
would wash down to the sea and there would not be
enough underground water to develop the area. A
delegation came to the Green Mountains in 1905 for
that study. This is part of history. If the Jewish people
had a historical right to Palestine, why were they
looking in Argentina, Uganda or the Green Mountains
of Libya for a homeland?
I know that some do not know these facts. They
have not read about them because the huge media
machine that is financed by some rich Jews has not
disseminated them.
As I said earlier, I am trying to appeal to minds. I
am not seeking to get a resolution adopted because
resolutions inevitably and repeatedly express the
balance of power. If the international community does
not address this issue, the balance of power will
change, as happened in Germany and Viet Nam. There
will come a time when the baby is delivered and then
we will all regret the opportunities squandered.
The Arab rulers who will meet tomorrow in Cairo
are caught between a rock and a hard place. They are
caught between two fires: the fire of people who
participate in demonstrations and sit-ins and the
pressure exerted by the United States. Which of these
two fires will they choose? When their thrones are

shaken, all will know which position to adopt, but by
then there will be neither rulers nor palaces nor
Governments to yield to pressure from anyone, no
matter how strong or powerful, because power will
reside in the street.
We have seen this in Iran. We have seen the
power of the people. There was a Shah, an Emperor,
but the power of the street undermined that despot and
overthrew him. The people were victors. In Addis
Ababa, there was another tyrant who, like the Shah,
was supported by all the major Powers. The people
took to the streets in Ethiopia and the Emperor was
soon relegated to history, as happened recently in
Yugoslavia. I would urge those who pay no heed to
such examples to recall them.
Mr. Insanally (Guyana): The chorus of views
which this Assembly has heard, both on Wednesday
and today, from so many member States undoubtedly
reflects the grave concern now felt by the entire
international community that the rapidly deteriorating
situation in the Middle East might not only jeopardize
the peace process which was undertaken by Israel and
Palestine, but also lead to a dangerous escalation of the
conflict, with unpredictable consequences.
In responding to these worrying developments,
my Government recently issued a press communiqué
publicly deploring this latest outbreak of fighting and,
more particularly, the tragic killings on both sides. The
text of this statement has been distributed for the
information of the membership of the Organization, so
that I have little to add on this occasion. I may say,
however, that although we remain distressed by the
continuing failure to reach a peaceful and lasting
settlement of the region’s problems, we are somewhat
encouraged to believe by the Secretary-General’s
report this afternoon on his peacemaking mission to the
affected region that a settlement of the fundamentally
important issues is still possible. This can only
materialize, however, if extremism is avoided on all
sides and a genuine effort made to achieve cooperation
and compromise through dialogue and negotiation.
The Government of Guyana further believes that
Security Council resolution 1322 (2000) of 7 October
2000 and other relevant resolutions which have been
adopted both by the General Assembly and the Security
Council in relation to the Palestinian question, as well
as the accords which have been reached directly
between Israel and Palestine, provide an ample

29

A/ES-10/PV.14

framework for pursuing the search for agreement. We
therefore join the call on the parties involved to avoid
further confrontation and to return to the negotiating
table with a view to finding an acceptable solution to
the problems which separate them. In this context, as
the occupying Power, Israel has a special responsibility
to observe all relevant international conventions to
protect the Palestinian people from harm.
Bearing in mind the deeply rooted differences
between the two main protagonists, we urge the
Secretary-General and influential countries to play a
greater auxiliary role in creating a new environment
that is favourable to an accommodation of the vital
interests of each party. We, as the supreme organ of the
United Nations, must also rise above recrimination to
make a sensible and concerted effort to renew
meaningful discussions between Palestine and Israel.
My Government is prepared to consider any
resolution which emerges from this debate that can
enjoy widespread support and serve to rekindle our
hopes for agreement between the parties. In this regard,
we appeal to Israel and Palestine to avoid a war of
words which may aggravate the situation. More
important than any wordy resolution is the political
will needed at this stage to bring an end to conflict.
Let me say in conclusion that, as a Member of the
United Nations and its Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
Guyana will not fail to work for the cause of peace and
justice in the Middle East so that all peoples in the
region, including Palestine and Israel, may live within
secure borders and be allowed to enjoy the full fruits of
peace and development.
Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for my delegation to address the General
Assembly on behalf of the countries of the Rio Group
with respect to the situation in the Middle East.
This is not the first time that we have spoken on
the situation in the Middle East. Only recently, on 6
October, the Rio Group issued a communiqué in which
it responded to the earlier violent events occurring in
that region, at the cost of many civilians lives and
numerous wounded. On that occasion, we emphatically
called on all the parties involved to do their utmost to
calm passions, eschew violence and seek the early
renewal of dialogue in pursuit of a definitive peace
settlement for the region via negotiations.

30

Some days later, on 13 October, we spoke out
again in the light of the intensified violence. On that
occasion, we firmly rejected the use of force and
expressed our wholehearted support for the actions
undertaken in that region by the Secretary-General and
by various actors of the international community, in
particular the United States, the Russian Federation,
the European Union and the countries of the area. We
recognized the efforts of those parties to attempt to
create conditions of stability in the region, establish a
propitious climate for resuming negotiations, end the
violence and foster renewed dialogue in order to
re-establish peace in the region.
We have noted with hope the understanding
reached at the Sharm el-Sheikh Summit, and we trust
that this will be consolidated in a clear step to reestablish the climate of trust necessary to restart the
peace process in the region.
We hope that the outcome of this special session
of the General Assembly will contribute to allowing us
to move beyond the current situation and will
reactivate the peace process. In this regard our efforts
and decisions must aim at achieving clarification of the
facts, must ensure an end to the violence and must
support the resumption of negotiations. We must
facilitate the creation of an environment propitious to
these aims.
We reaffirm our conviction that it is necessary to
guarantee respect for the principles of the Charter, the
norms of international humanitarian law and the
implementation of the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council on this matter.
Mr. Alemán (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to endorse the words of the
distinguished representative of Colombia, who spoke
on behalf of the Rio Group.
The tragic events which have recently occurred in
Gaza and the West Bank demonstrate how important it
is for Israel and Palestine to redouble their efforts in
order to avoid a recurrence of the unprecedented acts
of violence which have been broadcast by the media
around the world. When negative sentiments surface,
the voice of reason is silenced, and then it becomes
possible to witness with shock and condemnation the
desecration of religious sites and inhumane conduct;
this must disappear from the face of the earth.
Nevertheless, this violence is taking place within the
broader context of the continuous occupation of the

A/ES-10/PV.14

Palestinian territories and the clear need to find an
early, just, global and definitive solution to the
Palestinian question in conformity with the resolutions
adopted by the United Nations.
With the adoption of resolution 1322 (2000) on 7
October, the Security Council once again called upon
Israel and Palestine to set aside violent attitudes and
urged them to resume negotiations in the framework of
the Middle East peace process. The commitment made
in Sharm el-Sheikh on 17 October has provided basic
guidelines for a ceasing of hostilities and a restarting of
negotiations.
Ecuador, in conformity with the fundamental
principles of its international policy, advocates
peaceful solution of conflicts and rejects the
occupation of territories and the use or the threat of the
use of force in international relations. Ecuador believes
that Israel is entitled to live in peace within secure,
recognized borders and believes that the Palestinian
people have the same right, in conformity with the
resolutions adopted by the United Nations, which
recognized its inalienable right to free determination
and independence. Moreover, my delegation is
concerned about the disproportionate use of force
against the civilian Palestinian people and the
deterioration of respect for human rights in the
occupied territories.
We made a similar statement during the special
session of the Commission on Human Rights which
met recently in Geneva to discuss this situation in the
occupied territories. At that time we said that Ecuador
maintains the principle that human rights are not
negotiable and are to be universally respected with no
conditions attached and no exceptions. Peace and
cooperation between the peoples of Israel and Palestine
will only be achieved with the triumph of reason and
tolerance. This will remain unattainable the less respect
there is for the fundamental rights of individuals,
standards of international law and justice.
Never before had an overall peace settlement
been so near, as a consequence of the Oslo Agreement
and those agreed upon in Wye River and Sharm elSheikh. We must not allow the provocation in AlHaram Al-Sharif, which seems to have triggered the
situation we now see in the occupied territories and the
horrible events of recent days, to stymie or negate this
process. Consequently, Ecuador joins the call to the
leaders of Israel and Palestine to put an end to the

unsustainable situation that is undermining the huge
efforts made so far.
Geography destined Israel and the Palestinians to
be neighbours. History, which is made by men, must
allow them to live together peacefully and in
friendship. Only a negotiated solution, not one which is
imposed, will make it possible for both peoples to
leave behind confrontation and replace distrust with
understanding so that they will never again be
protagonists or victims of the spiral of violence and
insecurity which frequently darkens their relations.
In this regard, on behalf of my Government I
would like to express our resolute support for the steps
taken by the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
which together with those taken by other world
leaders — in particular those of the United States of
America, Russia, the European Union and the countries
of the region such as Egypt and Jordan — will
gradually allow a return to calm in this region of
upheaval.
Ecuador believes that the outcome of this special
emergency session of the General Assembly should
contribute to this goal and encourage the two peoples
to return to the negotiating table in a constructive spirit
prepared to build a future of harmony so that coming
generations will harvest the fruits of what has so far
been such an elusive peace.
Ms. Lee (Singapore): Once again, the situation in
the Middle East has reached a critical juncture. For the
past few years, we have lived in the hopes of peace.
These hopes have been shattered. Conflict has once
again escalated. Our immediate priority is to snap out
of the vicious cycle of escalating violence. We hope
that the Sharm el-Sheikh meeting will calm the
troubled waters.
But we need to do more. We need to get back to
the road of peace. To do so, we can no longer resort to
entrenched positions and old ways of doing things. We
must find the courage and strength to take bold steps
forward.
We commend the United Nations SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan for his bold initiative of
personally going to the Middle East to conduct shuttle
diplomacy directly with the leaders concerned. With
his usual diplomatic skills, the Secretary-General
succeeded in bringing the concerned parties and other
key players together in Sharm el-Sheikh. The

31

A/ES-10/PV.14

involvement of the Secretary-General and the results of
the Sharm el-Sheikh meeting are crucial steps in the
right direction. We are grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing earlier this afternoon, and we
give him our full support for his continued role in the
Middle East peace process.
Two weeks ago we were horrified by the
television footage of the killing of a 12-year-old
Palestinian boy, Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra, in the
arms of his father who tried valiantly to shield him
from Israeli bullets. His death was one of the more than
100 deaths and scores of injuries that have occurred in
the past two weeks, mainly among Palestinian
civilians. The international community is shocked by
these needless and wanton killings. Singapore hopes
that steps towards establishing a mechanism for a
speedy and objective inquiry into the tragic events —
as outlined in Security Council resolution 1322 (2000),
adopted on 7 October, and agreed upon at the summit
meeting at Sharm el-Sheikh — will be taken urgently.
If such an inquiry is conducted swiftly, it might help
assuage the anger over the excessive use of force by
Israeli forces against Palestinian civilians and prevent a
further escalation of the tensions.
We were equally horrified to witness on our
television screens the lynching of two Israeli soldiers
by Palestinian civilians, in plain sight of Palestinian
police. There must also be a full inquiry into that
incident. All human lives, whether Palestinian or
Israeli, are equally precious. We note that the
Palestinian Authority has already conducted a full
investigation. We hope to hear the results of both
inquiries soon.
Those two scenes we witnessed on television
were excruciating but brief snapshots of a much larger
crisis unfolding before our eyes in the Middle East.
They might not represent the complete picture of what
has been happening. However, these pictures have
fuelled much of the subsequent emotions and violence.
This new, highly charged atmosphere in the Middle
East makes it impossible for the parties concerned to
react calmly. But we, here at the United Nations, must
try to remain objective and we must work relentlessly
to find concrete and helpful ways of de-escalating the
violence and saving precious human lives.
The conflict in the Middle East does not affect
only Palestinians and Israelis. We, the international
community, also have a stake in resolving the crisis.

32

The violence has already spread to other parts of the
Middle East. It has also had global effects leading to
the hardening, polarization and radicalization of
positions. We have already witnessed heated
demonstrations across the globe, including here in New
York, just outside the United Nations and on Wall
Street, and oil prices have also been affected. Bad news
gets globalized as quickly as good news in the new
world we live in.
Singapore hopes that urgent steps will be taken
by the Security Council and the parties concerned to
implement resolution 1322 (2000), as well as the
agreement reached in Sharm el-Sheikh. We must give
priority to the immediate cessation of violence and use
of force. We hope that all sides will heed the call of the
Security Council and exercise maximum restraint, both
in words and in deeds. Both sides have also agreed to
issue public statements unequivocally calling for an
end to the violence. As a concrete follow-up to the
Millennium Summit and a tangible demonstration of
solidarity in the cause of world peace, all world leaders
should join them in calling for the violence to be
halted.
Singapore recognizes that the final steps to peace
must be taken by the parties themselves. We are also
cognizant of the fact that any action taken by the
United Nations must complement and not undermine
the efforts of others that are deeply involved in the
Middle East peace process. But no instrument of peace,
including the United Nations, the good offices of the
Secretary-General, the General Assembly and the
Security Council, should be excluded. As evidenced by
the crucial role played by the Secretary-General, the
United Nations could indeed be a positive force in the
peace process. Singapore fully supports the efforts of
the Secretary-General. In fact, we believe that with the
backing of the entire international community, the
Secretary-General is uniquely placed to play the role of
a neutral and even-handed mediator.
To enhance the capacity of the Secretary-General
to play the role of a mediator, the General Assembly
should clearly demonstrate that it is taking a fair and
objective view of the current situation. Any draft
resolution put before the Assembly on this item should
attempt to get the largest number of votes possible to
capture the views of the moderate middle. We believe
that neither the rejection of any resolution whatsoever
nor insistence on an unbalanced resolution will help the
situation. As the Secretary-General has stated, “words

A/ES-10/PV.14

can inflame or soothe”. (supra.) We hope that through
sincere negotiations and patient consultations, we will
adopt a balanced resolution which is supported by the
large majority of Member States.
In the midst of these dark days, we must not lose
sight of what we have accomplished in recent years.
Both parties have made tremendous progress in the last
seven years since the Oslo peace accord towards
finding a comprehensive and lasting agreement. The
costs of failure are too great, not just for Israelis and
Palestinians, but for the whole Middle East. We cannot
afford to return to the past, when violent confrontations
were daily occurrences. Violence cannot supplant
negotiations in the Middle East.
Singapore believes in a just and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East. We believe that no country,
however big or small, should be denied the right to
exist. This is equally applicable to the Palestinians and
to the Israelis. At the same time, we strongly believe
that the fruits of conquest should not be forcibly
converted into spoils of war. We also fully support
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). Israel has achieved statehood and recognition
by some of its neighbours. The Palestinians should be
given the opportunity to do the same through a
negotiated peace process. The sooner this happens, the
easier it will be to achieve comprehensive peace and
security for the Palestinians, Israel and its neighbours.
The alternatives to peace are too horrendous for us to
contemplate.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canadians have been deeply troubled by the conflict
that has engulfed the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and
Israel. Senseless violence threatens to sweep away
years of effort to build mutual confidence and to lay
the basis for a final agreement on a solution to the
conflict between Israelis and Palestinians. Television is
full of images of dreadful violence that repulse decent
people everywhere.
(spoke in English)
The current situation in the Middle East is
profoundly undermining the human security of the
people there and of their communities. When politics
and discourse fail, people suffer, children above all.
Children who should be protected, not exploited or
victimized, have particularly suffered in the current
crisis — the trauma of personal loss, the terror of
violence, social dislocation and general insecurity. We

must not allow respect for international humanitarian
and human rights law and principles, and tolerance
between communities also to become casualties. We
believe that the best way to restore human security is to
stop the downward vortex of actions and reactions.
From the beginning of the crisis Canada has
pursued
two
fundamental
objectives,
both
multilaterally through the United Nations and
bilaterally with our partners in the Middle East. Canada
wants to see the immediate cessation of violence and
the prompt return to negotiations. We support those
efforts that we believe contribute to these objectives.
We welcome the commitments made at Sharm
el-Sheikh and we call on the parties to respect them.
The success of those political efforts will hinge on the
ability of all concerned to put the safety, security and
well-being of people first and, in so doing, to help
restore the stability and tolerance that is necessary to
this tormented region.
We are profoundly grateful for the efforts of the
Secretary-General. He has played a critical role in
helping to contain violence and in bringing the parties
together at a time when hope was at a low ebb and
faltering. We pay tribute also to the unflagging efforts
of President Clinton and to the leadership of President
Mubarak in the urgent quest for peace in the Middle
East. Prime Minister Barak and Chairman Arafat
demonstrated at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit that they
too are capable of exerting the leadership necessary to
break the cycle of violence, to begin the process of
healing and to rebuild the trust that has been so
severely damaged. They owe no less to future
generations of Israelis and Palestinians.
There is no alternative to negotiations if
Palestinians and Israelis are to live in peace. It is time
for them and for us all to look forward. All Member
States have a responsibility to help create a climate that
is conducive to the achievement of peace. In that
connection we have informed you, Mr. President, that
we doubt that this emergency session will have a
beneficial impact on the situation on the ground.
(spoke in French)
We are particularly mindful of the SecretaryGeneral’s wise caution that language can also be
violence and that everyone needs the restoration of
calm and quiet. Let us be part of the solution and not
part of the problem.

33

A/ES-10/PV.14

The President: I should like to inform members
that in connection with this item, the Assembly has
before it a draft resolution issued as document
A/ES-10/L.6, which is now being distributed in the
Hall.

difficulties and the swings back and forth that come in
negotiations and the time, patience, creativity and
dedication they demand, as well as their rewards, and
the sincere will of the peoples to achieve a lasting
peace and begin to enjoy its benefits.

Mr. Valdez Carrillo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
The Peruvian delegation wishes to join the general
feeling, expressed in this tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly, welcoming the
commitment agreed at Sharm el-Sheikh this week,
which established the bases for the renewal of the
peace process by Israel and Palestine. That agreement
was the result of a joint effort in which the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization, to whom we have
attentively listened today, played an important role.

These efforts have fostered the shaping of a new
regional political scenario characterized by peace,
respect
for
treaties,
friendship,
integration,
cooperation, confidence and development. If this
experience teaches us anything, it is that there can be
no limits to or excuses for not carrying out efforts to
achieve peace.

Peru hopes that the objectives agreed at Sharm
el-Sheikh will be integrally implemented and
understood in their real dimensions by the different
actors and parties involved, based on the understanding
that those objectives are the only viable way to a final
peace. The international community would then be able
to recover the optimism reflected in last session, which
was reinforced a few months ago by the Israeli
withdrawal from southern Lebanon in accordance with
resolution 425 (1978) and resolution 426 (1978) of the
Security Council.
The Government of Peru learned with great
concern and sorrow of the recent tragic events in that
region and on 12 October 2000 issued an official
communiqué deploring the violent acts in the Middle
East, the tragic number of deaths and injuries and the
serious material damage to both sides, all of which
constituted a real threat to the development of peace
talks between the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian National Authority.
At that time the Government also urged the
immediate cessation of violence and encouraged
international efforts to resume negotiations. My
delegation believes this process must be categorically
supported at this special session of the General
Assembly through a consensual text, the objective of
which can only be to promote the cessation of violence
and to facilitate the establishment of and broaden the
scope of dialogue, negotiation and understanding.
Peru has favoured a peaceful approach to the
resolution of disputes as the only alternative that can
achieve lasting peace and development. In this regard,
together with our neighbours, we have recognized the

34

Thus we believe that excuses must not be used in
the Middle East peace negotiations and that the effort
that began in Oslo and Madrid and continued with the
1995 Washington treaties on the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip and the 1999 Sharm El-Sheikh
Memorandum, must be further strengthened.
We emphasize the need to fully implement the
relevant General Assembly resolutions, adopted on the
basis of the Charter, international law, humanitarian
law and particularly resolution 242 (1967) and
resolution 338 (1973) of the Security Council, which
form the basis of the Middle East peace process and
will contribute to irreversibly encouraging world
peace.
Peru, which has emphasized at different times the
need to guarantee free access to and due respect for the
holy sites, wishes to add an appeal for the need not to
use the sites politically or for personal benefit through
provocations, against the historical and religious
significance they represent, making them emerge as a
direct source of conflict.
Peru also rejects violence, calls for violence and
the measures that tend to provoke terror as part of the
negotiations of the peace process. My country was a
victim of criminal violence in the past and knows that
its leads nowhere except to an increase in violence
itself.
Peru will follow attentively, with interest and
hope, forthcoming developments in this peace process,
which is the only possible route to building an area of
peace, reconciliation, understanding, solidarity and
justice in the Middle East region, the ongoing wish of
the international community as a whole.
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
We have listened with great attention and appreciation

A/ES-10/PV.14

to the report of the Secretary-General, whose efforts at
restoring stability, peace and security in the region we
find invaluable.
The tragedy of the Palestinian people has once
again led us to meet at the General Assembly to call for
an end to the brutal practices of the Israeli occupation
forces against the defenseless Palestinian people, who
have only stones to defend their usurped rights with.
The international community is once again called upon
to condemn the Israeli occupation and Israel’s violent
practices against Palestinian men, women and children,
whose only fault was to protest Israel’s acts of
aggression against Muslim holy sites and to stand up to
the desecration of those places.
Israeli media have tried to give the impression
that responsibility for the massacres carried out by
Israeli forces lies with the Palestinian people.
Moreover, those media have sought to draw much
attention to the deaths of two Israeli policemen at
Ramallah who were members of a unit hated by the
Palestinian people. Such reporting provoked the
Palestinian people, who wanted to take revenge for the
killing of their families. The deaths of those two
soldiers would never have happened had it not been for
the fact that hundreds of defenseless and innocent
Palestinians have been killed, including children,
women and elderly people. We compliment the Israeli
media’s ability to distort facts and falsify reality, but its
skill in doing so cannot make us forget the ten-year-old
martyr Mohammed Al-Durra or the other martyrs who
fell to Israeli bullets and who had no weapons to use
against the Israeli occupation forces that had the most
lethal weapons at their disposal.
Mohammed Al-Durra, who fell while seeking his
father’s protection after being terrified by bullets flying
towards him, had not fired any bullets against the
occupation forces; it was those forces who blatantly
first fired at his legs to keep him from escaping, then
shot him through the heart. He was neither an extremist
nor a terrorist. He was just another Palestinian child
who fell victim to Israel’s tyranny. Innocent children
who dreamed of a future of peace also fell victim to
Israeli forces. They had not come from all corners of
the Earth to occupy Arab territories. Mohammed AlDurra and the other victims of Israeli aggression were
Palestinians who were born in Palestine and had been
part of Islamic and Arab civilization there for countless
years.

Deceptive Israeli media cannot make world
public opinion forget the principal reasons for the latest
Palestinian uprising. That uprising took place as a
result of a Zionist terrorist’s desecration of Islamic
holy sites; it would not have happened had it not been
for the fact that the Israeli Government never protected
those religious places or paid heed to the 1954
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in
the Event of Armed Conflict, the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, or
the Additional Protocols to the Fourth Geneva
Convention concerning the protection of civilian
property, all of which protected these Islamic holy
places. The anger of the Arabs and that of the world
would not have been inflamed had it not been for the
fact that the Israeli Prime Minister ignored Ariel
Sharon’s act of aggression against the holy places. Nor
would that anger have been manifested had it not been
for the fact that tanks and helicopters fired upon
Palestinians, thereby undermining the peace and
stability of the area by playing the game of Israeli
politics.
Israeli sharp-shooters shot Palestinians in the
eyes, heads and chests. Eighty-seven per cent of the
injuries to Palestinians were to the upper part of the
body and head, with a high percentage to the eyes. We
have all seen broken Palestinian bodies: heads crushed
and eyes plucked out. These brutal acts were not based
on anything other than the hatred felt by Israelis
towards Palestinians, Arabs and Muslims in general.
Demonstrations and protests take place throughout the
world, and security forces are there only to protect the
peace. They do not commit premeditated murder;
rather, they try to protect demonstrators and facilitate
their protests. They do not use bullets against them or
fire upon them with guns equipped with silencers,
rocket-equipped helicopters and tanks.
The world applauded the Yugoslavs when they
took over their Parliament building. Are we to blame
the Palestinians when they protest against the
desecration of their holy places? Is it right for the
entire world, but not for the Palestinians, to defend
their rights? Are not Palestinians and Arabs human like
everyone else? Do they not have the right to seek
liberation and independence? Are they not entitled to
enjoy human rights like everyone else? Are
Palestinians only to die in large numbers at the hands
of Israeli occupiers, with no one’s conscience being
alarmed? And when two Israeli occupation soldiers are

35

A/ES-10/PV.14

killed, do we then blame the victims and raise our
voices in protest?
No matter how good the deceptive Israeli media
are, they cannot manufacture facts. The first fact is that
one can deal with this issue only by dealing with the
root causes of the problem and discovering what the
true facts are. People will always know how to tell
right from wrong.
Sharon’s desecration of Al-Haram Al-Sharif was
the event that triggered bottled-up Palestinian anger in
the wake of the failure of the Camp David summit. The
Palestinian people realized how their demands had
never been met and how their aspirations had never
been achieved. Meetings between Palestinians and
Israelis were going nowhere owing to the arbitrary way
with which Israel has dealt with every agreement
reached.
Seven years after Oslo, Palestinians are now
surrounded by settlements that continue to expand and
multiply. They are being placed into bantustans that are
encircled by the forces of the occupation. They are
separated from each other and from Arab lands and
subjected to wanton closures. Palestinians will never
feel safe and secure in a situation devoid of any
dignity; a situation that could never be said to be in
keeping with human rights and that will never allow
them an avenue to the outside world. In fact, they feel
threatened by everyone and from everywhere. Their
land is being usurped; roads are being built through it
to enable Israelis to travel; their houses are being
bulldozed; their produce is held at Israeli border points
until it rots; and their workers are forbidden to enter
Israel to earn their living. How could they fail to be
disappointed? How could they fail to revolt? How
could they fail to rise up? How could they fail to
demand their rights and freedoms?
It is also true that the continued provocations and
humiliations to which Arab dignity has been subjected
and the acts of aggression against Islamic shrines have
had disastrous consequences and will be very difficult
to contain. This will have a severely negative effect on
the security of the entire region, owing to the
aggression and extremism of the Israelis and to their
refusal to acknowledge Palestinian aspirations.
We could continue to speak of the facts for days
on end, but it is our hope that the international
community will realize that merely talking about peace
and claiming to seek peace will not be enough unless

36

coupled with deeds and with the implementation of the
legitimate international will, of the resolutions of the
international community, foremost among which are
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), and of the principle of land for peace. It is only
common sense that when there is occupation, there will
be resistance; when there is injustice, there will be no
justice; and when there is no justice, there will be no
peace.
Needless to say, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia —
whose constitution is the Koran and whose approach is
based on Islamic teaching — believes in peace and
justice. It believes in any approach that will lead to
comprehensive peace and that will guarantee the
sanctity of all occupied territories and Islamic shrines
and the right of the Palestinian people to establish an
independent State of its own with Jerusalem as its
capital. That will lead to peace and stability in the
region.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this resumed tenth
emergency special session to consider the issue of
illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory. This was
necessitated by the highly precarious and volatile
situation in the Middle East.
My delegation wishes to express its gratitude to
the Secretary-General for the statement he made to the
Assembly on the current developments in the Middle
East. We admire his courage, and we support his efforts
on behalf of this Organization. Namibia has always
emphasized the central role of the United Nations in
the Middle East peace process.
The current crisis in the Middle East takes place
against the backdrop of repeated failure by Israel to
comply with various United Nations resolutions. The
situation was exacerbated by the provocative visit by
Mr. Ariel Sharon to Al-Haram Al-Sharif. His actions
were a deliberate provocation, and they caused a
serious setback in the delicate peace process. Neither
the Israelis nor the embattled people of Palestine derive
any benefits from such calculated provocations.
My delegation strongly condemns the current
wave of violence unleashed by Israeli security forces
against Palestinian civilians, including children. We are
particularly disheartened by the large number of deaths
and injuries resulting from the use of excessive force
and from the indiscriminate deployment of heavy

A/ES-10/PV.14

weaponry, such as helicopter gunships and tanks, by
Israel. I wish to take this opportunity to express my
delegation’s profound condolences to the families of all
those who have been killed or wounded.
The
military
occupation
and
economic
strangulation of Palestinian territories must be stopped;
they are inhuman and deny the Palestinian people their
basic human rights. The events of the past few weeks
have again highlighted the grave breaches by Israel of
the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, which is applicable to all territories
occupied by Israel since 1967. Israel, as the occupying
Power, should ensure that all provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention are fully implemented.
These tragic events have also made it crucial that
an independent fact-finding commission be established
to investigate the events that have occurred since
28 September 2000.
The current situation in the Middle East also
points to the fact that the exercise of the rights
of the Palestinian people to independence and
self-determination remains central to the achievement
of a lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. Namibia steadfastly supports the just struggle of
the Palestinian people to that end. In this regard, we
continue to believe that Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) provide a viable framework
for a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. It is also
important that Security Council resolution 1322 (2000),
which was adopted during an emergency meeting of the
Security Council on 7 October, be speedily and fully
implemented.
The peace process has undoubtedly suffered a
serious setback. However, now more than ever it is
required of both parties that they face these challenges
and, first of all, that they calm the situation and
thereafter resume the peace process. In this regard, we
once again welcome the courageous and intensive
efforts by the Secretary-General, as well as initiatives
by other players, to achieve that goal. We furthermore
welcome the outcome of the Sharm el-Sheikh summit,
which we believe provided a critically important start
to resuscitating the peace process. It is our hope that
the parties will be able to further build on that
agreement.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
unwavering support for the exercise of the inalienable

rights of the Palestinian people. We also continue to
support the peace process between Palestine and Israel
and the efforts by the Secretary-General to that end. We
therefore regard the draft resolution before us as
appropriate and necessary, and we fully support it.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): This emergency special
session has been convened at a critical moment for the
international community. We welcome and applaud the
agreement that Prime Minister Barak and Chairman
Arafat reached at the summit meeting in Sharm elSheikh to put an end to the violence. We thank
President Clinton for his determined efforts to contain
the crisis and to bring the peace process back on track,
and we applaud President Mubarak for his strenuous
efforts to the same end. We highly appreciate the
tenacious mediation efforts made by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, and our appreciation goes also to King
Abdullah and to the European Union High
Representative, Mr. Solana.
It is of crucial importance that each side
implement the agreement without waiting for the other
to do the same. Japan calls upon both sides to abide by
the agreement to restore calm throughout the region as
soon as possible. It is also imperative for the
international community to support and encourage the
implementation of the agreement.
The situation we have witnessed during the past
three weeks has indeed been deplorable. Violent
clashes have claimed the lives of more than 100
people, most of them civilians, some of them innocent
children. Japan deplored the escalating violence in
Jerusalem and other areas and condemned all acts of
provocation, any form of violence and the excessive
use of force. We strongly urged all the parties
concerned to do their utmost to put an end to the
violence and to exercise utmost restraint.
Having witnessed the tragedies of the last few
weeks, we sincerely hope that an environment will be
restored as soon as possible in which all Israelis and
Palestinians can live in peace.
The current crisis underscores yet again the need
for a negotiated settlement, which is the only viable
option. We therefore call upon the parties concerned to
make every effort to rebuild mutual confidence and to
resume the peace process as soon as possible. To that
end, we must help the agreement reached in Sharm ElSheikh work. Japan, for its part, is ready to extend all
possible assistance.

37

A/ES-10/PV.14

Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): The second
half of the twentieth century has witnessed great
successes in the efforts of the international community
and the United Nations in the area of decolonization
and of an ending the remnants of foreign occupation.
But there is one exception in which developments have
gone against the logic of history: namely the continued
Zionist occupation of Palestinian territories. This
occupation has been coupled with intensive emigration
to Palestine by persons of different nationalities,
prompted by religious myths.
Excessive force and intimidation were used to
compel the Palestinians to leave their homes and their
land. This occupation and colonization has been
accompanied by consistent recourse to force against
Palestinian civilians, the most recent manifestation of
which was the violence used by the occupying forces
against Palestinians in the Al-Aqsa intifada. That
violence came as a response to the desecration of AlHaram Al-Sharif by the terrorist Ariel Sharon on 28
September 2000, in an act of provocation that incensed
not only the Palestinians but all Arabs and Muslims as
well.
The use of military force by the occupying Power
left more than 100 Palestinians dead and over 3,000
wounded. This bloody repression of the Palestinian
people has engulfed all Palestinian cities and villages,
from Lot, Ramallah and Haifa to Hebron, Nablus and
Jerusalem, in grave violation of the 1949 Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. The actions of the Zionist
occupying forces are war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
In addition, the occupying authorities have
imposed a full siege on all Palestinian villages and
cities, depriving them of basic necessities such as
medicine and food. It seems that siege has become the
principal manifestation of the policies of the United
States and its surrogate, Israel. The occupation forces
thought that by using force and starvation they would
be able to break the political will of the Arab nation
and the Palestinian people. They thought also that
creating new facts on the ground would make it easier
for the occupied to accept the occupation. However,
they are mistaken. The uprising by the Palestinian and
Arab peoples and the solidarity shown by the peoples
of Islamic nations, and all nations of the world, is clear
testimony to this effect. But sooner or later the

38

aggressors will be defeated, and Palestine will be Arab
and free again.
The Security Council considered the Israeli
aggression against Palestinian civilians and, after great
hesitation and the threat of the use of the veto by the
representative of the United States, the Council
adopted resolution 1322 (2000), which really does not
provide even the minimum response required of the
Security Council in the face of this major threat to
international peace and security and of the massacres
committed by the forces of the Zionist occupation
before the eyes of the whole world.
Modest as they are, the steps mentioned in that
resolution were not implemented. No committee has
been established to investigate the Israeli massacres,
which the Council was unable to stop. On the contrary,
the Zionist forces escalated their bombing of
Palestinian villages and cities, and when the
international community insisted that the Security
Council take immediate action to ensure the
implementation of its resolution, the American
representative announced in the Council and to the
press that he would veto any draft resolution to be
presented to the Security Council.
Mr. Fall (Guinea), Vice-President, took the Chair.
At that point, the Arab Group had to request the
resumption of the tenth emergency special session of
the General Assembly to consider the grave situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories. The Non-Aligned
Movement also supported the Arab request and proved
once again its loyalty and its strong defence of its
principles and values. The General Assembly is called
upon to deal with this grave threat to regional and
international peace and security and to treat it with the
seriousness that it deserves. The General Assembly
should contribute, even if only modestly, to correcting
the historical mistake and to putting matters back on
the right track.
Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
distressing acts of violence that have been taking place
since 28 September in the occupied territories and
Israel require us to gather here at this emergency
special session of the General Assembly.
We thought that in the Middle East it had become
possible to overcome the language of hatred and
violence and that the process was moving — clearly,
not without difficulties — towards an acceptable, just

A/ES-10/PV.14

resolution of the prolonged conflict between Israelis
and Palestinians. But that was not to be, and in recent
days we have witnessed events that have caused more
than 100 deaths — most of them Palestinian — as well
as injury, destruction and hatred.
The moving images of recent days remain
engraved on our consciousness: the little Palestinian
boy who was shot dead at his father’s side; the two
Israeli soldiers killed by a mob; the confrontations
between those who responded with bullets to those who
threw stones; and the attempt to destroy a site that was
sacred to a people. These images show how violence
engenders further violence and intolerance.
What is clear is that all that has happened makes
it more necessary than ever for negotiations to begin
again so that peace can prevail in the Middle East once
and for all. That is the only path that remains available
to the Israelis and Palestinians if they wish to ensure a
viable future for their children and their children’s
children.
In order to achieve peace, it is essential for both
parties to recognize that they must live together and
that tolerance and respect for each other must be the
basis for coexistence. We believe that this is possible,
because not long ago something happened that we had
thought impossible: the process that began in Oslo.
Chile reiterates its fervent appeal to all the parties
involved to take urgent measures to prevent all acts of
force that could aggravate the situation in the area and
to allow as soon as possible the re-establishment of
conditions to facilitate the pursuit of peace efforts.
To this end, Chile would like to recall the
principles that govern its own foreign policy and that
are applicable to the emergency in the Middle East: the
peaceful resolution of disputes; respect for relevant
Security Council resolutions, in this case resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1322 (2000); the protection
of human life, especially the lives of civilians; and the
right of both Israelis and Palestinians to live within
secure, internationally recognized borders.
We cannot fail to highlight and express our
gratitude for the steps taken by President Bill Clinton
of the United States aimed at enabling the region to
return to normalcy and the peace talks to resume; for
the constructive attitude of President Hosni Mubarak of
Egypt, who hosted the recent Sharm el-Sheikh summit;

and for the intensive activities undertaken by the
Secretary-General in the area.
We hope that, through the agreement reached last
Tuesday, the hostilities will immediately be brought to
an end, that the committee agreed to under the Sharm
el-Sheikh accord will be established to investigate the
causes and the facts of the violence that has so
powerfully shaken the occupied territories and Israel,
and that a climate will be restored under which both
parties can return to the negotiating table.
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): My delegation endorses
the statement made by Colombia on behalf of the Rio
Group. I wish to express my appreciation to the
President for convening this important meeting.
The proportions of this tragedy and its
consequences for international security indeed require
a discussion of the issue by the General Assembly. No
one can be indifferent to the sad events and the
escalation of the confrontations in the Middle East. The
Brazilian Government deeply deplores the outbreak of
violence that has engulfed the Palestinian territories
over recent days and cannot but condemn the excessive
use of force that has led to a spiral of senseless acts of
brutality. We strongly urge both sides to bring this
bloodshed to a halt.
Ever since this question was placed on the agenda
of the United Nations, Brazil has consistently
advocated a peaceful resolution of the Middle East
conflict. We strongly believe that this lofty goal
presupposes, among other essential elements, the full
realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, as well as the
implementation of the pertinent resolutions of the
United Nations concerning Jerusalem.
At this particular juncture, we appeal to the
peoples and the Governments of the region to exercise
restraint and to gather the required political will in
order to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace.
It is of particular concern that those two weeks of
tragedy and suffering came at a time when the
international community had high hopes that
negotiation and understanding would prevail. Brazil
regrets that the many diplomatic efforts in recent
months, and the recent calls for restraint, have not
produced the desired effect. We nurture the hope that
the recent Sharm el-Sheikh understanding will create

39

A/ES-10/PV.14

an atmosphere for reflection and lead to the resumption
of meaningful negotiations.
Brazil commends and strongly supports
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his efforts in trying
to reduce tensions. In the present circumstances, it is
even more urgent that the United Nations, in
accordance with its purposes and principles, play a
more decisive role in the Middle East. International
law must be enforced and negotiations must be
resumed. We urge Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
heed the appeals of the international community in this
debate and take all necessary steps in order to create
the conditions necessary for the resumption of the
peace process. International support and popular
confidence are to be achieved by peace, not
confrontation.
The only way to produce mutually beneficial,
lasting results, is through negotiation, constructive
dialogue and respect for agreements. Peace is
achievable. The Oslo process, the progress in the past
year and the recent demonstrations of flexibility prove
that a better future can be built on dialogue. Acts of
violence will not further anyone’s cause. It is our
expectation that this debate will prompt those in a
position to do so to put an end to violence. All the
peoples of the region deserve an environment of
political freedom, peace and stability, where they can
concentrate their strength on prosperity and social and
economic development. Brazil remains prepared to
contribute in any way we can in order to help to
achieve this goal.
Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the beginning of this statement, may I convey my
earnest congratulations to United Nations SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan for his good offices and praise his
efforts during the Sharm el-Sheikh summit. We hope
that that summit will help to restore the situation that
prevailed in the occupied Palestinian territories before
the recent acts of violence.
Reconvening the tenth special emergency session
to consider the continuing deteriorating situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories shows the Assembly’s
high interest in the situation and how aware it is of the
seriousness of the recent explosive events, the
consequences of which are incalculable. His Majesty
the King has cautioned the international community
about the dangers menacing the peace process. Events
show the need for peace, for restoring the rights of the

40

Palestinian people and for freeing them from injustice
and occupation, under which they have suffered for so
long.
The Government of the Kingdom of Jordan
condemns the situation in the occupied territories, the
acts of repression and atrocious crimes perpetrated
against Palestinian citizens and the destruction of
Palestinian property. We share the regret expressed by
the Palestinian Authority over the killing of the two
Israeli soldiers in Ramallah last week. We also share
the view that there should be an inquiry into the
incident, and we hope that Israel will also proceed
towards an investigation of the massacre of Palestinian
citizens over the last two weeks. Victims should enjoy
protection in accordance with the Geneva Conventions
and the Additional Protocols. These massacres should
not only be condemned but should also be the subject
of a serious, comprehensive investigation so that
judicial proceedings might be taken against those
responsible for these crimes. The Government of
Jordan urges Israel immediately to put an end to acts of
violence, to proceed with the implementation of the
agreements concluded and of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, and to withdraw its troops as soon
as possible from the territories and cities that are under
the Palestinian Authority.
The prevailing situation in the occupied
territories is a logical consequence of extremism and
provocative acts perpetrated by forces that refuse to
work for peace in Palestine, thereby hurting the
sensibilities of Arab peoples and inciting their anger.
The Jordanian Prime Minister has said that if we let
fanaticism and extremism continue, we will have more
extremism. This would destroy any possibility for
negotiation and dialogue, which are the only effective
ways to reach the just, lasting and comprehensive
peace to which we all aspire.
My Government urges the Israeli Government to
shoulder its responsibilities in this critical situation at
this decisive stage of the peace process. It should put
an end to the suffering of the Palestinian people,
especially that caused by acts committed by fanatics,
who only provide an obstacle to any settlement, thus
giving rise to more hate, aggression and conflict.
Jordan, represented by His Highness, the
Government and people, reaffirms its solidarity with
the Palestinians in their struggle for their legitimate
rights and for the right to establish their own

A/ES-10/PV.14

independent State on their national soil, with Jerusalem
as its capital. In this context, I would like, on behalf of
my Government, to convey my most sincere
condolences to the Palestinian Authority and the
Palestinian people for the innocent martyred deaths
they have incurred during the violence.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): More
than 20 days have passed since the start of the intifadah
of Al-Aqsa after Ariel Sharon entered Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, provoking the feelings of Palestinians, Arabs
and Muslims the world over. Regrettably, despite all
diplomatic efforts during the past weeks, the Israeli
Government still insists on its policy — namely, the
use of excessive force against the intifadah. Not one
day passes without more Palestinian martyrs falling;
their number has exceeded 100. Still, the international
community has not risen up to its responsibilities.
Every effort must be made to stop Israeli military
actions and end the suffering of the Palestinians.
The resumption of this tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly aims at stopping
Israel’s grave violations in the occupied Arab
territories, which raised the indignation of the whole
world and which were recently confirmed by the
Commission on Human Rights in Geneva. Images of
children killed by Israel’s guns and rockets are still in
our minds. From this rostrum, we call for the
prosecution of those who committed this crime in an
international court, so that they get what they deserve
for such crimes against children and humanity.
It is really surprising and amazing to have
listened to the Israeli representative last Wednesday in
the General Assembly when he spoke about the killing
of two Israeli soldiers from the musta’ribeen unit and
depicted it as a great tragedy. We, in turn, ask: what
were those two soldiers doing in the occupied land,
especially under those circumstances? Everybody
knows that this unit has always entered freely into
Palestinian areas and villages to commit brutal acts
against defenceless civilians whose only aim is to get
rid of Israeli occupation. Palestinians lose martyrs
everyday — dozens of Palestinians have been killed in
the last few days. This is in addition to hundreds of
injured people who were distributed to various
hospitals in neighbouring countries.
Some people try to confuse and mislead others
about events in Palestine. But these attempts will never
succeed. We are in a technologically advanced world;

that is why any attempts at blurring the facts will not
be successful. You cannot compare the victim with the
victimizer. You cannot compare those who throw
stones with those who use helicopter gunships, tanks
and rockets. You cannot compare the enemy who
occupies the land by force with the one who is trying to
get rid of this occupation.
We simply would like to ask what the real
problem in the Middle East is. Have the Palestinians
occupied Israeli land and displaced Israel’s population
and done whatever they wanted in it?
Everyone knows the problem. Why, then, do we
not take radical steps to solve this problem? The
problem is in the continuation of the Israeli occupation
of the occupied Arab territories, whether in Palestine,
the Syrian Golan or the remaining Lebanese territory
under Israeli occupation. The solution lies in the total
withdrawal of Israel from these territories. If we want
this crisis to end and to achieve regional stability, all
the Arab territories occupied by Israel must be freed.
Then, and only then, will we have a solution.
In conclusion, we call on the international
community to put all manner of pressure on Israel, the
occupying Power, to force it to withdraw from all
occupied Arab territory, so that the Palestinians can
live in security and peace after having suffered greatly,
and so that they may establish their independent State
on their national soil, with Jerusalem as its capital.
Mr. De Saram (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka has always
considered the question of Palestine to be at the core of
the concerns of the region. Sri Lanka has consistently
supported the Palestinian people in their endeavours to
realize their national inalienable rights. Sri Lanka
believes that all States of the region have the right to
live in peace within secure and internationally
recognized borders. Sri Lanka shared the satisfaction of
the international community over the progress that,
despite delays and obstacles, was being made in the
peace process.
Tragic events, and overwhelmingly shocking
events, have, however, taken place in the occupied
territories. They have caused the convening of the
Security Council and the convening of the General
Assembly in emergency special session. They have
required the urgent meeting at Sharm el-Sheikh.
Where deep human emotions are in conflict, as
they are and have been for much too long in the

41

A/ES-10/PV.14

occupied territories; where frustration and hopelessness
prevail, as has been the case for much too long in the
occupied territories; where tensions are always close to
dangerous and explosive levels, as has happened far
too often in the occupied territories — then, if violence
is not to erupt and engulf all, sensitivity and
thoughtfulness are the essential, overarching and allencompassing requirements. To all those whose loved
ones were killed in the violent conflagrations, may I
convey the most heartfelt sympathies and condolences.

Palestinian territories, having regard also to the long
duration of the occupation, constitutes a general
violation of the human rights of the Palestinians of the
occupied territories. It is of the greatest importance,
therefore, that Prime Minister Barak and Chairman
Arafat return as speedily as possible to the peace
process, notwithstanding the enormous wounds that
both peoples, the Israelis and the Palestinians, have
suffered as a result of the very, very sad and troubling
occurrences of the past three weeks.

For the convening of the Sharm el-Sheikh
meeting, with the participation of Prime Minister Barak
and Chairman Arafat, great praise is due to President
Clinton, President Mubarak, King Abdullah and the
Secretary-General, who reported this afternoon most
usefully to this General Assembly on the meeting at
Sharm el-Sheikh, as well as to the European Union
Commissioner Solana. The meeting at Sharm el-Sheikh
was convened to restore calm to the region, in the hope
that the tattered remnants of the peace process — a
peace process for which so many had such high
hopes — might eventually be put together again, made
whole and, hopefully, lead before too long to the just,
comprehensive and lasting peace, long awaited by all
the peoples of the region and the international
community as a whole. Let us hope and pray that all
concerned will now take the steps that are necessary to
assist the peace process along.

Mr. Khurana (India): We thank
Mr. President, for calling this important meeting.

Sri Lanka is the Chair of the General Assembly’s
Special Committee on Israeli practices affecting the
human rights of the Palestinian people and other Arabs
of the occupied territories. Regarding the events that
took place in recent weeks in the occupied territories,
the Special Committee has requested me, as its Chair,
to convey to the General Assembly at this emergency
special session today its great concern and great
distress at the apparent magnitude of force with which
the Israelis acted in situations of unrest, and the
consequential severe violations of human rights: the
large number of Palestinians killed and wounded,
including many who were very, very young; the nature
of the military weaponry deployed and utilized by the
Israelis; the general closures or “sealing-off” of
Palestinian territories, with severe hardship to
Palestinians in general within the areas closed or
sealed; and the general, and often complete, restriction
on Palestinian movement in the occupied territories.
The Special Committee continues to be of the
view that the entire system of occupation of the

42

you,

On 18 October, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Chair of the Movement made a
statement with which we associate ourselves.
We would also like to share briefly with this body
our sentiments on this important issue, which has been
a matter of serious concern for the entire international
community.
As a country that has all along had a deep belief
and interest in the cause of justice and peace in the
Middle East and which has made such contributions as
it could, India is convinced of the need for dialogue
and peaceful negotiations to find a just, comprehensive
and lasting settlement of all issues between the
Palestinian and the Israeli sides. We have therefore
watched with very deep concern and consternation the
recent incidents of violence which have erupted in
Jerusalem, the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and other
parts of the territories under the control of the
Palestinian National Authority and Israel. There have
been deliberate acts of provocation, excessive use of
force and violations of basic human rights, including
the right to life. The international community has
watched with increasing anxiety the escalation in
violence and the enormous loss of innocent lives.
Particularly shocking and poignant has been the large
number of casualties among children. The Government
of India has expressed its deep condolences to the
families of those killed and reiterated its readiness to
extend all possible assistance to the Palestinian people.
To provide urgently required relief, the Government of
India has decided to airlift medical supplies to the
Palestine Red Crescent Society.
The spiral in violence has vitiated the atmosphere
of the Middle East peace process. The overriding need
of the hour is restraint, avoidance of provocation, and
the shunning of the use of force or encouragement to

A/ES-10/PV.14

violence or indeed to any act which could exacerbate
tensions, resulting in further loss of innocent lives.
This alone can ensure the restoration of peace and
calm. At the same time, an impartial and objective
assessment of these developments will help both in the
context of violations of human rights that have
occurred and to learn lessons for the future.
There had been considerable progress in the
peace process between the Palestinian and the Israeli
sides. The events of the last few days should not be
allowed to retard or delay the peace process, for which
the leaders of Palestine and Israel have striven so hard.
Together over the years, they have come a long way on
the road to peace — a one-way journey from which
there cannot and should not be any going back. We
believe that, given the required will and determination
and the commitment to resolving issues peacefully, no
odds are insurmountable, no goals too far. Violence has
to be abjured.
In our statement in the Security Council’s open
meeting on this issue on 4 October, our delegation said
that diplomacy and statesmanship have to triumph.
This is beginning to happen. It is our sincere hope that
the outcome of the Sharm el-Sheikh summit will put an
end to violence and pave the way to the negotiating
table. We appreciate the tireless efforts made by
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and others to bring the
violence to an end and to encourage the two sides back
to the path of the search for a lasting and just peace.
For the people of Israel and Palestine, destined to
live as neighbours, peace is not an option; there is no
alternative and no other way but this.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation deeply
regrets the events that have necessitated the convening
of this emergency special session of the General
Assembly.
The General Assembly has, over the years,
continuously encouraged an end to the PalestinianIsraeli conflict through an active negotiating process
which takes into account the right to security of all
States in the region, including Israel, as well as the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. Over the
years, there have also been many commendable
initiatives aimed at achieving this goal, within the
United Nations as well as by individual States and
regional organizations.

The situation in the Middle East continues to
require our collective action in order to remove all
threats to international peace, to prevent breaches of
the peace and to bring about a comprehensive
settlement of the dispute. Jamaica subscribes to the
view that it is only through negotiation that a lasting
solution can be found. We have therefore deplored the
violence that erupted in Jerusalem, the West Bank and
Gaza and the excessive use of force against Palestinian
civilians, which unfortunately resulted in the tragic loss
of so many lives. We must express our sincere
sympathy and condolences to the families of all the
bereaved on both sides.
The outbreak of violence has come at a time
when strenuous efforts were being made to bring peace
to the region and at a critical juncture, when the leaders
of both Israel and Palestine were engaged in
negotiations. We are therefore concerned about the
destabilizing effects that the recent violence has had on
the peace process.
Jamaica fully supports Security Council
resolution 1322 (2000), adopted on 7 October, and calls
for full compliance of the parties with its provisions.
We urge the parties to refrain from the use of force and
provocative acts, which only serve to undermine the
peace process, and we appeal to them to take
immediate steps to create the necessary environment
for a restoration of peace, stability and the continuation
of talks leading to a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace based on Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
commend Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
tireless diplomatic efforts, which resulted in a
commitment by the parties to resolve their differences
by peaceful means. The activities of the SecretaryGeneral have demonstrated that the United Nations
cannot absent itself from the search for peace in the
Middle East. It is therefore imperative that the
Secretary-General remain involved.
We also applaud the leadership shown by the
President of Egypt and the President of the United
States at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit and hope that the
agreements reached on security cooperation, on
renewing the peace process and on fact-finding will be
fully and speedily implemented. We must now
concentrate our efforts towards building on the
progress made to restore calm in the region. It is of

43

A/ES-10/PV.14

critical importance that the best possible atmosphere be
created for the resumption of the peace talks.
Too many people have been killed and too many
people maimed. For the sake of the people in the
region, there must be a restoration of confidence in the
peace process. We must break the cycle of distrust if
we are to reach a time when Palestinians and Israelis
can coexist in peace and mutual security.
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that after we have heard all the speakers we
shall proceed to take action on the draft resolution
contained in document A/ES-10/L.6, which was
circulated earlier.
Mr. Zackheos (Cyprus): At this late hour, I have
seen fit to shorten my prepared text.
Since the beginning of the recent bloody clashes
the Cyprus Government and people have expressed
sorrow and concern over the escalating tension and the
loss of so many lives. Cyprus has also expressed the
view that the visit to the Al-Haram Al-Sharif
compound in Jerusalem constituted a provocation
which should have been avoided, especially during
such a critical period in the Middle East peace process.
My Government welcomes Security Council
resolution 1322 (2000), adopted last Saturday, and calls
for its immediate implementation. We also welcome
the results of the Sharm el-Sheikh summit. We pay
tribute to the efforts of Presidents Mubarak and
Clinton, King Abdullah II, the United Nations
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and the High
Representative of the European Union, Javier Solana,
as well as to the political will and courage displayed by
the two leaders, Prime Minister Barak and Chairman
Arafat. We attach great importance to the
implementation of the commitments by both sides. We
therefore express regret at today’s deterioration of the
situation, which resulted in nine more dead
Palestinians.
Bearing in mind the efforts of the last seven years
by the international community, in which Cyprus had
its own share, in encouraging the parties on the
difficult road to peace and reconciliation in the Middle
East, we cannot but express our concern over these
negative developments. Time and again Cyprus has
stated that the Palestinian issue constitutes the core of
the Middle East conflict, and that without its settlement
the international community cannot hope to reach a

44

comprehensive and lasting solution to the Middle East
problem. We reiterate our support for a just and lasting
settlement of the Arab and Israeli conflict based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
A lesson drawn from the recent escalation of
violence is that unless peace efforts and initiatives are
based on international law the achievement of peace
will remain on very shaky grounds. Solutions to
problems must be perceived as fair and accepted as
such by the populations concerned; otherwise, the
sense of resentment and opposition will sweep away
agreements
reached
based
on
ephemeral
considerations.
Another point I would like to make is that the
absence of a solution to the Middle East problem leads
to instability, due to the continuing frustration of the
Palestinian people, who long to achieve their legitimate
rights and live in peace and dignity. At the same time,
we believe that security for all States is a necessary
component of peace in the region. The recent violence
does not serve the interest of either party to the conflict
and should stop immediately. We deplore any actions
that do not respect the sanctity of human life. Religious
sites should be respected. Innocent children must be
protected. We also call for respect for the legal
obligations and responsibilities under the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
In conclusion I express my hope that the
numerous difficulties, however daunting, will not deter
the drive towards peace. We support all international
initiatives and efforts to bring peace and stability to our
region. Cyprus has already conveyed to the parties its
readiness to host any meeting or to offer any other
assistance that they deem appropriate. We join the
international community in expressing our hope that
the situation will soon return to normalcy and that
efforts will be redoubled for the survival and ultimate
successful outcome of the peace process upon which
millions of people, both in the region and throughout
the world, have placed their hopes.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The convening of this tenth emergency special
session has a special purpose. It was convened because
the Security Council was unable to meet due to one
country’s threat to use the veto against any draft
resolution brought before the Council, despite the fact
that paragraph 8 of the latest resolution adopted by the

A/ES-10/PV.14

Council, resolution 1322 (2000) of 7 October, says that
the Council will follow the situation closely and remain
seized of the matter.
Regrettably, the Council is unable to assume its
responsibilities under the Charter. This prompted the
Arab League and the Coordinating Bureau of the NonAligned Movement to seek this special session under
the banner “United for peace” as a way to awaken the
world conscience and to support the Palestinian people,
who face aggression and brutal massacres at the hands
of the Israeli forces and settlers.
Before I arrived to make this statement, television
stations talked about 10 more Palestinian martyrs who
fell today, joining the martyrs in the massacres
perpetrated by the Israeli forces during the past three
weeks. The pictures of the killing of the child, the
martyr Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra, and other children
that shook the conscience of the whole world did not
really touch the feelings of the Israeli Government. On
the contrary, the Israeli forces continued their racism
and again shot a young man. After he fell dead, the
Israeli forces fired two more bullets at his body.
We have all heard that Israel is using helicopter
gunships, missiles, tanks and every sort of weapon
against a defenceless people that only wants to protest
against the aggression. In the last few days, Israel
almost declared all-out war against the Palestinian
people, with a view to making it surrender and accept
the Israeli peace terms. It killed children, women and
the elderly, closing crossing points, blockading
Palestinian cities and inciting the Israeli settlers to play
a role, in coordination with the Israeli forces, to
commit aggression against the defenceless Palestinians.
The tragic events in the occupied Palestinian
territories have proved once again Israel’s aggressive,
racist nature and that it does not want peace. This
stands as a clear contradiction to one of the terms it
accepted on becoming a Member of the United
Nations.
The picture of Israel in the Arab street is one of a
racist expansionist entity that finds pleasure in
occupation. Israel kills children, destroys houses, tries
to impose hegemony on the whole region, prevents
progress and development and undermines Arab
economies. In this respect, we can say that Israeli
provocation and the escalating aggressive spirit that it
has displayed in the past few weeks even affected the
Israeli Arabs of 1948. It crossed the so-called green

line in using excessive force against those whom it
considers citizens. It burned their houses, threatened
their children, and more than 10 of them fell victim to
this aggression. This begs the question: How can a
settler in the West Bank or Gaza enter Israel proper and
fire upon those who are considered citizens of Israel?
How can the Israeli Government allow this? This
makes it imperative that the international community
decide who was responsible and how it could have
happened. This is what world conscience and the
international community must be aware of.
Israeli acts of aggression and provocation during
the past few weeks have led to the convening of the
Security Council. The Council adopted a resolution
condemning the act of provocation that took place in
the Al-Haram Al-Sharif in Jerusalem. It denounced the
Israeli aggression in Jerusalem and in other territories
occupied since 1967. The Council condemned the
excessive use of force by Israel against the
Palestinians. These acts led to anger on Arab streets in
solidarity with their Palestinian brothers who in full
faith are defending themselves, their shrines, their
dignity, their land and their rights.
What can we conclude from these bloodletting,
painful events?
First, Israel is trying to impose conditions on the
Palestinian people to achieve peace on its own terms.
Secondly, Israel uses threats against Syria and
Lebanon to escalate the tension in the area and to kill
any chances for peace.
Thirdly, Israel ignores the need to stop the
escalation while it bears responsibility for the
escalation and tension in the area.
Fourthly, it takes advantage of the fact that the
Security Council, which has the power to implement its
resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations, has
become a silent witness to the deadlock in the peace
process in the Middle East.
Fifthly, Israel challenges the resolutions of
international legitimacy, the Geneva Conventions and
international humanitarian law, as well as the latest
resolution of the Security Council. It even challenges
the understandings recently reached at Sharm
el-Sheikh. This is confirmed by the fact that 10 martyrs
fell today — after Sharm el-Sheikh. This is the saddest
day since the uprising of Al-Aqsa on 28 September in
the wake of the provocative visit by Ariel Sharon.

45

A/ES-10/PV.14

This demonstrates once again that Israel does not
comply
with
any
resolution,
agreement
or
understanding reached, which thereby undermines the
peace process.
Israel alone bears full responsibility for escalating
tension in the region. It bears full responsibility for its
practices of genocide against the defenceless
Palestinian people and for instability in the Middle
East, thus making the region a picture of injustice that
the whole world looks at and sees that Israel is
responsible for all the violations that have taken place
during the past three weeks.
The peace process, which has been severely
wounded, will die if there is no radical change in the
approach taken by the international community; an
approach that would restore right and justice and would
end injustice, aggression and oppression; an approach
that would eliminate Israeli occupation of all Arab
territories. The international community must stop
Israeli aggression. It must force Israel, with all
available means under the Charter, to respect the rights
of the Palestinian people and the Arab people in the
occupied territories.
In this context, Mr. Al-Shara’, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Syria, said in the regular session of
the General Assembly that the continued occupation by
Israel of the Arab territories, under the pretext of its
need for security and other myths, is the basic obstacle
to peace.
These Israeli pretexts have transformed the peace
process into an endless process of negotiations.
Israel must realize a perfectly clear fact —
achieving a just and comprehensive peace requires
serious and honest political will. In order for this peace
to be achieved, Israel must implement Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. It must completely
withdraw from the Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem, and restore undiminished Palestinian
sovereignty over Jerusalem, including Al-Haram
Al-Sharif.
This would also mean a complete withdrawal
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June
1967
without
prevarication
or
delays
and
implementation of Security Council resolution 425
(1978) on Lebanon.

46

Syria denounces the Israeli aggression against the
defenceless Arab Palestinian people and the attempt to
force them to accept peace on Israel’s own terms. Syria
supports the Palestinian people in its legitimate
struggle to restore its legitimate rights and to establish
its independent State on its national soil, with
Jerusalem as its capital.
This emergency special session is called upon to
denounce and deplore the Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian Arab people and the religious shrines in
Palestine. Israel must bear full responsibility for the
serious situation in Palestine and at the Lebanese
borders. This session must adopt measures to force
Israel to respect international law, international
conventions and to implement the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
In conclusion, the bloodshed of the Palestinian
Arab people will not be in vain; and the salvation of
Palestinian Arabs and other Arab citizens is dependent
on the conscience and sense of justice of the
international community to help achieve a just and
comprehensive peace, security and dignity for all, as
well as the elimination of tension and instability. This
is what all Arabs in the region want. I wish to reaffirm
that, because of its history and location, the will of the
Palestinian people, the resolutions of international
legality and United Nations resolutions, Jerusalem is
Arab. Jerusalem is occupied and must be returned to
the Palestinian people to become the capital of
Palestine where the Palestinians can exercise full
sovereignty over it.
Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, the delegation of the Kingdom of Morocco
wishes to warmly thank you, Mr. President, for having
called for the resumption of the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly to examine a
very serious, difficult problem that presents a number
of dangers to Al-Quds, to Palestine and to the occupied
territories.
We were very moved by the account presented by
our Secretary-General and we wish to pay tribute to
him for his courage, perspicacity and will to ensure that
the international community contributes to the
commendable efforts for peace and the end of violence.
Great hope was born following the Sharm
el-Sheikh summit and the admirable endeavours of
President Clinton and President Mubarak. On behalf of
the injured and the mourning, we wish to thank them.

A/ES-10/PV.14

Each of our countries has tried to provide assistance
and comfort and to express its solidarity. However, this
will, unfortunately, not immediately relieve the pain of
those who have lost their children and their parents,
who have fallen victims to the bullets of a blind army
and police force. Today we are shaken by the renewed
violence and by the fact that it has not yet been
possible to establish full peace. The injuries inflicted
on the brave Palestinian people will take a long time to
heal. Today the victims of this catastrophe have been
blamed, but the international community knows very
well what has happened, and Israel, particularly groups
in Israel that recently struggled to enable Oslo to exist,
recognizes the catastrophe triggered by the calculations
of a man who is, to say the least, irresponsible. We
have let folly prevail and are surprised today to see the
fury of a people.
We hope that wisdom will prevail over these
regrettable and unforgivable events. It is imperative
that Israel have the courage to restore honour to the
world, for it is well aware of our traditions, for no one
is entitled to sacrifice the future of two peoples — the
Israelis and the Palestinians — and to trigger the
irreversible and unforgivable in the Muslim and Arab
world as well.
A decision was taken to establish a joint
committee. It must be done quickly because tomorrow
it will be too late. The withdrawal of tanks to erase the
image of war unleashed on unarmed children was also
decided. That too must be done without delay. These
measures must be accompanied by a lot of patience and
perseverance. Israel must show once and for all
whether or not it wants peace. It can still do this.
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and Security
Council resolution 338 (1973) clearly define the
framework for a just and lasting peace. This is perhaps
a last opportunity. Our Palestinian brothers, who are
trying to heal their wounds and are mourning their
dead, and who have shown in the past enough courage
and great spirit, will know, if their dignity is protected
and they are not humiliated daily, how to resume the
path of peace.
We express our great hope that Palestine will
rediscover its glory and its people will find once again
the path of honour and happiness. On behalf of my
Government and His Majesty Mohammed VI, I wish to
reiterate our full support for the Palestinian people and
what they have experienced.

Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, the Sudanese delegation wishes to thank you,
Sir, for agreeing to hold the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly on the illegal Israeli
acts committed in Palestine and the occupied Arab
territories.
First I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
constructive initiative, his participation in this
important session and the useful information he
provided.
This special session is held at a time when brutal
crimes against the Palestinian people are being
committed in the wake of Ariel Sharon’s visit to
desecrate the land of Palestine and the bloodletting
events that led to the victimization of people praying at
Al-Aqsa Mosque. This was a provocation to Arab and
Muslim sentiments and was another expansionist act
carried out by Israel, which tries to create a de facto
situation that will render Palestinian-Israeli final status
talks completely irrelevant and baseless. That visit
exposes the falseness of Israeli claims on the question
of sovereignty over Jerusalem, which is vitally
important to all Palestinians and all Arabs, Christians
and Muslims.
Since the last week of September, developments
in the occupied territories and the killing of
Palestinians have been blatant violations of the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.
This Convention applies to all territories occupied by
Israel since 1967. These developments reveal the
current Israeli Government’s support for and approval
of provocative acts of aggression against defenceless
Palestinians, acts of torture, intimidation and killing
taking place before the international community. These
are unconscionable acts.
Sudan strongly condemns the massacre at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which claimed hundreds of
martyrs and wounded victims — Palestinian men,
women and children. The victims of Israeli bullets
continue to fall as we meet at this emergency special
session. While the ink on the Sharm el-Sheikh
memorandum of understanding has yet to dry, the
Palestinian people continue to offer up their lives as
martyrs, one after another.
The delegation of Sudan trusts that the General
Assembly will assume its full responsibility with
regard to the heinous crimes being perpetrated against

47

A/ES-10/PV.14

the Palestinian people. The Assembly should protect
Palestinians from the torture and killing they are
subjected to at the hands of Israeli forces that employ
the most advanced and lethal weapons. The Assembly
must act now that the Security Council has failed to
take the necessary measures to stop the killing of
defenceless Palestinians because of the threat of using
the veto by a permanent member of the Council — a
country that should have implemented the principles of
international law to achieve peace and justice in the
region, by virtue of its sponsorship of the peace
process. That country is not supposed to take sides in
the conflict.
Sudan calls upon the General Assembly to force
Israel to implement resolutions of international legality,
in particular resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
and to force it to withdraw completely from occupied
Arab territories in Palestine and the Syrian Golan and
the still occupied parts of southern Lebanon. In this
regard, Sudan supports the draft resolution the
Assembly intends to adopt at the end of this session.
That draft resolution would send Israel a strong
message about the importance of respecting the rules of
international law. Sudan will vote in favour of that
draft resolution.
In conclusion, Sudan would like to extend its
heartfelt condolences to the families of the heroic
Palestinian martyrs who fell victim to the latest Israeli
acts of aggression and injustice. We reaffirm our full
solidarity with the Palestinian people and other Arabs
in their struggle to liberate their lands and to protect
their dignity and Holy Places.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway deeply regrets the
loss of life and suffering that have been caused by the
unrest of the past few weeks. We are horrified by the
unacceptable deaths of innocent civilians, including
children, and by the high incidence of injuries. Norway
deplores all acts of violence and the indiscriminate use
of force. It is with the greatest concern that we notice
that in some places the unrest is still going on, and that
voices are still being heard in favour of continued
violence.
The events over the last few weeks have revealed
the frustrations and distrust that exist between Israel
and the Palestinians. The work to achieve peace has
suffered tremendous setbacks. It will be very difficult
to overcome the animosity and distrust that has ruled
the scene. Nevertheless, it is now important to search

48

for common ground in order to return to the negotiating
table.
Norway believes that the understanding reached
at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit represents an important
step towards rebuilding the peace process. The factfinding commission must be impartial and have as its
primary goal to work towards healing the wounds. The
provisions for a ceasefire and an end to the violence
must be strictly adhered to.
Norway urgently calls for an end to all hostilities
and for the implementation of measures aimed at
diffusing tension. The parties must refrain from all
activities that can instigate new violence. Israel, with
its military might, has a special responsibility to show
restraint. The Palestinian leadership should do its
utmost to prevent demonstrations from becoming
violent.
The confrontation over the last few weeks has not
only undermined the peace process, but economic and
social development as well. Norway, as the Chairman
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee and as a major donor
to the development of the Palestinian area, is gravely
concerned about the long-term implications of the
conflict on the ongoing work to develop the Palestinian
economy and to improve economic and social
conditions.
It is essential that the international community
now take advantage of the understanding reached at
Sharm el-Sheikh and support all efforts to rebuild trust
between the parties. Continuing the peace process is
the only means of ensuring lasting peace and stability
in the region. It is therefore of paramount importance
to prepare the ground for a resumption of negotiations.
We must let the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement work, and
avoid all actions that can derail the present fragile
process and hinder the resumption of the negotiations.
We must create an atmosphere that is conducive
to the resumption of the negotiations. It is Norway’s
strong hope that the Israelis and the Palestinians will
restore their mutual confidence as peace partners, and
that the peace process will be continued. Norway
welcomes the new and constructive role of the
Secretary-General in this regard.
The violence that we have witnessed in recent
weeks clearly shows that there are no alternatives to
the quest for peace. The tragic events of today
underline this even more. The violence is not only a

A/ES-10/PV.14

direct threat to the peace process itself, but to the
stability of the whole region. It is our duty to exert all
efforts to reach peace for the benefit of Israelis and
Palestinians, the region, and the world at large.
Mr. Nakayama (Micronesia): My delegation has
listened with sorrow to the many statements made in
the General Assembly Hall of the United Nations. If
one were to take a tally, clearly there would be more
statements in condemnation of one side than there
would be those that are objective and helpful. Thus it
would seem to the people outside this Hall that United
Nations debates on peace issues lack a genuine and
sincere intent to soothe the tension in the Middle East
and to encourage both sides to talk peace.
The Secretary-General has reported to this body
on the conciliatory role he has just played to urge both
sides of the conflict to abandon violence and to go back
to talking peace. My delegation commends his hard
work and dedication to the role that is the United
Nations.
We also pay tribute to the President of the United
States and the President of Egypt for the critical roles
they have played in the peace process.
No one likes violence, and no one condones the
loss of life to violence. My Government is sad, and it
expresses its deep sympathy to the Israeli people and to
the Palestinian people in connection with the loss of
life, the injuries and the damage to property. We hope
that the recent unfortunate events will once again
reinforce the fact that there is no real alternative to
lasting peace for any people, anywhere. We support
those delegations that have spoken before us urging
both sides to make peace.
We would also like to see delegations in this body
play a conciliatory role by supporting the peace
process, rather than adopt unbalanced resolutions that
will only further inflame violence. The United Nations
must remain objective and impartial in its relentless
work to find lasting peace in the region.
Mr. Aboud (Comoros) (spoke in French): This
universal body is meeting at a critical and explosive
time to consider the illegal occupation of East
Jerusalem and other Palestinian territories. My
delegation supports the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, and hails his
courage in going to the region to serve as a mediator in
the current crisis.

Over the past several weeks, the global village —
as the Secretary-General described it in his millennium
report (A/54/2000) — has been shocked by the terrible
images of violence seen on television and in the other
media. There can be no justification for the violent acts
committed by the Israeli authorities against unarmed
Palestinian civilians in the occupied territories. My
country, the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros,
was disturbed by the Israeli army’s escalation of
violence against the Palestinian people. In spite of the
efforts made to put an end to the violence, the Israeli
army this morning shot civilian demonstrators, killing
more than five Palestinians. My Government believes that
the international community, represented by the United
Nations, is duty-bound to establish a commission of inquiry
to bring to justice the perpetrators of the violence that has
caused the death of more than 100 Palestinians.
Violence and policies against the Palestinians in
the occupied territories have undoubtedly created a
climate of anxiety in the region and throughout the
international community.
(spoke in English)
My Government strongly believes that the
international community should condemn and take
action on the illegal actions committed by the Israeli
Government. It believes also that the question of
Palestine should remain the responsibility of the United
Nations, as the unique universal Organization it is.
Moreover, it would request the international
community to put pressure on Israel to stop its crimes
against children, women and other unarmed
Palestinians.
On behalf of the Government and the people of
the Comoros, I convey our condolences to the families
of the heroes killed by the Israeli Government.
Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): Just a few weeks ago,
we were all on the verge of celebrating the conclusion
of an agreement between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority that, at long last, would have fulfilled the
aspiration of the Palestinian people to live in peace in
an independent State of Palestine and that of Israel to
exist in peace within secure borders. We had hopes that
the last Camp David lap in the negotiations on a final
settlement would be completed sooner rather than later
by Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Chairman Arafat,
who, over a long period of time, had engaged in serious
negotiations in sincerity and mutual trust, and who had

49

A/ES-10/PV.14

crossed so many difficult hurdles. Unfortunately, that
was not to be.
Our high hopes were shattered on account of an
unwarranted act of provocation on the Israeli side,
when they failed to prevent the visit undertaken by
Mr. Ariel Sharon and his supporters to the holy shrine
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The violence which followed
as a consequence has not only struck a severe blow to
the peace process, but has caused the loss of numerous
innocent civilian lives on the Palestinian side, and also
of a number of lives on the Israeli side. We deplore the
excessive use of force and violence by the Israeli
authorities, which has resulted in the killing of
innocent civilians. We present our heartfelt
condolences to the families of the victims.
But we know that violence only breeds more
violence, and that violence is no alternative to the
legitimate aspiration of all the peoples of the Middle
East to live in peace and security. We call on both
parties to adopt a forward-looking attitude and to work
collectively within the framework of the recent Sharm
el-Sheikh arrangement. We call on both sides to
recreate the positive environment of mutual trust and to
resume the peace talks. Mauritius firmly believes in the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to live in
peace in an independent State of Palestine. That can be
achieved only with the speedy implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
We support the proposal for an international
inquiry into the acts of violence that have taken place
over the past few weeks, as called for by the Security
Council last week and by the Sharm el-Sheikh
arrangement. Mauritius recognizes the crucial role
played by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, by
President Mubarak of Egypt and by President Clinton
in convening the Sharm el-Sheikh meeting, which has
revived hope for peace in the Middle East. We
encourage them to stay engaged to ensure the early
normalization of the situation and the revival of the
peace process.
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 48/265 of 24 August 1994, I now
call on the observer of the Sovereign Military Order of
Malta.
Mr. Linati-Bosch (Sovereign Military Order of
Malta): The Sovereign Military Order of Malta,
founded in Jerusalem in the eleventh century, is

50

strongly connected with all past and present events in
the Holy Land. It flourished there for over two
centuries, which explains its political and hospitalrelated activities and has led to its current presence in
Jerusalem, especially in the Bethlehem area.
The Holy Family Hospital, a maternity clinic with
over 3,000 deliveries per year, serves the greater
Bethlehem area, including Hebron. This activity is
conducted through the Holy Land Foundation of the
Order of Malta.
There is one word we hear every day:
globalization. We hear it or read it in quotations,
newspapers, books, speeches and statements. We hear
about its benefits and contradictions. It is a word that is
usually immediately associated not only with financial
problems and economic issues but also with a concern
for the increasing threats to the environment and with
an excess of information. It means, in fact, that no
country can live isolated or marooned.
The concept of globalization can also be applied
to conflicts and problems. Political events are also
globalized today. When there is a struggle for power, or
when differences between communities lead to armed
conflicts in different parts of the world, the
phenomenon of globalization affects every one of us. It
has an impact not only on the part of the world where
the conflict is developing but on the international
community as well. We must be aware of the problem
and of the injustice and calamities that can result from
intolerance and misunderstanding.
The Sovereign Military Order of Malta is
concerned about the lack of tolerance that exists with
respect to human rights and its harsh consequences for
civilians,
especially
women
and
children —
consequences that include displaced persons, refugees,
sickness and increasing misery.
Twenty centuries ago, the Christian world, one of
the three monotheistic religions represented in the Holy
Land, received a message of love, friendship and
civility. Today, the international community must
renew this message by asking the family of man to live
in peace and harmony. There is a natural law — a
divine law — and an international law, both of which
advise us on the path we should follow: no violence,
and commitment to the respect of human rights.
The activity of the United Nations can and must
be the platform on which to build a community in the

A/ES-10/PV.14

Holy Land — a community in which differences will
be overcome through an understanding that includes
financial, legal and technical measures to be
implemented through Israeli-Palestinian cooperation.
The framework of self-determination, national
sovereignty and independence must be respectfully
observed as the cornerstone of peaceful development.
Regarding the day-to-day activities of the Order
of Malta in the Holy Land, I cannot hide our concern
for the security not only of our humanitarian personnel
operating in the area, but also of the women being
cared for by the Order and the children being born in
its hospital. We know that this is no easy task. We do
not live in a new world with blank areas on the map.
We must consider this developing problem against the
backdrop of a land that is a melting pot of religions,
peoples, civilizations and interests that seem to be at
odds. We can find formulas — in legal doctrines, in
historical precedents and under the current rules of
international law — to guarantee the legal status and
the peaceful development of the peoples involved in
the Palestinian problem.
The Sovereign Military Order of Malta wishes to
continue its hospital-related work in the Holy Land
and, as a consequence, is ready to persist in its offer of
humanitarian and financial aid, and even to increase it,
as we are currently doing. The diplomacy and hospitalrelated services of the Order are ready to collaborate
with the international community to find a solution to
this ongoing violent and onerous conflict.
The President: In accordance with the decision
taken by the General Assembly at its 10th plenary
meeting on 5 February 1999, I now call on the observer
of Switzerland.
Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement and for the great personal
commitment that he has shown in his action for peace.
The serious events that led to the convening of
this emergency special session illustrate clearly the
close link between the establishment of a just and
lasting peace and respect for international law. All
agree in condemning acts of provocation, violence and
hatred, whatever their origin. We cannot exploit the
suffering of some or ignore that of others.
Basing ourselves on the fundamental principles of
humanity, impartiality and universality, we must work

to reaffirm and reinforce the essential function of
international law and in particular that of international
humanitarian law. This will help stem the violence,
restore confidence and encourage the resumption of
dialogue, which is indispensable.
In this respect, my delegation would like to
welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General and of
other key players. We share the hope that the Sharm elSheikh meeting will enable us to resume and bring to a
successful conclusion the peace process in the Middle
East.
In order to put an end to the cycle of violence, it
is now important that everyone, without condition,
refrain from all acts of provocation. We must try to
promote tolerance and mutual respect, which are
inseparable from peace between peoples.
We solemnly appeal for respect for international
humanitarian law. The Swiss Government would like to
point out that the 1949 Geneva Conventions were the
result of the tragic experience of humanity; they do not
set out an ideal, but indicate the threshold below which
barbarism begins. These Conventions take into account
the imperatives of security. States undertake to respect
them and to ensure respect for them in all
circumstances. The Fourth Geneva Convention deals
with the protection of civilians in times of war. It is
applicable de jure in the territories occupied by Israel,
particularly in those whose annexation has not been
recognized by the international community.
As for the draft resolution that has been
distributed, we note that paragraph 10 refers directly to
the depository of the Fourth Geneva Convention. This
paragraph leaves open several questions. If necessary,
my authorities will examine the possibilities available
to the depository for taking action as requested.
Responsibility for peace and for respecting the
law in the Middle East lies first and foremost with the
parties to the conflict, but also with the international
community, which, in recent years, has spared no
effort —
political,
diplomatic,
financial
or
technological — to facilitate development and stability
in the Middle East. Only a peace that guarantees
respect for the fundamental rights of the individual can
bring this about.
Returning to the negotiating table in conditions of
respect and mutual trust and repudiating violence are
the only way to find, within the framework of

51

A/ES-10/PV.14

international law, a lasting solution to the conflict
between Israelis and Palestinians. We sincerely hope
that the recent talks in Sharm el-Sheikh will make it
possible to relaunch that process.

The sixth preambular paragraph expresses
support for the peace process and the efforts to reach a
final settlement between Israel and the Palestinians,
urging the two sides to cooperate in these efforts.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.

In the seventh preambular paragraph, the
Assembly reaffirms the need for full respect by all for
the holy places of occupied East Jerusalem and
condemns any behaviour to the contrary. Similarly, the
eighth preambular paragraph reaffirms the need for full
respect by all for the holy places in the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory, as well as in Israel,
condemning any behaviour to the contrary.

I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt
to introduce draft resolution A/ES-10/L.6.
Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt): I should like to
announce that since the publication of the draft
resolution, the Comoros and Indonesia have become
sponsors.
On behalf of the sponsors, it is my honour to
introduce the draft resolution to the General Assembly
today at its resumed tenth emergency special session,
on the illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory. I will
briefly introduce each of the preambular and operative
paragraphs of the draft.
The first preambular paragraph reaffirms the
resolutions of the tenth emergency special session and
the need for their full implementation.
The second preambular paragraph welcomes the
Security Council’s adoption of Security Council 1322
(2000), stressing the urgent need for full compliance
with it.
In the third preambular paragraph, the Assembly
expresses its deep concern over the provocative visit to
Al-Haram Al-Sharif on 28 September 2000, and the
tragic events that followed in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory, which
resulted in a high number of deaths and injuries, mostly
among Palestinian civilians.

The ninth preambular paragraph expresses
determination to uphold the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter, international humanitarian
law and all other instruments of international law, as
well as the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions.
In the tenth preambular paragraph, the Assembly
reiterates the permanent responsibility of the United
Nations towards the question of Palestine until it is
solved in all its aspects.
The eleventh preambular paragraph says that the
Assembly is conscious of the serious dangers arising
from persistent violations and grave breaches of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the responsibility
arising therefrom.
The twelfth preambular paragraph stresses the
urgent need for providing protection for Palestinian
civilians in the occupied Palestinian territory.

The fourth preambular paragraph expresses deep
concern over the clashes between the Israeli army and
the Palestinian police and the casualties on both sides.

The thirteenth and final preambular paragraph
notes the convening, on 15 July 1999, for the first time,
of a Conference of High Contracting Parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention on measures to enforce the
Convention on the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem, and welcomes the statement
adopted by the participating High Contracting parties.

The fifth preambular paragraph reaffirms that a
just a lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict must
be based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), through an active negotiation process
that takes into account the right of security for all
States in the region, as well as the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people, including their right to selfdetermination.

I should now like to turn to the operative
paragraphs of the draft resolution. Paragraph 1
condemns the violence of 28 September 2000 and the
following days at Al-Haram Al-Sharif and other holy
places in Jerusalem and other areas in the occupied
Palestinian territory, resulting in over 100 deaths, the
vast majority Palestinian civilians, and many other
casualties.

52

A/ES-10/PV.14

Paragraph 2 condemns acts of violence,
especially the excessive use of force by the Israeli
occupying forces against Palestinian civilians.
Paragraph 3 expresses support for the understanding
reached at the summit convened at Sharm el-Sheikh,
Egypt, and urges all parties concerned to implement
these understandings honestly and without delay.
In paragraph 4, the Assembly demands the
immediate cessation of violence and use of force, calls
upon the parties to act immediately to reverse all
measures taken in this regard since 28 September and
acknowledges that necessary steps have been taken by
the parties in this direction since the Sharm el-Sheikh
summit.
Paragraph 5 reiterates that the Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem, are illegal and are an obstacle to peace, and
calls for the prevention of illegal acts of violence by
Israeli settlers.
Operative paragraph 6 demands that Israel, the
occupying Power, abide scrupulously by its legal
obligations and responsibilities under the Fourth
Geneva Convention, which is applicable to all
territories occupied by Israel since 1967.
In operative paragraph 7, the Assembly strongly
supports the establishment of a mechanism of inquiry
into the recent tragic events, with the aim of
establishing all the precise facts and preventing the
repetition of these events, and in this regard the
understanding reached at Sharm el-Sheikh on a
committee of fact-finding, and calls for its
establishment without delay.
Operative paragraph 8 supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General, including his efforts for the
establishment of the above committee, and requests
him to report to the Assembly on the progress made in
these efforts.
In operative paragraph 9, the Assembly calls
upon the Members of the Security Council to closely
follow the situation, including the implementation of
resolution 1322 (2000), in fulfilment of the Council’s
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Operative paragraph 10 invites the depository of
the Fourth Geneva Convention to consult on the
development of the humanitarian situation in the field,
in accordance with the statement adopted on 15 July

1999 by the Conference of High Contracting Parties to
the Convention, with the aim of ensuring respect for
the Convention in all circumstances in accordance with
common Article 1 of the four Conventions.
Operative paragraph 11 supports the efforts
towards the resumption of the Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations within the Middle East peace process on
its agreed basis, and calls for the speedy conclusion of
the final settlement between the two parties.
In the last operative paragraph, 12, the Assembly
decides to adjourn the tenth emergency special session
temporarily and to authorize the President of the most
current Assembly to resume its meeting upon request
by Member States.
I will now deliver my final remarks in the Arabic
language:
(spoke in Arabic)
Finally, I would like to apologize, on behalf of
the sponsors of the draft resolution, for the delay in
circulating the draft to delegates. As you all know, it
has been subjected to long and hard negotiations that
have taken place until the last minute in order to attain
the largest balance acceptable to all regarding the
language of the draft resolution. On this basis, we
appeal to all Member States of the United Nations that
respect human rights and that reject occupation and
oppression, to declare their positions in support of
those noble values by voting in favour of this draft
resolution. We are confident that the Member States
sponsoring the draft resolution will greatly appreciate
every vote in support of the rights of the Palestinian
people.
The President: Before we proceed further, I
would like to consult the Assembly with a view to
proceeding immediately to consider the draft resolution
contained in document A/ES-10/L.6. In this
connection, since document A/ES-10/L.6 has only just
been circulated in the Hall, it would be necessary to
waive the relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of
procedure.
The relevant provision of rule 78 reads as
follows:
“… As a general rule, no proposal shall be
discussed or put to the vote at any meeting of the
General Assembly unless copies of it have been

53

A/ES-10/PV.14

circulated to all delegations not later than the day
preceding the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objections, I shall take it that
the Assembly agrees with this proposal.
It was so decided.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.6.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Göktürk (Turkey): My delegation will vote
for the draft resolution contained in document L.6.
Turkey is profoundly concerned by the events that have
unfolded since 28 September 2000 in East Jerusalem,
the West Bank and Gaza, and deeply grieved by every
life lost in the spiral of violence.
However difficult it may be, leadership on all
sides requires the willpower to stay the course, the
course towards lasting peace. The outcome of the
Sharm el-Sheikh summit is the first step to getting out
of the maze filled with passion and blood. We applaud
the principles of the summit for what they have
achieved. The summit understandings stand to be fully
honoured. We must likewise heed the call of the United
Nations Secretary-General to help lower the tension
with the eventual aim of putting the peace process back
on track.
What has transpired since the end of September
must be proof enough for everyone that building on
violence and the excessive use of force is no recipe for
peace. All of the nations in the region are destined to
live side by side. The choice is only about peaceful
coexistence. This requires calm, moderation and a
forward-looking spirit. Turkey is determined to play a
role as a proponent and facilitator of peace.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/ES-10/L.6.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium,

54

Belize, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia, Ghana,
Greece, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Tuvalu, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Barbados, Benin, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji,
Germany, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Poland, Romania, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.6 was adopted by 92
votes to 6, with 46 abstentions (resolution
ES-10/7).
Subsequently the delegation of Belarus advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
first speaker in explanation of vote after the vote, may I

A/ES-10/PV.14

remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Samadi (Iran): My delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolution contained in document
A/ES-10/L.6. However, I wish to register the
reservations of the Islamic Republic of Iran regarding
any provisions of the resolution that imply the
recognition of Israel.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): For three
weeks, the Middle East has been plunged into tragedy.
More than 110 people have died, more than 3,000 have
been wounded. But the hope for peace has not totally
disappeared. The Sharm el-Sheikh summit is a witness
to this, and in this regard I would like to pay tribute to
the role played by the Secretary-General and to
Presidents Clinton and Mubarak and King Abdullah II.
I would also like to note the presence at that summit of
the European Union, in the person Javier Solana.
The Sharm el-Sheikh agreement has to be
applied. The recent news is worrisome: nine deaths
today.
France, and with it the entire European Union,
calls for the full and unconditional implementation of
the Sharm el-Sheikh summit decisions. This message is
the principal message of the resolution that we have
just adopted.
France, which currently holds the presidency of
the European Union, has had the honour of negotiating
this text in good faith with the Palestinian Ambassador,
Nasser Al-Kidwa, and beyond that, with the Arab
Group. The text that we have just adopted is, in the
opinion of France, a good text. Unfortunately, after
lengthy discussions, the 15 countries did not manage to
speak in a single voice regarding this text, but the
European Union is unanimous in its message: the cycle
of violence must stop now. There must be a return to
the situation that prevailed before 28 September.
Reason and tolerance have to prevail once again over
the forces of hatred. The hope for peace has to remain
anchored in the hearts of all the men and women of the
Middle East.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
voted in favour of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.6,
entitled “Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East
Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian

Territory”. Our positive vote proceeds from our
continuing support for the struggle of the Palestinian
people against Israeli occupation, as well as our
opposition to the continuing acts of aggression against
that valiant people.
On the one hand, we would like to say that the
resolution reflects many positive aspects pertaining to
the role and responsibility of the United Nations in the
question of Palestine, as well as in the need to provide
protection for the Palestinian civilians in the occupied
territory. We are also pleased that the resolution
stresses that Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
are illegal, and that the resolution demands that Israel
respect the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention on the protection of civilian and military
persons in time of war.
On the other hand, we would like to stress that we
object to clauses in the resolution that equate the
aggressor, Israel, with the victims, the Palestinians.
Furthermore, the delegation of the Syrian Arab
Republic cannot agree to references in the resolution
that do not clearly and unequivocally assign to Israel
responsibility for the events in the occupied
territory — although the world fully recognizes Israel’s
complete responsibility for the massacres taking place
in the Palestinian territory.
My delegation would also like to register its
reservations regarding references in the resolution to
some understandings to which my delegation was not a
party, as well as reservations regarding some
agreements on which we have expressed our position in
previous statements.
The Palestinian people have fallen victim to
bloodthirsty Israeli policies. Any resolution that does
not address the roots of the tragedy of Palestine and the
requirements for a comprehensive peace and that does
not call for an end to the suffering of the Palestinian
people on the basis of the resolutions of international
legitimacy cannot meet the expectations and demands
of the international community for a just,
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I am
speaking on behalf of the Southern Cone Common
Market
(MERCOSUR).
The
countries
of
MERCOSUR — Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile,
Paraguay and Uruguay — have voted in favour of the
resolution in the belief that this resolution is going,

55

A/ES-10/PV.14

above all, to stimulate and reinforce the will of the
parties to continue with the peace process. The events
of today confirm the urgent need to create conditions
so that the peace process can produce immediate
results and so that the understandings reached at Sharm
el-Sheikh will bear fruit as soon as possible.

salutary opportunity to eschew confrontation and to
move towards dialogue and the renewed logic of peace.

Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway abstained in the
voting on the resolution. The violence that we have
witnessed in the Palestinian territories for the past
weeks has clearly illustrated what we all feared would
be the alternative to the positive developments in the
peace process.

We also welcome the responsible and tireless
efforts of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. His
position yesterday at the summit of the League of Arab
States, rejecting any attempt to promote armed conflict
in order to silence belligerent voices by raising those of
reason and dialogue, is a courageous stance on behalf
of peace. Egypt and Mr. Mubarak have thus established
themselves as significant factors in the creation of the
necessary coexistence between Arab and Jew in the
Middle East.

Norway deeply regrets the loss of life and the
suffering that have been caused. The Norwegian
Government has welcomed the understanding reached
in Sharm el-Sheikh, in which the parties have
committed themselves to ending the violence and to
resuming the negotiations on a final status agreement.

We also wish to express our full admiration for
United States President Bill Clinton and for his
incomparable investment, his generous presence and
his unshakeable faith in a necessary and ineluctable
peace between Israel and its regional Palestinian and
Arab partners.

Norway
strongly
urges
the
effective
implementation of this agreement. We support the
establishment of a fact-finding mission, as agreed at
Sharm el-Sheikh. Norway feels that the role of the
international community at this stage should be to
recreate an atmosphere of trust between the parties in
which they can resume their trust in a lasting peace.

Allow me at this stage to make a few comments
on this debate and to the resolution that has emerged
from it. We have noted the recurrence of — indeed, the
shrill insistence on — the notion of “occupied
territories”. I would stress first of all, not wishing to
give any cause for apprehension, that ever since the
signing of the Oslo accords the State of Israel has
adhered by agreed modalities to a logic and policy of
non-occupation,
made
concrete
by
territorial
redeployments, which currently include almost half of
the territories as a whole. We should also note, in order
to defend and illustrate the steps Israel has taken for
peace, that the bold policy of Prime Minister Barak —
which was praised in this very Hall during the
Millennium Assembly — strengthens the logic of
territorial compromise with a scope that is as
unprecedented as it is incomparably significant for
achieving a final status that will be fair to all sides.

This being the case, we have chosen to abstain in
the voting on the resolution, as, in our view, it contains
elements that detract from what must be our primary
concern at this point in time: an intensified search for a
joint strategy to end the killing and proceed with the
peace effort.
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in exercise of the
right of reply.
May I remind members that statements in
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and to five minutes for the
second and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to commend the remarkable statement
made by the Secretary-General at the opening of this
debate and to express our appreciation for his vision,
moral authority, leadership and work for peace,
animated by unparalleled inspiration. Mr. Annan was
the architect of the recent Sharm el-Sheikh summit, a

56

Faced with the overall process of Israeli
occupation of territory, it should be urgently recalled
that the occupation did not fall from the sky. It was the
result of the strict cause and effect of the broad and
concerted aggression of June 1967 aimed purely and
simply at dislodging Israel. It should be added that,
were it not for the emergence of the State of Israel in
1948 and for the failure of the attempt to annihilate it
in 1967, other Powers than Israel would have imposed,
if not occupation, then at least their presence and
sovereign responsibility over those very territories. For
memory’s sake, we need to reiterate the telling fact that

A/ES-10/PV.14

it has only been under Israeli administration of these
territories that the principle of territorial compromise
with the Palestinians has emerged since Oslo.
My colleagues here need not take me at my word
as to the following assessment, because I would cite at
this particular juncture the illustrious late President of
the French Republic, Mr. François Mitterand. I am
even further motivated to recall his words because the
magisterial and yet scandalously false lesson of history,
geography and sociology promulgated here by one of
our brilliant colleagues prompts me urgently to do so.
On 20 May 1992, I had the signal privilege of
presenting to President Mitterand my credentials as
Israel’s Ambassador to France. A 20-minute
conversation ensued concerning the situation in Israel
and the Middle East, in the course of which he said:
“The territory that we customarily term
‘occupied’, I personally prefer to call ‘disputed’.
Yes, I recognize Israel’s right to its philosophical
and historical, if not military, arguments, so
deeply are the historic rights of the Jewish people
rooted in these territories where it emerged and
flourished.”
And yet, Mr. Mitterand concluded,
“You have a problem. More than 2 million
Palestinians are living there who have a right to
their state structure. It is not up to me to decide
their borders. That is to be settled between you
and the Palestinians. I urge you to adopt that
solution.”

Yes, we feel that Mr. Barak’s Government took
every possible risk, including its own political
dissolution, so that there might be an end to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. Instead of taking a genuine
Palestinian decision commensurate with the aspirations
of the Palestinian people, President Arafat chose to
inflame the territories and to destabilize the region
because of his inability to respond to history’s
invitation.
Rather than manage the future of a people within
borders that have been definitively accepted and
recognized, President Arafat has decided to join in the
condemnation of Israel, ignoring one resolution after
another and declining one summit after another. He
should, however, be moving towards the summit of
making history. Unfortunately, it is at this level that a
real solution has just been missed.
As we have previously stated, we flatly reject the
resolution resulting from this debate. In spite of certain
moderators who have made sustained efforts to bring
goodwill to the undertaking, this resolution embodies
the arbitrary, the iniquitous and the biased, and it does
not say anything about the savage killing of the two
members of the Israeli military in Ramallah. The
parade of shame, the bloody procession of the dead
Israeli bodies mutilated in Ramallah, is not reflected in
the resolution and evidently means little to its signers.
There has also been silence as to the profanation of the
Jewish Holy Places.

Steeped in biblical lore and exceptionally aware
of the subtleties of the founding texts and of the
historic journey of the Jewish people, François
Mitterand could not ignore Israel’s ancestral rights to
what was Judea for many centuries. Moreover, beyond
this modest personal testimony, Mr. Mitterand
bequeathed to history, through numerous official
documents and texts, his vision for the disputed
territory.

As we have said, this resolution is a certificate of
respectability awarded to base instincts and the
exacerbation of the situation. It certainly sends a
negative message to the majority of the Israeli people
who want openness and peace. It signals a major retreat
in the dynamic of peace and sows major doubts as to
the capacity of the Palestinians to be firm partners in
peace and reconciliation. As such, due to its grave
deficiencies, as well as the harmful malfunctioning
which it introduces in Israeli-Palestinian relations, we
categorically reject this resolution.

It was at Camp David, after the historic turning
point of Oslo and the political achievements it
generated, that we prepared ourselves to engage in this
wise and unavoidable dispute — the frank and resolute
negotiation to lay the concrete foundations for a final
status between us and the Palestinians, in which
Mr. Mitterand and his direct successors might detect
the outlines of his political philosophy.

Certainly we do not remain indifferent with
regard to the United Nations, with the measured voice
and source of hope of Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
and with his reserve, as well as that of a friend, the
Permanent Representative of Morocco, representative
of His Majesty Mohammed VI, the healthy resonance,
noted as exemplary. All this shows the distance vis-àvis the majority concerning this resolution.

57

A/ES-10/PV.14

We obviously thank those peace-loving Member
States that have made the courageous choice to oppose,
fully or through half-measures, this useless resolution.
Finally, in addition to our reservations regarding
the defective procedures which have governed the
convening of this special session, we regret not being
able to adjourn at 6 p.m. in respect for the celebration
of the Jewish festival of Sukkot and the holiness of the
sabbath. Certain modalities which have been accepted
for other faiths have not been made for the Israeli
delegation. Let us take note of this fact as a regrettable
affront to the sister faith of the two other monotheistic
religions.
The President: We have now heard the right of
reply. I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to thank the members of the
General Assembly for staying so late on a Friday
evening. I apologize to you, but I believe you all
understand how serious the situation is. I would also
like to thank all the speakers, beginning of course with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations for all his
important and positive efforts. I would also like to
extend our sincere thanks to all the countries that cosponsored the resolution we have just adopted, and
naturally all the countries that voted in favour of the
resolution.
We are proud that the great majority has
supported this important resolution and are pleased that
there were no objections to it other than the traditional
objections that we have grown used to. There were 92
votes in favour. These votes carry much more weight
than the sheer number they represent under normal
circumstances. We have negotiated in good faith with a
view to adopting a reasonable resolution that would
reflect the position of the international community and
would also gain more support. In this regard, we must
extend our thanks to the presidency of the European
Union for its efforts.
Unfortunately, it seems that the pressures were
too high and too strong. Apparently, the attempts to
hegemonize the Security Council were not enough, so
now we see attempts to hegemonize the General
Assembly. We have witnessed different kinds of
pressure, including the use of the media. Regrettably,
all that did not come at the appropriate time. For
example, today 10 more martyrs have fallen in the

58

occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem.
Two of these martyrs were children under the age of
18. Another example is the holding of a summit of the
League of Arab States tomorrow, which is of extreme
importance.
We highly appreciate, and our people will
remember, as will the Arab world, the principled
position taken by those who voted in favour of the
resolution. Our people and the Arab countries will
watch with great concern the adoption of some
countries of a position inconsistent with justice or
international law or even with their traditional position.
Today’s resolution is of great importance. First, it
was adopted in an emergency special session of the
General Assembly, and it determined a certain position
with regard to the tragedy taking place in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the acts
of violence and the excessive use of force by the Israeli
forces against the Palestinian civilians.
Secondly, it provides the necessary support to the
understandings achieved in Sharm el-Sheikh and the
efforts of the Secretary-General, particularly with
regard to the establishment of a commission of inquiry.
Thirdly, it provides adequate support to the peace
process, its basis and the necessity of its resumption.
Fourthly, it establishes the legal framework for
the situation on the ground as one of occupation.
Fifthly, it opens the door for more important
moves such as continuing the negotiations between the
parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention.
We strongly believe that this resolution will have
a very important impact, particularly if Israel, the
occupying power, realizes its disregard for the
international will and listens to the clear position taken
by the international community.
Naturally, we fervently hope that the current
tragedy will come to an end; that the killing and
wounding of our people will cease. We are trying our
utmost to achieve that goal, including through the
implementation of the Sharm el-Sheikh understandings.
Of course, if these bloody actions do not cease
and if Israel persists in its bloody acts of oppression,
we will again resort to the Assembly and call for a
resumption of the tenth emergency special session.

A/ES-10/PV.14

Under what is called the right of reply,
Mr. Lancry stated that the occupation did not fall from
the sky. My question is, if it did not, why has it lasted
for so many years and why has it become a colonialist
occupation, characterized by the forced displacement
of the population in order to annex the land?
International law and United Nations resolutions
are very clear. This is occupied territory, Mr. Lancry.
The land recognized as Israeli until now is the land that
was allocated to the Jewish State in accordance with
resolution 181 (II), the partition resolution. If there are
territories in contention, they are the lands that Israel
occupied in addition to the land allocated to the Jewish
State in accordance with resolution 181 (II).
On our part, in spite of this, we have accepted
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) as a basis for
settlement. That resolution determines very clearly the
occupied territory. For Israel to come now and
undermine the basis of the settlement process and
claim that these territories are in contention is a very
grave development indeed.
We heard such claims from a former
representative of Israel, Mr. Dore Gold, and we thought

that we would now be listening to a representative of a
different kind of Government. I should like to reiterate
that what we have heard is extremely grave. It is
tantamount to undermining the basis for a settlement, a
rejection of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and
an insistence by Israel that territories occupied in 1967
are territories in contention. We very strongly condemn
this.
If today’s resolution had not been adopted, we
would have requested that a reference to this be
included in a draft resolution.
Lastly, I should like to reiterate our thanks to
those who have supported us and say to those who did
not that we understand; we look forward to their
support on another occasion, in accordance with
principles, international law and their traditional
positions.
The President: The tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly is now temporarily
adjourned, in accordance with the terms of paragraph
12 of the resolution adopted at the present meeting.
The meeting rose at 10.15 p.m.

59
