*:

UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFIC-IAL
THIRTY-FIRST

RECORDS
YEAR

18801h

MEETING:

27 JANUARY

NEW YORK

1976~~

~l$~>~~\/

JUL

2 4 1g$q

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1880) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/11918). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV. 1880

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemerits bf the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1880th MEETING
Held in New York 09 Tuesday, 27 January 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

(United

Mr. Salim A. SALIM
Republic of Tanzania).

Mr. Murpaung
(Indonesia),
Mr. Hall (Jamaica),
Mr. Harriman (Nigeria) and Mr. Petrie (Yugoslavia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northe’m Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

“With regard to the forthcoming meeting of the
Security Council on the question of Namibia, the
United
Nations
Council for Namibia,
at its
228th meeting held on 21 January 1976, decided that
its delegation to the Security Council would consist
of the following:

agenda (S/Agenda/ltBO)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/11918)
The meeting

3. The PRESIDENT:
I have also received a letter
dated 23 January 1976 from the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, which reads as follows:

of the agenda

Mr. Dunstan W. Kamana, President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia;

was called to order at 11.30 a.m.

Mr. H. Talvitie

Adoption

Mr. H. Abduldjalil

of the agenda

The ugendu was udopted.

Mr. Z. Nicinski

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1918)

(Indonesia);
(Poland);

Mr. V. Montemayor

CantG (Mexico)“.

4. It may be recalled that on previous occasions when
it was considering the situation in Namibia the Security
Council extended invitations to representatives of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, most recently
at its 1823rd meeting on 30 May last year. Accordingly,
if there is no objection, I propose that the Council
extend an invitation, pursuant to rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to the President and the
aforementioned
members of the United Nations
Council for Namibia.

I. The PRESIDENT:
I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Egypt, Guinea, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Nigeria and Yugoslavia, containing requests
that they be invited in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule37 of the provisional
rules of procedure to participate in the discussion of
the question’ now before the Council. Accordingly,
if there is no objection, I propose, in conformity
with the usual practice and with the consent of the
Council, to invite the representatives
I have just
mentioned to participate in our discussion without the
right to vote.
It was so decided.

(Finland);

It WNS so decided.

5. The PRESIDENT:
Since the Council agrees to my
proposai. I invite the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia and his delegation to take places
at the Council table.

.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I invite those representatives
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the usual understanding that they
will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when they address the Council.

At the invitution of the President, Mr. Kumunu
(President of the United Nutions Councilf%r Numihiu)
und the rncjrnht>rs of the delcgution-Mr.
Tulvitie
(Finlund), Mr. Ahduidjulil (Indonesiu), Mr. Nicin’ski
(Polund) und Mr. Montemayor Cuntli (Mexico)-took
pluces at the Security Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ruhul (Algeria), Mr. AhdelMquid(Egypt),
Mr. Cutnuru (Guineu),

i

6. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform members of the
Council also that I have received a letter dated
26 January 1976 from the representatives of Benin,
the Libyan Arab Republic and the United Republic of
Tanzania [S/11943]. That letter contains a request that
the Security Council extend an invitation under rule 39
to Mr. Moses M. Garoeb, Administrative
Secretary
of the South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO) of Namibia, and his delegation. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Council is agreeable
to extending the invitation under rule 39, as requested.

and its goals supported by the Security Council in its
resolution 245 (1968).
12. The question of Namibia is now, without doubt,
one of the perennial issues on the agenda of the
Security Council. It was last considered in this very
chamber as recently as June 1975 [see 1829th meeting].
What happened then is a matter of public record:
negative votes by three permanent members of the
Security Council prevented the adoption of a broadly
supported draft resolution. As far as the Security
Council is concerned, matters have since stood at
that. But that has not been the case with South Africa.
The stalemate in the Council was apparently interpreted by the authorities in Pretoria as an encouragement for them to consolidate South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia. Alarming and most disquieting
events have since taken place in the Territory.

It was so decided.

7. The PRESIDENT:
I shall invite Mr. Garoeb at
the appropriate moment to make his statement.
8. The Security Council will now proceed with its
consideration of the item on the agenda. As the item
indicates, this meeting has been convened in response
to the terms of resolution 3399 (XXX) adopted last
November by the General Assembly and brought to the
Council’s attention by the Secretary-General
in his
letter of 16 December 1975 contained in document
S/l 1918.

13. It is in the light of the deteriorating situation
in Namibia and the comfort South Africa appears to
have taken from the non-action of the Security Council last June that the General Assembly was prompted
at its just-concluded thirtieth regular session to urge
the Council, in its resolution 3399 (XXX), to take up
again the question of Namibia “and to act to give
effect to its resolution 366 (1974) of 17 December
1974”. I might add that the General Assembly resolution was adopted by an impressive majority of Member
States-no doubt a reflection of the growing concern
about South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of
Namibia and its obnoxious policies in the Territory.

9. The first speaker is the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, Mr. Kamana, to whom
I give the floor.
10. Mr. KAMANA
(President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia): I wish, first of all, to express
the sincere pleasure and satisfaction of the delegation
of the United Nations Council for Namibia at seeing
you, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, distinguished representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, preside
over the Security Council as it once again takes up
the question of Namibia. It is indeed a happy coincidence that you should be the President of the Council
at this particular point in time, for your own personal
commitment
to the cause of the Namibian people,
your dynamism, your extraordinary talents and your
diplomatic
skill will certainly be invaluable in the
deliberations on this all-important
African problem.
Moreover, you represent the United Republic of
Tanzania, a country which is in the forefront of the
struggle against all attempts to deprive colonial countries and peoples of their right to self-determination
and independence.

14. I cannot overemphasize
the significance of
Security Council resolution 366 (1974). In that resolution, adopted unanimously, the Council demanded that
South Africa make a solemn declaration that it would
comply with the resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations regarding Namibia
and with the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 21 June 1971’ and that it recognize the territorial
integrity and unity of Namibia as a nation. Moreover,
the Security Council demanded that South Africa take
the necessary steps to withdraw its illegal administration from Namibia and transfer power to the people of
Namibia with United Nations assistance.
15. The reply of South Africa to resolution 366
(1974) [S/1170/] was negative and is on record and
indeed familiar to all members of the Council. It was
the subject of critical analysis at the meetings in May
and June 1975 [1823rd-1829th
meetings].
I shall
therefore not repeat here the well-known views of the
United Nations Council for Namibia on it. Indeed,
there appeared to be a consensus of opinion in the
Security Council when that reply came up for consideration to the effect that it was totally unsatisfactory,
both in spirit and in substance. If anything, it was an
attempt by South Africa to hoodwink and confuse
international
public opinion regarding its designs to
perpetuate the illegal occupation of Namibia.

11. I would also like to thank the members of the
Security Council for this opportunity
afforded the
United Nations Council for Namibia to participate in
the deliberations concerning Namibia and indeed to
be the first speaker this morning. This is a fitting
recognition of the United Nations Council for Namibia, the organ established by the General Assembly
with the mandate to administer Namibia until the
Namibian people achieve their independence. Indeed
the mandate established by General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, which has been
reaffirmed at all subse@ent sessions, was endorsed
2

leadership in Namibia for no other purpose than to
stifle Namibian nationalism. The most recent attempt
to mislead the Namibian people and the international
community is the so-called constitutional
conference
in which individuals
subservient to the political
interests of South Africa have been put forward as
representatives
of the Namibian
people and empowered to carry out sham negotiations
on the
political and constitutional
future of the Territory.
Those hand-picked puppets and stooges of South
Africa have been portrayed as the true representatives of the Namibian people. Political parties such as
SWAP0 have been excluded.

16. What is important now is to uphold the validity
of Security Council resolution 366 (1974) and for the
Council to explore ways and means of giving effect
to that resolution. It is the hope and expectation of
the United Nations Council for Namibia that this time
the Security Council will find common ground on which
to act. The intervening period between the last meeting
of the Security Council onihe subject [1829th meeting]
and now has clearly brought into focus the necessity
for decisive action by the Council.
17. Since the situation in Namibia was last considered
by the Security Council, the people of Namibia have
continued to suffer under the illegal South African
occupation. The Pretoria regime has continued to
escalate its police-State measures against Namibians
through killings, mass arrests, detentions, floggings
and other repressive actions. Its continued illegal
occupation of Namibia has been reflected in the
expanding application of apartheid and the. attempts
to carry out the bantustanization
of the Territory.
This is indeed in keeping with a notorious and shameless State policy of establishing so-called homelands
adopted in 1968 following a recommendation
of the
Odendaal Commission.*

22. That bogus constitutional conference has adopted
a Declaration of Intent [see S/11948 and Add.11
which in essence indicates that Namibia will obtain
some sort of “independence”
by 1978 as a loose
confederation of ethnic States, with the white settlers
retaining the most valuable land areas. That Declaration is blatant in its violation of the rights of the
Namibian people; it does not recognize Namibia as a
unitary State and makes no reference to majority
rule or to the institutions of a central government.
SWAP0 has already decisively rejected this mystification. The United Nations Council for Namibia has
also naturally condemned the so-called constitutional
conference. Moreover, the United Nations Council
for Namibia has reaffirmed the territorial integrity
of Namibia as well as the inalienable and imprescriptible right of the Namibian people to self-determination
and independence.

18. In this regard, South Africa decided to set aside
40 per cent of the land, the least desirable and least
developed parts, as separate so-called homelands for
each of the non-white groups, other than those
identified in their racist jargon as “Coloured”.
This is
being done without due regard to the massive dislocation and suffering of the majority population. In South
Africa’s sugar-coated propaganda, those so-called
homelands are promised some eventual self-governing
status, a self-governing situation in which the uprooted
African population will find no valuable economic
resources to serve their material needs and which will
have resulted in the fragmentation of their land and
the destruction of their territorial unity and integrity.

23. But the so-called constitutional
conference and
the killings, mass arrests, detentions and floggings of
Namibians, to which I referred earlier, have not been
the only recent acts by South Africa designed to
perpetuate its illegal occupation of Namibia.
The
racist regime has gone further than that; it has
decidedly embarked on the militarization
of the Territory. In this regard, it has built in Namibia perhaps
one of the most modem and sophisticated military
bases in the region. This South African military
build-up in Namibia has been accompanied by the
forceful removal of Namibians
from the northern
border in order to free that area for military purposes.
The upheaval, loss and privation resulting from this is
simply enormous.

19. At the same time, this repugnant scheme is
intended to maintain South African control over a
so-called “white area”, consisting of 43 per cent of the
land in which are included most mineral reserves and
all urban centres, seaports and transportation facilities.
Another 17 per cent of the total area of Namibia
covering all unsurveyed lands and the two key diamond
areas on the south-western coast would pass directly
to South African control.

24. The persistent refusal of South Africa to terminate
its iIlega1 occupation of Namibia, which, as can be
seen, is maintained by force of arms, has left the
people of Namibia with no alternative but to struggle
for their right to self-determination
and independence
by all means at their disposal. There is no doubt
that they would have preferred a peaceful resolution
of the problem of Namibia. This is amply demonstrated
by the goodwill and co-operation that their national
liberation movement, SWAPO, has displayed not only
towards the United Nations Council for Namibia,
which is an instrument for peaceful change, but also
towards the United Natiohs as a whole. It is only

20. Clearly, the aim of South Africa in pursuing
the so-called homelands policy is the perpetuation of
its illegal occupation of Namibia and the ruthless
exploitation and plunder of its resources, while at the
same time it subjects the majority of the population
to the most despicable forms of deprivation, oppression and repression. The so-called homelands policy is
nothing but a divide and rule policy.
21. In this connexion, I need not point out that
South Africa has been deliberately encouraging tribal
3

South African intransigence which has compelled
SWAPO-the
liberation
movement recognized by
both the Organization of African Unity and the United
Nations as the authentic representative of the people
of Namibia-to
wage an armed struggle for the independence of Namibia.

must all feel a particular sense of obligation to act
decisively in the case of Namibia. It must no longer
remain one of the perennial items on the agenda of
both the General Assembly and the Security Council.
There certainly is an urgent imperative to resolve the
question of Namibia.

25. The United Nations Council for Namibia is firmly
convinced that violent change in Namibia can be
avoided only if South Africa reckons with the realities
of Namibian nationalism. This means that the South
African regime must respect the genuine aspirations
of the Namibian people as expressed through their
national liberation movement, SWAPO. South Africa
must accord due recognition to SWAP0 and accept
to deal with it in any act genuinely designed to shape
the dest.iny of Namibia, which, indeed, can only be
independence through the process of self-determination of the people of the Territory. Continued encouragement of ethnic leadership can only be an act of
self-deception on the part of South Africa-an
act
which inevitably advances the dreadful prospect of a
racial conflagration and violent change in Namibia.

29. The United Nations Council for Namibia trusts
that the Security Council will seize this new opportunity to make a decisive contribution
towards the
resolution of the question of Namibia. In the view of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, the Security
Council must, at the very minimum, do the following:
first, strongly condemn the continued illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa and demand that
South Africa comply with the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions calling
upon it to withdraw from Namibia; secondly, strongly
condemn the attempts by South Africa to divide
Namibia into so-called homelands and its application
of racially discriminatory
and repressive laws and
practices in the Territory and accordingly demand
an immediate end to all such abominable acts aimed
at violating the national unity and territorial integrity
of Namibia;
thirdly, strongly condemn the South
African military build-up in Namibia and the recent
convening of a so-called constitutional conference in
the Territory;
fourthly, declare and direct that, in
order that the people of Namibia may be enabled
freely to determine their own future, free elections
under the supervision and control of the United
Nations be held for the whole of Namibia as one
political entity; and, fifthly, demand that South Africa
urgently make a solemn declaration accepting the requirement for the holding of free elections in Namibia
under United
Nations
supervision
and control,
undertaking to comply with the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations and the advisory opinion
of the International
Court of Justice of 21 June 1971
in regard to Namibia and recognizing the territorial
integrity and unity of Namibia as a nation. ‘
+

26. When my predecessor, the then President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, spoke before
the Security Council on 30 May 1975 [see 1823rd
meeting] at the start of the debate on South Africa’s
compliance with resolution 366 (1974), he challenged
South Africa to agree to the convening of a national
_election in Namibia under United Nations supervision
and control. I should like to repeat this challenge
today. The United Nations Council for Namibia
believes that there is still a chance for peaceful change
in Namibia. This chance lies only in the convening
of a national election in Namibia under United Nations
supervision and control. Such an election, in which
all the political parties of Namibia, including SWAPO,
must participate on an equal footing, would constitute
a genuine act of self-determination
by the people of
Namibia.
27. It is important that the election take place under
United Nations supervision and control, for this is the
only way that we can guarantee fair play. Past
experience shows that South Africa cannot be trusted
to create the necessary conditions for the unhindered
expression of the popular will. Acts of intimidation
and the manipulation
of the electorate have been
habitual practices of South Africa in its ill-concealed
attempts to perpetuate its control over Namibia. But
of even more overriding importance is the fact that the
United Nations is the legal authority in Namibia and
that South Africa is occupying the Territory illegally.
The United Nations therefore has a duty to live up to
its responsibilities over the Territory.

30. I wish to stress that, pending the holding of the
national elections in Namibia under United Nations
supervision and control, it will be imperative for
South Africa to do the following: first, comply fully
in spirit and in practice with the provisions of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights; secondly,
release all Namibian political prisoners, including all
those imprisoned
or detained in connexion with.
offences under so-called internal
security laws,
whether such Namibians have been charged or tried
or are held without charge and whether held in Namibia
or South Africa; thirdly, abolish the application in
Namibia of all racially discriminatory
and politically
repressive laws and practices, particularly
those
relating to Bantustans and homelands; and, fourthly,
accord unconditionally
to all Namibians currently in
exile for political reasons full facilities for return to
their country without risk of arrest, detention, intimidation or imprisonment.

28. The people of Namibia have suffered for too
long under the illegal South African occupation. Yet
theirs is a unique case in the whole process of
decolonization.
In no other case has the United
Nations assumed similar responsibility.
Surely, we
4

31. For all those who support the cause of the
Namibian people, the Security Council is once again
the focus of attention. The people of Namibia too
have their eyes focused on the Council with hope
and expectation. This is indeed a decisive moment in
the history of Namibia, for soon it will be known
whether change in Namibia
will be peaceful or
violent.

in its fate. Not only is Namibia’s fate linked up with
the rest of southern Africa, but perhaps more importantly Namibia is the sore point because of its
continued illegal occupation by South Africa. And
for as long as South Africa maintains its illegal occupation of Namibia, for so long will there be strife and
instability in that region.
38. It is a fact of history that South Africa is the
arch-enemy of the liberation struggle, not only in
Namibia but in the entire subcontinent of southern
Africa. And of late South Africa has been using Namibian territory as a spring-board to commit aggression
against neighbouring
African countries. Let it be
known that the acts of unprovoked aggression and
incursion
into neighbouring
territories
by South
Africa are not so recent as some would have us
believe. It is a matter of historical record that the
Security Council not very long ago debated a complaint brought by the Republic of Zambia when South
Africa committed aggression against that country in
1972 [see 1687th-1694th meetings]. And even in this
case that aggression was committed from Namibian
territory.

32. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have just received a letter
from the representative of Mauritius containing a
request that he be invited in accordance with rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. I propose,
if I hear no objection, to invite the representative
of Mauritius to participate in the discussion, in conformity with the usual practice and with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and the provisional rules of
procedure.
It MJUSso decided.

33. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative of
Mauritius to take the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber on the usual understanding
that he will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when he addresses the Council.

39.. In recent months a new aspect of South Africa’s
illegal occupation of Namibia has finally surfaced. Here
I refer to the total and complete militarization
of
Namibia by the illegal South African regime. For many
years now, indeed as far back as June of last year,
SWAP0 has been warning the world of the intensified
militarization
of Namibia,
but again we have also
warned that last year many of the troops which had
been withdrawn by the racists from Rhodesia were
being redeployed
in Namibia.
The purpose was
essentially twofold: first, to counter the increasing
activities of SWAP0 inside Namibia and, secondly,
to prepare for the extraterritorial
incursions into
neighbouring countries. As the Council is very well
aware of developments in the subcontinent, members
will know that our charges and our warnings at that
time have indeed been confirmed by the very actions
of South Africa.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Ramphul
(Muuritius)
took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chumher.

34.. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
Administrative
Secretary of the South West Africa
People’s Organization
of Namibia and accordingly
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
35. Mr. GAROEB: Mr. President, my delegation is
gratified to extend to you personally comradely felicitations and goodwill upon your assumption of the high
office of the President of the Security Council for
this month. Similarly, Mr. President, for us in SWAPO,
and for Namibians,
it is indeed a source of great
satisfaction and inspiration that the question of Namibia should be considered by the Council under your
able and industrious superintendency.

40. The militarization
of Namibia has not been limited
to the reinforcement and redeployment of the racist
regime’s regular armed forces in Namibia.
Indeed
-perhaps
more importantly-it
also involves the
establishment of new army and air bases at strategic
points ‘throughout Namibia. As has been stated here,
one of the biggpt army and air force bases in the
whole of the African continent is to be completed
sometime next month at the town of Grootfontein,
which is approximately
230 kilometres south of the
Namibian-Angolan
border.

36. May I also express our thanks and appreciation
to the rest of the Council for the opportunity accorded
my movement, once again, to testify before this august
body.
37. This meeting of the Security Council takes place
against the background of grave military and political
developments in southern Africa which, in our view,
constitute a threat to international peace and security,
not only for that troubled region but for the rest of the
international community. Namibia is part and parcel
of the subcontinent of southern Africa. Hence it goes
without saying that Namibia is inevitably caught up

41. It is, of course, inevitable that this militarization
of Namibia has led to increased repression and indiscriminate killing of the Namibians
by the South
African racist troops. During the last quarter of 1975,
hundreds of Namibians-men,
women and childrenwere killed when the racist troops decided to clear
5

a 250-kilometre “security zone” along the NamibianAngolan border. Some of the villages along the border
area were simply wiped out because they were
allegedly harbouring SWAP0 guerrillas. Even today
as I am addressing the Council, Namibians continue
to die as the militarization
process gains momentum
throughout the country. In short, the illegal regime
aims at creating an elaborate military infrastructure
throughout Namibia, and these acts are not indicative
of a country that intends to withdraw from Namibia,
as South Africa alleges.

only in Namibia but in the whole subregion of southern
Africa. The situation in Namibia has further deteriorated since the Council met in May and June last
year [1823rd-1829th meetings]. In this context, the
Security Council has an obligation to itself and indeed
to the suffering people of Namibia to compel South
Africa to meet the demands set forth in its resolution 366 (1974). The Council must still take action in
respect of that resolution.
46. There are certain members of the Security Council who could but, unfortunately,
will not adopt
effective measures to reach an amicable solution to
the Namibian problem. Security Council resolution
366 (1974) of December 1974 provided an opportunity
and an excellent basis for such a solution. Unfortunately, South Africa, consistent with its defiance
of the United Nations, not only flouted the spirit in
which the Council addressed that resolution but
rejected the demands expressed therein. Naturally,
the logical question the Council addressed itself to
was: what next?

42. This, in our view, is proof enough that South
Africa, contrary to its pretentious statements to the
effect that it does not want an inch of Namibia and
would be glad to get rid of it, is in actual fact bent
on entrenching its illegal occupation on every inch of
Namibian soil for an indefinite period. We are not
convinced by the statement of the racist regime of
South Africa making it appear as if it were about to
give in and to withdraw from Namibia, and we never
shall be convinced.

47. The point is that we in SWAP0 felt then and
still feel today that the Western permanent members
of the Security Council, through their traditional ties
with South Africa, are in a position to bring their
influence to bear on South Africa to comply with the
Council’s resolutions. The Western permanent members of the Council had a golden opportunity
to
exercise their influence on South Africa, especially
in May and June 1975, to comply with the Council’s
resolutions. Regrettably, that opportunity
was lost
because the Western Powers decided to treat Africa
and indeed the world to a triple veto [see 1829th
mcvting]. SWAP0 of Namibia cannot help but deplore
in the strongest terms the triple veto cast then by the
three Western permanent members, namely, the
United Kingdom, France and the United States.’ We
do so with a very clear conscience, knowing full well
that the overwhelming majority of the world agrees
with us.

43. Perhaps more disturbing than the foregoing, and
bearing particularly
in mind South Africa’s recent
extraterritorial
incursions into neighbouring countries,
is the ugly reality of South Africa’s becoming a nuclear
Power. Those who have been following the world
press must be aware of the collaboration that South
Africa has received from the Western Powers in this
exercise of becoming a nuclear Power. So we may
very well ask who can guarantee that South Africa
cannot, in the not too distant future, precipitate a
nuclear war in the subcontinent of southern Africa,
just as it is currently involved in extraterritorial
excursions into the neighbouring territories. This is
food for thought for the African countries, because
there is no guarantee that South Africa, if and when it
does become a nuclear Power, will not commit acts
of aggression against the rest of Africa.
44. The Security Council is meeting now at. the
request of the General Assembly, which in its resolution 3399 (XXX) urges the Council to convene urgently
in order to take without delay effective measures, in
accordance with the relevant chapters of the Charter
of the United Nations and with resolutions of the
General Assembly, to compel the illegal occupation
regime of South Africa to withdraw its administration
from Namibia. This meeting of the Council is expected
to give full meaning and, above all, concrete expression
to that solemn request of the Assembly. It is the
exclusive responsibility
and duty of the Council to
ensure the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of
South Africa from Namibia and in doing so to bring
about the restoration of the inalienable right of the
Namibian people to self-determination
and national
independence.
45. We have sought to demonstrate
illegal occupation regime in Namibia
aggravating the political and military

48. We in SWAPO, and indeed the people of Namibia,
have long accepted the historical imperative that we
are our own liberators. We believe very strongly that
the liberation of Namibia can be brought about only
by the Namibians themselves. We in SWAP0 also
believe that that liberation can be achieved only
through armed struggle. We come to the United
Nations and indeed to the Security Council because
we believe that they have an obligation to help us,
but, perhaps more importantly,
we believe that the
Couucil and the relevant institutions of the United
Nations and ourselves are partners in the exercise
of the liberation struggle, and it is this obligation,
more than anything else, that the Council must live
up to. The viability and effectiveness of the United
Nations may be tested once and for all on the question
of Namibia.

how far the
has gone in
situation not

49. For another thing, we maintain that all the
relevant chapters of the Charter of the United Nations
6

.

have not yet been exhausted on the question of
Namibia. Therefore SWAP0 will continue to insist
that as long as South Africa’s illegal occupation continues in Namibia the United Nations must take all
the necessary measures to de.feat that rkgime’s sinister
designs in Namibia.
In this respect, I would take
this opportunity to refer the Council to the Declaration
of Dakar on Namibia and Human Rights of 1976,
[S/11939, annex], adopted by the Dakar International
Conference on Namibia and Human Rights.

55.

Mr.

CAMARA
(Guinea) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, allow me first of all, on behalf
of my delegation and on behalf of the Group of African
States, which my country, Guinea, has the outstanding
honour of representing as Chairman for January 1976,
to extend our thanks for this opportunity to participate
in the Council’s debate and for enabling me thus to
set forth the iriews of Africa on a problem which is
of constant concern to the international
community.
Before I do that, however, r should like to say how
proud we feel at seeing you, Mr. President, presiding
over the Security Council at this very imp&tant time.
I wish also to convey to you the regrets of the head
of our Mission, who has been prevented from coming
to New York. as a result of an equally important
commitment.
He thus is unable to participate personally in the Council’s work.

French):

JO. My delegation has requested this timk for a
hearing before the Security Council to make a humble
and solemn submission, with the kind indulgence of
the members of the Council, without prejudice to all
the previous resolutions of the United Nations, that
the Security Council should make a declaration that,
in order that the people of Namibia may exercise their
right to self-determination
and independence and to
express themselves freely on the constitutional
processes and political development, free national elections under the supervision and control of the United
Nations should be held for the whole of Namibia as
a single political entity. Many times the South African
Government has claimed that SWAP0 does not have
national support in Namibia.
When we make this
proposal in fact we issue a challenge to the South
African Government, hoping that a peaceful solution
can still be found, to conduct national elections under
the supervision and control of the United Nations,
so that we might prove to the world, and, kyrhaps
more importantly, to South Africa, that. SWAP0 does
command
national
support throughout
Namibia.
SWAP0 proposes this course of action here in the
face of the deteriorating situation in Namibia which
now constitutes a threat to international
peace and
security and which is a direct result of the triple veto
which was cast in this chamber.

56. Having heard the brilliant
stateinents of the
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia
and of the representative of SWAPO, I feel that the
task entrusted to my delegation will be easy, for
the question of Namibia has a long history and the
position of Africa is sufficiently well known. While
not wishing to dwell ‘on the painful situation before
the Security Council, I should like, however, to highlight certain events and to make certain brief
comments.
.
57. For 30 years now the United Nations has been
discussing the question of Namibia. As early as 1946
the South African tigime refused to place Namibia
under international
trusteeship and proceeded to
annex that Territory on the basis of the shameful
consultations held with tribal chiefs whom it had
chosen itself. In resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, the General Assembly decided that the
Mandate of South Africa over Namibia, which at that
time was known as South West Africa, was terminated
and that that Territory henceforth would be the direct
responsibility of the United Nations.

51. Before I conclude; I should like to undersdore
our insistence on United Nations supervision and
control of any elections that might be conducted in
Namibia. We could not accept elections under South
African control and supervision, because the very
presence of South Africa in Namibia is illegal, and
giving South Africa an opportunity to conduct any
elections wouid mean tacit approval of South Africa’s
presence in Namibia.

58. We all recall how immediately thereafter, namely,
on 19 May 1967, the General Assembly decided to
set up a Council which would administer that Territory
until independence and which would immediately make
cdntact with the South African authorities in order to
establish procedures for the transfer of administration
over the Territory. We ,a11:know what the Pretoria
Gqvemment
has done since that time. Throughout
the years it has continued to defy the authority of the
international
community,
which has constantly
stressed that the continued occupation of Namibia
by South Africa is illegal.

52. Finally, we wouId also insist that, prior to the
holding of any elections in Namibia, South Africa must
withdraw its illegal administration. Then and only then
can there be free elections and fair play.
53. In conclusion, Mr. President, we thank you’and
the other members of the Security Council f& giving
us this opportunity
to state our case on behalf of
SWAP0 and the people of Namibia.

59. The General Assembly, like the Security Council, then endeavoured to work out principles for a
solution. Thus almost 10 years ago the United Nations
put an end to South Africa’s Mandate and assumed
direct responsibility
for the Territory and for the
people of Namibia. Throughout all those years the
General Assembly and the Security Council adopted
many resolutions which have remained dead letters.

54. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Guinea. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to niake his statement.
7

.

60. In this connexion, we need refer only to Security
Council resolution 366 (1974), which was unanimously
adopted on 17 December 1974, and which condemns
the illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia by
South Africa, Indeed that Security Council resolution
is very clear: it demands that South Africa make a
solemn,declaration
that it will comply with the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations and the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 21 June 1971 in regard to Namibia and that it
recognize the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia
as a nation. That resolution also demands that South
Africa take the necessary steps to effect the withdrawal, in accordance with Security Council resolutions 264 (1969) and 269 (1969), of its illegal administration maintained in Namibia and to transfer power to
the people of Namibia with the assistance of the
United Nations. It further demands that South Africa,
pending the transfer of power, comply fully, in spirit
and in practice, with the provisions of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, abolish the application
in Namibia of all racially discriminatory and politically
repressive laws and practices, particularly
those
relating to Bantustans and homelands and accord
unconditionally
to all Namibians currently in exile
for political reasons full facilities for return to their
country without risk of arrest, detention, intimidation
or imprisonment.

the territorial integrity of Namibia and that the racist
regime of Pretoria should recognize SWAP0 as the
sole representative of the Namibian people. It demanded further the liberation of all Namibian political
prisoners detained both in Namibia and in South
Africa.
63. OAU also condemned the strengthening ,of the
military establishment of South Africa-in Namibia, as
well as the so-called constitutional conference which
the illegal administration
in Namibia had imposed on
the Namibian people. OAU made an appeal to all
member States asking them to comply strictly with the
the decision of the United Nations to prevent any
investment
in Namibia
under South African occupation.
64. At its thirtieth session, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 3399 (XXX) in which it recognized
that the situation in Namibia was a threat to intemational peace and security and proposed a number of
measures to enable the United Nations fully to assume
its responsibility for the Territory and for the people of
Namibia. The General Assembly urged the Security
Council urgently to take up again the’ question of
Namibia and to take the necessary measures to implement its resolution 366 (1974) of 17 December 1974.
65. We should like to believe that the Security Council will assume its full responsibility by taking effective
measures to maintain the territorial integrity of Namibia and the inalienable right of the Namibian people to
self-determination
and national independence;

61. The Vorster regime not only rejected those
demands, which the Security Council unanimously
considered minimal, but it also began acting in violation
of the resolutions of the United Nations by viciously
applying its Bantustan policy. That very same regime
organized a so-called constitutional
conference with
its puppets and rejected the principle of national elections held under the auspices and supervision of the
United Nations. However, to our deep regret, in
June 1975 France, the United Kingdom and the United
States of America used their right of veto to prevent
the Security Council from taking a decision. Thus they
opposed an embargo on the sale of arms to South
Africa under the terms of Chapter VII of the Charter.
The Security Council then faced a situation in which
its position on Namibia was indeed very clear, but in
which its authority was attenuated because of the
hesitation or refusal of certain Powers to take effective
action against the South African regime under the
terms of the Charter. The need for such action has
been proved now that South Africa, strengthened by
encouragement
from the West, is using Namibian
territory as a base for aggression against the new
State of. Angola.

66. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
67.

Mr.

RAHAL
(Algeria) (interpretation
from
In its resolution 3399 (XXX), the General
Assembly called on the Security Council to resume
consideration of the question of Namibia and to take
the measures necessary to implement. resolution 366

French):

(1974).
68. In implementation
of the latter resolution, the
Council had already met from 30 May to 6 June 1975,
but had been unable to take any decision since the
only draft resolution which was then submitted to it for
its approval, as we know, met with the negative votes
of three permanent members.

69. The unanimity which was revealed in favour of
resolution 366 (1974) had nevertheless given rise to
some hope that the Council was at last in a position
to assume the responsibilities assigned to it under the
Charter of the United Nations. We know that there is
absolutely no need for us to recall the nature and the
scope of those responsibilities.
Some of the principal
imembers of the Council have already and on several
occasions had an opportunity
to specify them and
emphasize their importance. Our disappointment
was
all the greater on noting the paralysis of the Council

62. At its twelfth ordinary session, the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), held at Kampala from 28 July
to 1 August 1975, demanded that South Africa withdraw its illegal administration
from the Territory of
Namibia. It also demanded that South Africa respect
the right of the Namibian people to self-determination
and national independence, that South Africa respect
8

in a situation recognized by it as being detrimental
to the maintenance of peace and security in the region
and its inability to define its action when it was
unanimous in its assessment of the legal, political
and human aspects of the situation.

as well as strategic control over all the southern part
of the African continent, is also an immediate and no
less serious danger for all other African countries
which are thereby threatened in. their own security.
The present intervention
by South African armed
forces in Angola is but a sample of the way in which
the racist rkgime of Pretoria, relying on aggressive
behaviour and a military power the importance of
which is no secret, effectively threatens the peace
and security of that region.

70. The problem of Namibia actually has been of
concern to the Organization since its establishment.
There is therefore no -need to proceed to a tedious
repetition of its various elements. What is clear in this
question is that, by a decision of the General Assembly,
confirmed by the Security Council, South Africa’s
Mandate over Namibia has come to an end, and thus
South Africa’s presence in that Teiritory
is illegal.
This is what was confirmed by the International Court
of Justice in its advisory opinion of 21 June 1971.
Accordingly, in. many of its resolutions, including of
course resolution 366 (1974)., the Security Council has
demanded that South Africa “take the necessary
steps to effect the withdrawal.. . of its illegal administration maintained in Namibia and to transfer power to
the people of Namibia with the assistance of the
United Nations”.

75. .However, the problem for the Security Council
is no longer one of becoming convinced of the harmful
and odious character of apai-theid policy or of the
need for respect for the rights of the African population of Namibia. The numerous resolutions already
adopted by the Council on the subject are sufficient.
to reveal that the opinion of the Council is totally
in accord with that of the international community.
The problem which is of concern to us, and which
primarily of course is of concern to the members of
the Council, is what measures should be adopted to
compel South ,Africa to comply with the decisions
which have already been adopted. The very authority
of this institution and its credibiliiy among all members
of the international community are at stake.

71. South Africa, by refusing to comply with this
request, first of all fails to fulfil the obligations it freely
entered into on becoming a Member of the Organization, in particular those arising out of Article 25 of the
Charter. The fact that it persists in this negative
attitude, despite unanimous and vigorous disapproval
expressed throughout the entire world, ultimately
reflects a feeling of scorn for the international community and of defiance with respect to the Organization.

76. After having appealed in vain to South Africa to
withdraw from Namibia and to hand over to the United
Nations the Mandate is received from the League of
Nations, the Security Council attempted to weaken
Pretoria’s obstinacy by entrusting the SecretaryGeneral with a mission of information and negotiation.
Unfortunately,
we know that the sole effect of that
operation was to give the Council further proof of the
stubbornness of South Africa in defying the resoiutions of the Organization and in pursuing a policy
the culmination of which would in fact be the merging
of Namibia with the South African Republic.

72. Furthermore,
we know that the behaviour of
the Pretoria authorities with respect to the United
Nations is but a projection of their stubborn resistance
to all decisions intended to combat the odious rkgime
of upurtheid. In truth, South Africa thereby placed
itself in the position of an outlaw vis-%-vis the interna:
tional conimunity at the very moment when, expressing
its support for the Charter of the United Nations, it
pledged to respect the spirit and the letter of the Charter
and to participate in the efforts of all peoples to create
a more just world in which fundamental human rights,
the dignify and value of the human person and the
equality of rights between men and women would be
respected.
73. South Africa’s occupation of Namibia is not only
illegal, it is dangerous. It is dangerous first because
it offers a field for developing the policy of crpartheid,
to which the population of a Territory not a part of
the ‘South African Republic ‘is subjected. This policy
of racial segregation, there as etsewhere, has as its
sole purpose, as we all know; to ensure that the white
population enjoys a pdsition of supremacy in exploiting
the riches of the country for its exclusive benefit.

77. Throughout
the years, the Security Council,
with the aim of exercising pressure on the South
African Government,
has adopted various measures
directed in particular against its economic interests.
Thus; in various resolutions the Council has called on
all States to refrain from having any relations with
South Africa which would indicate recognition of its
authority over Namibia, to see to it that their companies
or companies under their control cease all relations
which they might have had with commercial
or
industrial compar$es or concessions in Namibia, to
grant no loan, credit guarantee or other financial support which their citizens or companies might use to
facilitate relations or trade with Namibia, to discourage
their citizens or companies from making any investmGnts In Namibia,
to grant such investments ,in
Namibia no protection against possible claitis made by
any future legal Government of Namibia and to discourage tourism and emigration to Namibia.

74. But the presence of South Africa in Namibia,
by enabling the Pretoria tigime to extend its military

78. What can we say about all these measures save
that in the end they had no effect. Not that they
9

were in themselves inoperative had they been scrupulously complied with by all Members of the Organization. We know that; regrettably, this was not
so since it is well known that these recommendations
are infringed by members of the Security Council
itself whose links with South Africa are no doubt for
them so important as to make them forgetful of their
obligations to the rest of the world community.

themselves propose the measures whereby, according
to them, previous decisions may be implemented.
We believe them when they join us in condemning
apartheid;
we believe them when they qualify the
occupation of Namibia by South Africa as illegal; we
believe them, too, when they join us in demanding
the withdrawal by South Africa from Namibian tenitory. But, this being so, they cannot at the same time
seek refuge in a systematically negative attitude by
refusing to join in all measures which have been
proposed to compel South Africa to abide by the
decisions of the Security Council. Perhaps they will
indicate to the Council a better course so that finally,
with their co-operation, we may attain the objectives
which we cherish and which they solemnly declare to
be theirs as well. At any rate I can assure them that
in that event, both in this forum as well as outside
the Security Council, they will have an audience that
is most attentive and anxious to be understanding.

79. The General Assembly, for its part, has from
year to year endeavoured to express its condemnation
of the policy of South Africa in Namibia as well as of
its policy of apartheid. These reprimands had no effect,
so at its twenty-ninth session the General Assembly
decided not to allow the South African delegation
to participate in its work. This decision, which was
adopted by the vast majority of the Assembly, nevertheless has been criticized by certain countries, among
them, of course, those which have so far refused to
abide by the resolutions of the Council. Whatever
may have been said about this attitude of the Assembly,
and whatever might still be said, now this decision to
place South Africa under quarantine has so far been
the only concrete measure taken by the Organization
in accordance with its principles and regulations which
is likely to bring about real effects and to command
respect for an institution which itself had begun to
have doubts about its mission.

83. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Mauritius. I invite the representative of
Mauritius to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
84. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius):
First of all,
Mr. President, I would like to thank you very much
indeed for allowing me to speak and, through you,
the members of the Security Council. We have grave
responsibilities before us as we consider the question
of Namibia,
which has been the lengthiest of the
disputes before the international community today and
is at the present time one of the most urgent. We all
know the long history of the attempts by the League
of Nations and the United Nations to fulfil their
responsibilities
to the Namibian people, first under
the Mandate and then in terms of the opinions of the
International
Court of Justice, which in its advisory
opinion of 21 June 1971 declared that the United
Nations was directly responsible for the Territory.

80. This measure adopted by the General Assembly
is necessarily limited in scope. But the Charter makes
provisions for other far more effective measures to
be applied in order to ensure compliance with international law. In fact, it is incumbent upon the Security
Council to resort to such measures. We can understand the hesitation of certain members of the Council
to resort immediately
to the extreme measures contained in the Charter. We understand them in so far
as this reticence is not a cover-up for concealed
complicity
with the delinquent State or for selfish
interests which are given primacy over the higher
interests of the international community.

85. It is no secret that the United Nations and the
people of the world have been frustrated in their
attempts to carry out these responsibilities
by the
obstruction and use of force on the part of South
Africa. In recent months we have witnessed the
biggest military build-up ever seen in Namibia, which
is aimed both at crushing popular resistance to the
illegal occupation regime inside Namibia and at the
same time at armed intervention in the neighbouring
independent and sovereign country of Angola. We may
recall that the League of Nations Mandate expressly
forbade the militarization
of any part of Namibia.
This provision has always been flouted by the
stationing of South African troops at the Namibian
town of Walvis Bay and at the Katima Mulilo base
in the Caprivi Strip. However, this pales into relative
insignificance in comparison with the massive buildup of South African armed forces, particularly in the
northern part of Namibia.
New bases have been
created, the biggest at Grootfontein, used as launching
pads and supply facilities for South African troops

81. But in the case of Namibia these hesitations,
this reticence seem to us to have no justification
whatsoever. Condemnation of the attitude of South
Africa was unanimous in the Security Council, and
the terms of resolution 366 (1974), which was also
adopted unanimously
by the Council, set a very
specific objective for the action to be undertaken.
And yet, last June the permanent members opposed
a draft resolution the purpose of which was precisely
to reflect in concrete measures the provisions of
resolution 366 (1974).
82. Are we going to find ourselves once again in the
same situation? We believe that, a repetition of what
has already occurred would be extremely embarrassing
to the very dignity of the Council and for the future
of international relations. The countries which adopted
resolution 366 (1974) but which used their veto against
the draft resolution for implementation
must no doubt
10

and aircraft currently committing
sion against Angola.

ment, not to mention mercenaries or military personnel from their own countries, which are being
used in South Africa’s intervention in Angola from its
bases in Namibia. My delegation .wishes to challenge
the .countries which either are reported as being
involved in this illegal occupation or have openly
admitted their collaboration to explain their position.
I refer in particular to one major nuclear Power, a
permanent member of the Security Council, whose
President referred to its widely reported involvement
in his recent State of the Union message to its national
Congress. I am also concerned about the open sale of
arms by another permanent member of the Security
Council, regardless of the fact that helicopters and
aircraft from there are reported to be used by South
Africans in their current adventure in Namibia and
Angola. A new element is to be introduced also by the
sale by yet another permanent member of the Security
Council of the most modem electronic ‘detection
system to South Africa, which is clearly intended for
use in Namibia and Angola. Reports have also been
published of the involvement of the mercenaries, as
well as the weapons, of two Western European countries in the same operation. To quote again from
the Dakar Declaration:

gross acts of aggres-

86. This use of the illegally occupied Territory of
Namibia to carry out aggression in Angola creates a
situation in the area which is a threat to international
peace and security, particularly since it greatly aggravates the degree of foreign intervention on all sides
in the tragic conflict within Angola. It was the intervention in November of an armoured column, which we
now know to have been organized, equipped and
directed by South African armed forces operating
from Namibia,
that suddenly upset the balance of
forces established
prior to independence
and
determined
predominantly
by the Angolan people
themselves, a balance which had resulted in the
establishment of a strong and responsible government
at Luanda which my Government,
along with the
majority of the members of OAU, has recognized as
the legitimate Government of Angola. In the view of
my delegation, South Africa committed
a blatantly
illegal and aggressive act against an independent and
sovereign country on the borders of Namibia, an act
which makes extremely urgent the elimination of its
illegal and forcible occupation of Namibia itself. Until
that is achieved, Africa will be under a continuous
threat of South African aggression.

“It is high time for the States of Africa to make
it clear to the, countries which are supporting South
Africa in this way that they cannot continue to do
so while claiming the friendship of the peoples of
Africa.‘* [f&f.]

87. I wish to bring to the attention of the Security
Council the Declaration of Dakar on Namibia and
Human Rights, adopted by the Dakar International
Conference on Namibia and ,Human Rights earlier
this month. I particularly wish to stress certain parts
of the Declaration which underline the urgency of
dealing with South Africa’s occupation of Namibia.
The Declaration states, for example:

89. In the past few days there have been unconfirmed
reports that South African troops would withdraw
from the Angolan conflict. While we welcome such
a possibility and urge that it be realized immediately,
there are disquieting reservations that we have to make
on this issue. The first is that a withdrawal by South
African troops back to Namibia is in no sense a solution to the serious threat to peace in this area. South
Africa must withdraw totally both from Angola and
from the illegally occupied international Territory of
Namibia.

“Maintenance
of the occupation of Namibia by
South Africa and of the system of apartheid
is a
continuing threat to peace and security in southern
Africa, the whole of Africa and the world...
“The recent reinforcement of the military presence of South Africa in Namibia must be condemned
as a means of consolidating the illegal occupation
of that country and of repressing the legitimate
resistance of the people of Namibia. What is more,
the use of the Territory of Namibia as a base for
intervention in the internal affairs of African countries, as is at present the case in Angola, aggravates
the threat to international peace and security and
must cease immediately...

90. However, it is likely that South African forces,
if they do withdraw from the present battle zone-or
non-operational area, as some call it-have no intention of withdrawing even as far as the Namibian
border. Persistent reports in’the South African press
and elsewhere, monitored by the United Nations
Secretariat, indicate that the South African Govemment intends to annex a large area of southern Angola,
on the pretext that it has the right to occupy the area
of the Cunene Dam scheme and to secure the Namibian
occupation against armed resistance by SWAPO, the
Namibian liberation movement. To that end, plans
have been drawn up for the deportation of perhaps
60,000 people from the frontier region.

“The military and economic assistance furnished
to South Africa by certain States must also be openly
denounced and manifestly combated by all the forces
of progress. Arms sales, nuclear co-operation agreements... in South Africa or Namibia constitute acts
of sheer complicity with the policies of uparth~~id.”
[S/17939, rrnncx.]

91. It is vital that the Security Council consider this
apparent intention of the South African occupation
tigime and stand ready to condemn it if the plan is

88. A number of countries have serious charges to
answer in relation to the supply of arms and equip11

To this end. mv delegation invites all members of the
Security Cou&ii, andparticularly
the Governments of
the Western European permanent members of the
Security Council and their allies, to make clear their
position on South Africa’s occupation of Angolan
territory, using Namibia as a stepping-stone.

indeed carried out. I should like to remind the Council
that the Cunene Dam scheme, contrary to the blatant
propaganda of the South African regime; has no
relation to the welfare of the African population of
Namibia. Its purpose is in fact to procure water and
electrical power from sources inside Angola, in order to
speed up the plunder of Namibia’s natural mineral
resources. It is this power which is intended for use in
the massive new uranium mine at Rossing, which the
companies of one permanent member of the Security
Council and of an Asian country-and
that Asian
country, incidentally, also is currently a member of the
Security Council-helped
to underwrite by their
massive advance purchasing contracts made in 1970,
and in which the Governments of one Western member
of the Security Council and of a European country
are also involved.

94. I should like to conclude by assuring you of my
Government’s
full support for the draft resolution
which will be introduced shortly. In the light of the
urgency of effecting South Africa’s removal from
Namibia as from Angola, it is imperative that the
Security Council show a united front in support of the
ideals of the Charter of the United Nations and the
fundamental concepts of international
law. We are
calling for elections in Namibia, under United Nations
supervision and control. This has been carried out
extremely well by the United Nations in various
different contexts; all that could prevent such elections
in the case of Namibia is the intransigence of the
South African occupation regime, using all the force
at its disposal, and possibly with the collusion of
other Governments. The vote on the draft resolution
to be introduced, I submit, will be an acid test for the
commitment
of Governments to the cause of democracy throughout the world, and to freedom and selfdetermination in Namibia.

92. The Security Council has already called on all
States to refrain from investment in the occupied territory, and to discourage their companies and nationals
from doing so. I need hardly add that the acceleration
of mining operations to plunder the irreplaceable
resources of Namibia is in direct violation of previous
Security Council resolutions and also of Decree No. 1
for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia
adopted by the United Nations Council for Namibia
in 1974.’

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

93. I therefore wish to stress that not only is the
Cunene Dam scheme a further challenge to the authority of the United Nations and international
law in
Namibia, but the South African intention to occupy
the area of Angola surrounding it is a blatant provocation. We must be alert to the plans of the South
African regime to perpetuate such illegal occupation,
and it must be clearly stated that such occupation of
Angola stands condemned by the international community, just-as does the illegal occupation of Namibia.

Notes
’ Legui Cansequences
for Stutes af the Continued Presence of
South Africa
in Namibia
(South
West Africa)
notwithstanding
&carity
Council
Resolution
276 (1970), Advisory
Opinion,
I.C.J.
Reports
1971, p. 16.
2 Commission
of Enquiry
into South West Africa Affairs, established in 1962 by the Republic
of South Africa under the chairmanship of Mr. F. H. Odendaal.
’ See Official
Records
c>f the General
Assembly.
Twenty-ninth
Session. Supplement
No. 24 A, para. 84.

12

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans ks librairis et ks agencesdepositaires du
monde entier. !nformez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adreasez-vous& : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Gen&.

COMMENT-

/

KAK

~OJlYPNTh

V3AAHKJl

OPrAHHIAl&AH

QIihEAHHEHHhIX

HAUNR

M3nanm
OpraHmaunn
OCVbemmexHblx
HaqnR
UO*HO icynqm
a K~~H)K~+IX marawinax
H aremcmax
~0 acex pafionax
uwpa. I-Iaaonnre
cnpaam
06 uwawvix
n
mawens miwcnos4
sfarmune
xm nnmme
no anpecy i Oprami3amin
OtYbenwnenxb*x
H~uHR, Cerun~
no nponazue nmanwfi,
Hblb-tIOpK
tin&i )Keneaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casasdistribuidoras en
todas partea de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o C&bra.

Litho in United Nations. New York

00300

83-60801~May

1984-2,200
