UN LIBRARY
IFEB1 4 1995

UNITED NAT~mr?s

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2601st

MEETING:

26 JULY 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/260 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 24 July 1985 from the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17351);
Letter dated 25 July 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mali to the.
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17356). .

1

WPV.2601

,>;;
‘_

:
:

:.
.

.-I

:

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security ‘Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
‘
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January !965, became fully operative on that date.

‘,

2601st MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 26 July 1985, at 11 a.m.
letters from the representatives of the Central African
Republic, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic,
Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic and Zaire in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

President: Mr. Guennadi I. OUDOVENKO
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Unioti of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional agenda (WAgendaf2601)
1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gbezera-Bria (CentraI African Republic), Mr. Worku (Ethiopia), Mr. Hucke
(German Democratic Republic), Mr. Ba (Senegal), Mr. EIFattal (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Bagbeni Adeito Nzengeya (Zaire) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.

of the agenda

2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 24 July 1985 from the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17351);

3. Mr. MOHAMMED
(Trinidad and Tobago): It is a
pleasure for me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for this month. I am fully convinced
that your well-known experience and skill will bring success to the deliberations of the Council.

Letter dated 25 July 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mali to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 7356)

l7te meeting was called to order at 12.35 p.m.
4. Last year the racist regime in South Africa introduced
a new constitution which continued the disenfranchisement of the black majority, thereby perpetuating the heinous system of apartheid. Subsequently my delegation
warned that that action would provide the impetus for an
escalation of violence and the intensification of repression
in South Africa, and that is precisely what is happening.
Since then, more than 500 people have been killed, and
violence has become endemic.

Adoption of the agenda
lhe agenda was adopted

I& questionof South Africa:
Letter dated 24 July 1985 from the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (Wl7351);
Lettei dated 25 July 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mali to the United Nations addressed to
the Presidentof the Security Council (S/17356).

5. The racist regime has resorted to every instrument of
the State apparatus as a tool for repression and State violence, and the declaration of a state of emergency on 20
July 1985 is but the latest manifestation to enable that
minority regime to pursue unbridled repression. The system of apartheid is the root cause of violence in South
Africa. By means of that pernicious system, the majority of
the people of South Africa-over
80 per cent of the
population-are
terrorized, brutalized, “marginalized”,
tortured and murdered with increasing ferocity and
savagery.

1. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation’ from Russian): In
accordance with the decisions -&ken at the 2600th meeting,
I invite the representative of Mali to take a place at the
Council table; I invite the representatives of Cuba, Kenya
and South Africa to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Niare’ (Mali) took a
pIace at the Council tabIe; Mr. Oramas OIiva (Cuba), Mr.

Mudho (Kenya) and Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council

6. In order to ensure the preservation of apartheid within
its own borders, the racist regime of South Africa pursues
a concomitant policy of regional aggression and destabilization of the Governments of neighbouring countries, and
it has continued its illegal occupation of Namibia, where it

chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received
1

has instituted its abhorrent system of apartheid. We must
therefore conclude that the system of apartheid pursued by
South Africa, together with its conjunctive actions, creates
a situation which threatens international peace and
security.

delegation, Sir, to express my sincere congratulations to
you on your assumption of the presidency for the month
of July. We are sure that under your wise guidance, and
thanks to your diplomatic experience, the Council will be
able to shoulder its responsibilities tinder the Charter of
the United Nations.

7. We have gone through a gamut of resolutions and
decisions in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly. It was only four weeks ago that the Council
deliberated the question of southern Africa; first we dealt
with the illegal occupation of Namibia, and then we followed that with consideration of the naked aggression perpetrated against Angola and Botswana. In each case, a
stem warning was given to the South African rkgime that
the continuation of its policy of apartheid would result in
more stringent action being taken against it by the intemational community. We have issued warnings, condemnations, affirmations and reaffirmations, but all of them have
been to no avail. To the contrary, we have been treated
with utter contempt and disdain by the r&me in South
Africa, and we are witnessing an escalation of unmitigated
and callous violence by it.

12. I take this opportunity also to pay a deserved tribute
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and to the representative of Trinidad and Tobago for the way in which they led
the work of the Council in June.
13. For the fourth time in seven months, the Council
must consider the situation in South Africa. This reflects
the seriousness of the situation and the need to take effective action to put an end to the chronic violence in that
country. After studying the tragic events which have
shaken South Africa in recent months, we wish to make
the following cibservations.
14. First of ail, the racist authorities of Pretoria, notwithstanding repeated condemnations by the international
community, are not prepared .to abandon the repulsive
system of apartheid and will shrink from. nothing to preserve the white minority’s position of domination and privilege. Moreover, the majority of the South African
population, notwithstanding the massacres and arrests, is
more than ever determined to persist in their liberation
struggle.

8. For how long must the international community allow
the racist r&ime in South Africa to continue its institutional repression and violence? For how long must we
allow one country to flout the decisions of the United
Nations? This state of affairs has been allowed to continue
for far too long. The Council must now act decisively to
ease the suffering of some 22 million South Africans living
under the heel of South African racism and oppression.

15. The Pretoria r$ime’s proclamation on 20 July of this
year of a state of emergency in 36 magisterial districts in
South Africa was intended only to legalize the terror perpetrated by South Africa’s forces of repression. Indeed, since
the entry into force of the socalled Internal Security Act,
the South African police have had at their disposal a host
of repressive measures, including the ability to carry out
arbitrary arrests, to engage in torture and to eliminate
hostile witnesses. The fact is that the establishment of this
state of emergency reflects the disarray of the South African regime in the face of the increasing turbulance and the
growing fervour of the demonstrators.

9. It is the view of my delegation that the regime in South
Africa would not have been able to show such brazen
defiance of the international community without the open
and tacit support of some countries. We feel that the international community has been tolerant of the situation in
South Africa for far too long. We have given more than
adequate time for the sceptics to discover through bitter
experience that policies of constructive dialogue have not
worked and will not work. In fact, those policies have not
only produced contemptuous intransigence by South
Africa, but have given the racist regime moral support for
its policy and practice of violence.

16. The scope of the resistance of the oppressed people of
South Africa, supported by the international condemnation of the apartheid system, wdrries the South African
racist r&me, which has become increasingly aggressive. It
is high time that the Council shouldered its responsibilities
and took concrete steps to compel the Pretoria authorities
to dismantle the. apartheid system and to renounce
violence.

10. I reiterate that the repressive system of apartheid, the
noncompliance
by South Africa with United Nations
resolutions and decisions and the acts of aggression committed by the racist regime constitute a threat to intemational peace and security. Appeals, warnings, condemnations and policies of constructive dialogue have all failed.
We must take more effective action, and the time for that
action is now. The procedure and mechanism formulated
by the drafters of the Charter of the United Nations for
ensuring the maintenance of peace and security must be
invoked against the recalcitrant minority rtgime. We call
on the Council to adopt immediately’ effective measures
against the racist r&me of South Africa, as provided for
under the Charter, including the imposition of sanctions
under Chapter VII.

17. It is encouraging to note that some countries considered to be allies of the South African racist rPgime are
beginning to put pressure on the supporters of apartheid,
but the recommended-measures are unilateral and vohmtary, and are not enough to weaken that bastion of racism.
Only concerted international action to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against So&th Africa can bring
about peaceful change in that country.

Il. Mr. RAKOTONDRAMBOA
(Madagascar) (interpretation from French): I wish first of all, on behalf of my

18. For its part, the Democratic Republic of Madagascar
unreservedly condemns the blind repression carried out by
2

the South African police and armed forces against the
black population, which asks only for recognition of its
inalienable rights. We demand that the state of siege in
South Africa be lifted immediately, and we call on the
Council to declare that the apartheid regime poses a
serious threat to international peace and security. That
would enable the Council, under Chapter VII of the Charter, to consider the imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa.

and we fully support the statement made by the representative of Mali.
25. Senegal has denounced and will continue to
denounce all forms of oppression and discrimination
which hinder individual liberty. This is why, as soon as the
emergency measures decreed by South Africa were
announced, President Abdou Diouf, as current Chairman
of the OAU, made the following statement:

19. We wish to thank the sponsors of the draft resolution
before the Council in document S/17354 for their initiative. We should have preferred a stronger text which would
have sent an unequivocal message to South Africa. We
hope that the consultations.now under way will lead to a
consensus text.

“The segregationist South African Government,
increasingly unabie to cope with the resistance opposed
by our black brothers to its policy of apartheid, has just
decreed a state of emergency. Thus, the security forces,
left to themselves, are acting in the most complete arbitrariness, oppressing, arresting and assassinating people
who are simply claiming their most elementary rights as
human beings. Africa unanimously summons the international community to bear witness and to assume its
responsibilities. It demands in particular those who
have experienced and so courageously fought nazism in
the interests of mankind as a whole to recollect, to react,
and above all, to adopt the necessary sanctions-in particular, economic sanctions-to ensure that apartheid
meets the same fate as its sinister ancestor. I appeal to
world public opinion and above all to the Governments
of countries to which the Charter of the United Nations
confers prime responsibility for the maintenance of
peace throughout the world. The South African
Government and its accomplices must realize that as
long as apartheid is not totally eliminated, that country,
and beyond that, our world will never know true peace.
Africa, through me, reaffirms its active solidarity with
our colleagues from the ANC (African National Congress of South Africa] and PAC [Pan Africankt Congress
of Azaniu] in their just struggle and reiterates its determination to implement the measures that they have just
drawn up in Addis Ababa in order to bring about the
total elimination of this blot on our century, apartheid.:’

20. Finally, my delegation wishes to pay a tribute to the
heroic resistance of the oppressed people of South Africa
against the apartheid regime. We reaffnm the legitimacy of
its struggle for the elimination of the system of apartheidso
that a united, non-racial, democratic South Africa may
become a reality, not merely a mirage.
21. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of Senegal. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
22. Mr. BA (Senegal) (interpretation from French): At the
outset, Sir, I should like, on behalf of Mr. Abdou Diouf,
President of the Republic of Senegal and current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I am certain, Sir, that given your
talents as a seasoned diplomat, the work of the Security
Council will be crowned with success. I wish also to thank
you and the members of the Council for permitting me to
read out a declaration issued on 24 July at Dakar by President Diouf on the state of emergency declared in South
Africa.

26. Mv countrv. Senegal. and its head of State would
have likkd to givea rno; detailed viewpoint on the odious
situation which still continues to prevail in that part of our
continent. However, in the light of the urgency of the situation and out of courtesy to the members of the Council,
who, we hope, will unequivocally condemn these acts and
will take appropriate measures, we have refrained from
amplifying further on this matter.

23. My whole-hearted congratulations go as well to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of Trinidad and Tobago on the very successful way in which they
led the Council’s debate last month.
24. My country is very pleased by the initiative of the
French Government, first, to call for these emergency
meetings of the Council and, secondly, to impose national
sanctions against the racist regime of South Africa. We are
pleased too by the efforts of the Group of African States,

The meeting rose at 1.0.5 p.m.

3

I

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations pubIications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales seaion, New York or Geneva.
coMMENTsEPBocuRER
LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et les agences d&o&ins
du monde entier. Informez-vous au
de votre lib&e ou ad~ssez-vous B : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes. New York ou 8Ztve.
KAIC l-loJlYmrl%

zi3AAIiml

M3muim
Opra~m3aum1
~areaTCTBF+XBOBCCX~OHZUHapa.

oplxHH3*
HanM

O~%XXE~EE~~

OE%WIx

W

MOJK?IO -TIJ
B zmimcttbtx hmra%t~ax
i-bOJIETCClIpZIBEIiC6U3JIZtHS!IUBaaureM-OM

mramue mu rntmrre uo clllpccy:. Oprtuni3amia
uponaxce H~JI~EE&, Hbto-fiopx
mu
Eeue9a.

06auwrernrarx

HaWt.

C~KIWI no

COMO CONSEGUIR PL7BLICACiONES DE LAS NACZONES UNWAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en lib&as y casasdistriidoras en
todas pates &l mundo. Consulte a su lhero o dir&w a: Naciones U&as, Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Giibra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300.

90-61439-Jammty

1995-1.925
