S/PV.8690

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8690th meeting

Wednesday, 18 December 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Craft/Mr. Barkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Velásquez
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Allen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/938)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-41970 (E)
*1941970*

S/PV.8690

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/938)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Ms. Adele Raemer.
Ms. Raemer is joining via video-teleconference
from Tel Aviv.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/938, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016).
I now give the floor to Special Coordinator Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: On behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, I will devote my regular briefing on the
situation in the Middle East to presenting the twelfth
report on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/938). The report covers
the period between 12 September and 6 December 2019.
As members have already received the written report,
in today’s briefing I will provide a brief update on
developments related to the provisions of the resolution
that have taken place following the submission of the
report to the Council.
2/24

18/12/2019

As detailed in the report, no steps were taken during
the reporting period to “cease all settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem”, as demanded by the Council in paragraph
2 of the resolution.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures also continued across the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Since 6 December, an
additional eight structures were demolished or seized
by the Israeli authorities, resulting in the displacement
of some 20 people.
In its paragraph 6, resolution 2334 (2016)
also “calls for immediate steps to prevent all acts
of violence against civilians”. Unfortunately, the
violence continues, even during the few days since the
submission of the report. In the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, 16 Palestinians were injured in various
incidents, including in clashes with the Israeli security
forces during demonstrations, security operations,
settler-related attacks and other incidents since the end
of the reporting period.
Protests at the Gaza perimeter fence have also
continued. While most demonstrations remained
relatively peaceful, some protesters engaged in violent
activities. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) responded
with riot-dispersal means and live fire, injuring some
38 people. On 17 December, a Palestinian was killed
by an Israeli drone as he approached the perimeter
fence. According to the IDF, the man was armed. Three
rockets were also launched by Gaza militants towards
Israel, causing no injuries.
On 9 December, assailants slashed the tires of more
than 160 Palestinian cars in the Shuafat neighbourhood
of East Jerusalem and sprayed anti-Arab graffiti.
Additional vehicles were vandalized or set on fire in
two villages in Bethlehem and in another two villages
in Ramallah. The Israeli police are investigating the
Shuafat incident.
Several dozen Israeli activists from the Tag Meir
forum visited the Shuafat neighbourhood following the
attack in order to express their rejection of the violence
and their solidarity with Shuafat’s residents. They were
hosted by Hussein and Suha Abu Khdeir, whose son
Mohammad was murdered in a terror attack in 2014.
Resolution 2334 (2016), in its paragraph 7, calls
upon the parties “to refrain from provocative actions,
incitement, and inflammatory rhetoric”. Unfortunately,
19-41970

18/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

such actions and rhetoric have continued. The resolution
also reiterated calls by the Middle East Quartet for
affirmative steps to be taken immediately to reverse
negative trends on the ground that are imperilling the
two-State solution.
In recent weeks, the United Nations has continued
its engagement with senior Palestinian officials and
different factions towards holding inclusive elections
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory. In
preparation for possible 2020 parliamentary and
presidential elections, and upon the request for
technical assistance from Palestine’s Central Elections
Commission, a United Nations electoral needs
assessment mission was deployed to the occupied
Palestinian territory earlier this week. On 10 December,
the Palestinian Authority announced that it had
officially sent a request to Israel to allow Palestinian
residents of East Jerusalem to participate in potential
presidential and legislative elections.
I would like to focus on some of the observations
concerning the implementation of the resolution’s
provisions. In the three years since the Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016), plans for over 22,000 units have
been advanced or approved in West Bank settlements,
including in East Jerusalem. Tenders for approximately
8,000 units have been issued. Those numbers should be
of serious concern to all who continue to support the
establishment of an independent and viable Palestinian
State alongside Israel. Resolution 2334 (2016) clearly
states that the establishment of settlements in the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, has no legal validity and constitutes
a flagrant violation of international law and a major
obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution
and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. Settlements
must therefore cease immediately and completely.
The continued demolition and seizure of
Palestinian structures, including internationally
funded humanitarian projects, is also of significant
concern. That practice is not in line with international
humanitarian law and must stop. Affected populations
must be duly compensated for damages incurred.
Similarly, the high number of Palestinian households in
East Jerusalem with eviction cases filed against them
is alarming. As an occupying Power, Israel must abide
by its obligations under international humanitarian law.
I remain gravely concerned about the continuing
violence, terror attacks against civilians and incitement

S/PV. 8690

to violence, which greatly exacerbate mistrust between
Israelis and Palestinians and are fundamentally
incompatible with a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
The indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars
towards Israeli civilian population centres is prohibited
by international humanitarian law, and Palestinian
militants must immediately cease that practice.
The security situation in Gaza remains very
fragile. The use of force by Israel at the Gaza perimeter
fence and the number of Palestinians killed and injured
also remains a significant concern. Security forces
must exercise maximum restraint and use lethal force
only when strictly necessary and in response to an
imminent threat of death or serious injury. Hamas
must stop the firing of rockets and ensure that protests
remain peaceful. Children should never be the target of
violence or be used or put in harm’s way.
Reports of increased numbers of settler-related
attacks and harassment are also deeply concerning,
particularly around the olive harvest season and in
Hebron. Further measures must be taken to ensure
that Israel fulfils its obligations to protect Palestinian
civilians from violence, including by settlers, and to
investigate and hold accountable those responsible for
such attacks.
Provocative and inflammatory rhetoric during
the reporting period continued to deepen the divide
and fuelled further mistrust between Israelis and
Palestinians. Leaders and officials must set a tone that
encourages tolerance and facilitates increased dialogue.
I am particularly appalled by the racist and
inflammatory statements that aim to spread fear and
hatred among people. I call on all to join the United
Nations to condemn all such statements. Regrettably,
statements on the prospect of annexation of the Jordan
Valley and other parts of the West Bank also continue.
Such steps, if implemented, would constitute a serious
violation of international law and would be destructive
to the realization of the two-State solution and the
prospects for peace.
September marked one year since the start of
the implementation of the United Nations package of
urgent humanitarian and economic interventions for
Gaza. The efforts to date have achieved important
results, yet the situation remains very fragile. Security
risks abound, movement and access restrictions
remain severe and there has been no progress towards
intra-Palestinian unity. Some of the investments made

19-419703/24

S/PV.8690

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to date, as a result of efforts by the United Nations,
will end on 31 December. Without additional funding
and a durable Israeli and Palestinian commitment, the
situation in Gaza could once again be pushed to the
brink of collapse. The stakes are too high to allow that
to happen. All stakeholders must act to prevent the
ongoing crisis in Gaza from deepening further.
On its own, no amount of humanitarian or economic
support will resolve either the situation in Gaza or the
broader conflict. Gaza ultimately requires political
solutions. Taking into consideration its legitimate
security concerns, I urge Israel to ease the restrictions
on the movement of goods and people to and from
Gaza, with the goal of ultimately lifting them. Only
by fully lifting the closures, in line with resolution
1860 (2009), can we hope to sustainably resolve the
humanitarian crisis. It is also critical to end the militant
build-up in Gaza and the constant threat of rocket fire,
and to reunite Gaza and the West Bank under a single,
legitimate Palestinian national authority, in accordance
with the recommendations of the 2016 Middle East
Quartet report (see S/2016/595).
In that context, it is critical that the important
Egyptian-led intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts
continue. The United Nations stands firm in its
support of Egypt’s efforts in that regard. I call on all
Palestinian factions to make serious efforts to advance
Palestinian unity.
I welcome ongoing discussions on the holding of
Palestinian general elections. If elections materialize,
they would be the first Palestinian elections since 2006,
giving renewed legitimacy to national institutions. The
international community should support that process.
As I emphasized in my previous briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.8669), three critical elements are
required for elections to be credible — first, they
must be organized across the occupied Palestinian
territory, in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and Gaza, in line with the Palestinian basic law,
electoral legislation and international best practices;
secondly, both legislative and presidential elections
are necessary and should be held within a clearly
identified and reasonable time frame; and, thirdly,
broad intra-Palestinian agreement must be reached on
the modalities of holding such elections.
Palestinians have been denied their democratic right
to vote for too long. I am hopeful that the Palestinian
President will very soon issue a decree scheduling
4/24

18/12/2019

legislative and presidential elections and that Israel will
allow voting in East Jerusalem.
Despite the partial agreement reached between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority on 3 October on
clearance revenues, it remains critical that both sides
engage in a constructive manner with the goal of
restoring the revenue transfers in full, in accordance
with the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations.
The financial situation of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, unfortunately, has also continued to worsen.
Urgent disbursement of donor funds is essential to
ensure that operations can be sustained through the end
of the year.
I also call on Member States to support the 2020
humanitarian response plan for the occupied Palestinian
territory, launched on 11 December. The plan calls for
approximately $348 million to provide basic food,
protection, health care, shelter, water and sanitation to
about 1.5 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
This month marks three years since the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016). The situation on the ground
since then has only deteriorated. Settlements have
expanded significantly, demolitions have accelerated,
violence and incitement have continued, achieving
intra-Palestinian unity remains elusive and credible
negotiations have yet to be launched. I remain greatly
concerned by the persistent lack of progress towards
ending the occupation and realizing a negotiated twoState solution. As I have consistently stated, it is not
enough to call for the renewal of our collective efforts
to that end. We must take concrete action.
Absent the renewed commitment of the parties
and the international community to pursue concrete
measures that will lead to genuine political progress,
the situation will continue to worsen. The IsraeliPalestinian conflict is in a fragile phase, with the
occupation deepening, political uncertainty prevailing
and volatile regional dynamics threatening to further
destabilize the situation.
I once again urge leaders on all sides to summon
the necessary political will to take concrete steps in
support of ending the occupation and realizing a lasting
peace, resulting in two democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace, within secure
19-41970

18/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8690

and recognized borders and with Jerusalem as the
capital of both States.

this great international body, and nothing has changed.
If anything, it has gotten worse.

The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.

My community was a paradise for raising children
when mine were growing up, but today, as my two
little granddaughters romp on our lawns, I do not have
the same sense of security for them that I had when
raising my children. Just last week, I stood with Israel’s
Ambassador to the United Nations, Danny Danon — and
possibly others in attendance here today — in the bowels
of a now-neutralized terror tunnel, a mere five minutes’
jog from my house. It is sinister and frightening, built
with a complex infrastructure for communications
and electricity that was developed solely for purposes
of death.

I now give the floor to Ms. Raemer.
Ms. Raemer: I thank you, Madam President, for
inviting me to address the Security Council today. It is
an incredible honour, and while I speak to the Council
representing the residents of the Eshkol region in Israel
along the frontier with Gaza, my views and opinions
are my own and reflect my personal experiences living
in Kibbutz Nirim on the border with the Gaza Strip
since 1975.
Has anyone here ever had to literally run for their
life? When I hear the red-alert early-warning system
for incoming rockets, I know that I have from 5 to
10 seconds to get to someplace safe, regardless of
where I am in my little kibbutz house. From my kitchen,
I can sprint to the safe room in about three seconds.
If it catches me while I am in the shower, I am out of
luck. There is no way I can jump out and make it to the
safe room before impact without slipping. If I am out
walking my dogs, I either throw myself down next to a
wall or just lie down wherever I am, cover my head and
hope that whatever falls does not fall too close.
Until two years ago, we did not have the Iron Dome
system to protect us. Now we do, but that brings its own
dangers of deadly, falling debris when it makes impact
with the rocket. Every siren means that something — be
it rocket impact or an intercept — will explode nearby,
and, during the 11 rounds of escalated rocket fire that
we have had in the past year and a half, there were
numerous alerts every single day. One thousand eight
hundred rockets were launched at our communities in
the Eshkol region alone during that period — 1,800.
What would anyone here do if that number of projectiles
were launched over their country’s border?
On 26 August 2014, on what was to become the
final morning of the last major operation — Operation
Protective Edge — my bedroom was invaded by deadly
shrapnel from a mortar that exploded just outside and
ripped through the walls. The electricity of our entire
community was knocked out in that same barrage,
which could have killed me had I been in my bedroom
rather than in my safe room. And here I am, five and
a half years after that bloody summer, speaking before

Can those here imagine how our children feel when
they know that terrorists could come bursting through
a tunnel under our community at any time? Thanks
to technology, that threat will soon be eliminated, but
there are other threats that throw a shadow over our
lives here in what we like to refer to as “95 per cent
paradise and 5 per cent hell”.
Within the past two years, Hamas has been
organizing weekly riots along the border — every
Friday after the group’s prayers. The Great March of
Return is, in fact, weekly, violent riots, which involves
throwing Molotov cocktails and grenades, vandalizing
our border fence and attempted infiltrations, which
often spiral into retaliatory rocket fire after someone is
killed from among the rioters.
Every Friday, rather than welcoming in the
peaceful Sabbath, as most of the Jewish world does,
we on the border brace ourselves for the possible
escalation of violence and rocket fire. In fact, we never
know when we will wake up to find our lives put on
pause and roads and schools closed for one to two days,
or possibly longer, owing to rocket and mortar fire.
Just last night, the people in my community were on
alert as the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) killed another
armed terrorist attempting to cut through the border
fence and infiltrate Israel through our fields, as Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov mentioned earlier.
During the past two years, we have also had to live
with a new threat — balloons, kites and drones that have
brought over flaming coals and incendiary explosives
that detonate overhead or ignite our crops. They have
burned down 35 square kilometres of agriculture,
forests and nature reserves. That is comparable to
igniting a little more than half the island of Manhattan.

19-419705/24

S/PV.8690

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

They have sent over balloons attached to explosive
booby-trapped books and toys. During the past two
years, 17 more terror tunnels have invaded our borders
and have been discovered and neutralized.
As a result, the rate of people seeking psychological
aid in our region has risen by 231 per cent in the past
five years, since Operation Protective Edge. More than
half of them have been children. Yet despite everything
and against all odds and seeming logic, our region
continues to grow and thrive. Our 95 per cent heaven
comprises an award-winning educational system,
innovative agricultural endeavours and beautiful
expanses of desert, which come alive with red poppy
blooms in late winter. All that, in addition to a strong
sense of community pride, encourages young families
to come and settle here despite the challenges.
All of the residents in our region, both on the Israeli
side and the Gazan side, are hostages of Hamas — some
even more literally than us. I am referring to the two
Israeli citizens being held in Gaza and the bodies of
our two fallen soldiers, Hadar Goldin and Oron Shaul.
Eleven times in the past two years, I personally have
been held hostage by Hamas rockets. My life was put on
hold. Work, routines and plans were cancelled. Hamas,
and Hamas alone, decides when there will be a ceasefire.
Even today, Hamas chooses to construct terror tunnels
rather than buildings to house their people or factories
to generate industry. They keep their population
poor and unemployed by funnelling funds from the
international community into their own pockets rather
than to those for whom the aid was intended — their
citizens. Luckily for me, Israel builds safe rooms to
protect its citizens. Every home within 7 kilometres of
the border has a reinforced, rocket-proof safe room built
on its premises paid for by the Government of Israel.
Hamas, on the other hand, builds safe rooms to protect
its weapons. Hamas brings Gazans, including women
and children, to the border riots to lose life or limb.
Hamas aims its rockets at Israeli civilian communities,
including my own, from within schools, mosques and
homes, knowing full well that the IDF is reluctant to
retaliate where there are innocent civilians nearby who
could be harmed.
I know that not all Gazans are part of Hamas. I
know that most Gazans want the same things that I
do — safety for their children, food on their tables and
to enable their children to have a horizon of hope. I
have that horizon because I have seen it. When I came
to live in my kibbutz, we used to drive to the beach
6/24

18/12/2019

or the market in Gaza, and Gazans used to come to
my area. I have that horizon because I am personally in
contact with Gazans who want to educate their children
to have different hopes and realities. I have that horizon
because I have spoken with Gazans and worked with
them recently on educational projects, for which they
risk their lives. I have even had a chance to hug a Gazan
woman who lives just on the other side of our border
from my home, a couple of weeks ago, right here in
Tel Aviv, while taking part in the women’s leadership
seminar, run by the Geneva Initiative.
It is only a fence that divides us. We all know that
Gaza and the western Negev mirror each other, with
the same climate, fauna and flora. A border fence can
keep people in or out, but it cannot stop the pollution
that threatens the underwater aquifers that supply
water to both sides of the border, due to the crumbling
sewage system in Gaza caused by the conflicts of
recent years and by Hamas’s failure to prioritize
civilian infrastructure.
In preparation for this talk, I spoke with our mayor,
Mr. Gadi Yarkoni, who lost both legs in one of the
rocket attacks on the last day of Operation Protective
Edge. Mr. Yarkoni said that he knows that the only
solution is for us to live together. He told me that he
and the other mayors of the region have extended their
hands in peace, cooperation and collaboration. I asked
him how they did that. That is when he told me about
the plans that we have for building an electricity plant
to provide electricity to Gaza, with the backing of Arab
and European investors. He also described the plans
that they have for another collaboration to answer the
needs of Gazans, a plant for treating sewage in Gaza
and turning it into electricity, because Gazans do not
have electricity 24/7, thanks to the infighting between
Fatah and Hamas. The people of our region in Israel
know that if we want our lives to be good and that for
our region to thrive and prosper, we need to see to it
that our neighbours, too, can thrive and prosper.
I live in the shadow of the threat of rockets and
attack tunnels, and I know only too well that until
the Gazans have something to live for, they will only
have reasons to die for. I understand that until the
unemployment level drops and their ability to put
food on their tables increases, our safety will remain
compromised. I have no doubt that until Palestinians in
Gaza are able to construct housing, they will continue
to construct tunnels and rockets, and that until they
are able to raise their children in homes rather than in
19-41970

18/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the rubble of the conflict, they will be raising another
generation of Israel-haters, and my grandbabies will not
be able to play outside without their mother worrying
about the eventuality of a blaring siren.
Coexistence
begins
with
education
and
responsibility. I hold Hamas responsible for finding a
way to stop investing in terrorism and incitement to
hatred, and to start making choices that will enable
the people of Gaza to thrive and prosper. I call on my
Government and the leaders of the Palestinian side
to get to the table to work out a long-term political
agreement. I call on the countries of the world and their
representatives, the members of the Security Council,
to compel Hamas to abandon its path of violence and
empower all the people in our region, on both sides of
the border, and provide them with the conditions they
need to live in a way in which the human rights of all of
us will be truly respected.
We all need to be able to raise the next generation
to respect our neighbours, not to fear them. That is
clearly not a conflict that can be resolved by weapons.
It can be resolved only by courageous leaders and
diplomacy. I warmly invite you, Madam President, and
the Ambassadors in attendance today to come visit me
in my 95 per cent heaven and see it first-hand.
The President: I thank Ms. Raemer for her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.

S/PV. 8690

for his update on the situation of the implementation of
this important resolution, which we will be highlighting
in our statement today. We will also shed light on
the illegal settlement policy. Resolution 2334 (2016)
stresses that Israeli settlement activities are a blatant
violation of international law and an obstacle to peace.
Unfortunately, however, that has not deterred Israel, the
occupying Power, from expanding its policies to annex
Palestinian territories at an unprecedented rate. The
Secretary-General’s report clarifies that Israel took no
steps during the reporting period to end its settlement
activities, which means that Israel, the occupying
Power, has paid no attention to the calls of the Security
Council, as outlined in the resolution, to fully and
immediately end its settlement activities.
Israel, the occupying Power, has carried out plans
to build, expand, fund and license its settlements that
have led to an increase in crimes against innocent
Palestinian people, their properties and their holy sites.
Sadly, that has gone on under the protection of the
occupying authorities, which are fully responsible for
the crimes and aggressions that violate international
law, international humanitarian law, the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention and other international conventions
that guarantee peace and security for people on
occupied land. We therefore strongly condemn Israel’s
illegal expansionist settlement policy in all its forms
on all the territories of the State of Palestine occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem. We reaffirm that
Israeli settlements are null and void and cannot be
accepted as a fait accompli.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his twelfth report (S/2019/938) on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), which is a written report in line
with the provisions of the resolution and presidential
note S/2017/507, as is the case with all other items on the
Security Council agenda. We look forward to receiving
at least two written reports every year in that regard.

We are not exaggerating when we say that the
future of the Palestinian question is on the line. We
cannot achieve a breakthrough in the peace process if
any of the parties fail to comply with the international
terms of reference for the peace process in the Middle
East, that is, the resolutions of international legitimacy,
the principle of land for peace and a two-State solution,
which would bring the Israeli occupation to an end. It
is therefore essential that all Member States that have
not yet recognized the State of Palestine do so in order
to put an end to occupation, save the two-State solution
and promote the prospects for peace, especially in these
critical circumstances.

We commend the efforts of the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, and reaffirm our full support to him in
his efforts to carry out his mandate. We also thank
Ms. Adele Raemer for her briefing and Mr. Mladenov

The States concerned must also practice neutrality
when they mediate to achieve peace, given that taking
unilateral measures that contravene the relevant United
Nations resolutions represent a real threat to peace
and security in the Middle East and throughout the

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

19-419707/24

S/PV.8690

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

world. They may have repercussions that could help
to fuel frustration as well as instigate extremism and
violence in the Palestinian territory and the region as
a whole, especially given that Israel, the occupying
Power, insists on depriving the Palestinian people of
their legitimate rights and is determined to entrench
its occupation. In addition, it has tightened the blockade
imposed on Gaza for more than 12 years and restricted
freedom of movement for individuals and goods. It
continues to carry out attacks on holy sites and seeks
to alter the historic status and character of Jerusalem as
well as its demographic composition. It undermines the
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which provides
basic services to Palestinian refugees in areas such
as health, education and relief. Israel, the occupying
Power, has also taken other unilateral unjust decisions,
such as not renewing the mandate of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron and freezing part of
the Palestinian tax returns.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the Arab position,
which holds that peace is the strategic choice and is
the solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict, in line with
the relevant legitimate international resolutions,
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the provisions of the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, which
stipulates that comprehensive peace in Israel must be
preceded by ending the Israeli occupation of all Arab
and Palestinian territories since 1967 as a prelude to
realizing all legitimate political rights of the Palestinian
people and establishing an independent Palestinian
State on their land, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Mr. Velásquez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting. We
thank Mr. Mladenov and Ms. Raemer for their
valuable briefings.
Peru is deeply concerned about the increasing
deterioration of the political and humanitarian
conditions underpinning the Palestinian issue. The
situation is unsustainable and destabilizing for the
Middle East and for the international community.
We must continue to condemn the ongoing
indiscriminate attacks against civilians by Hamas
and other radical Palestinian actors, as Ms. Raemer
apprised us, as well as the disproportionate Israeli
responses. International law and human rights are
openly flouted, creating a climate of impunity that
exacerbates the conflict. That dynamic, together with
8/24

18/12/2019

the Council’s inaction and the passivity of certain key
actors, has negative repercussions in an environment
that is already highly volatile. Putting an end to that
serious situation is a major undertaking but it is urgent.
In these difficult circumstances, we wish to
reaffirm our commitment to the only solution that we
believe to be viable and consistent with international
law: that of two States with internationally recognized
and secure borders, to be negotiated directly between
Israel and Palestine on the basis of the borders in force
until 1967, which should also lead to the resolution of
the final status of Jerusalem.
It is imperative, in the immediate term, that
the leaders of both sides show real signs of genuine
commitment and political will, replacing unilateral
actions that undermine the trust required with genuine
signs of compromise. We refer specifically to the
noted intensification of settlement, demolition and
eviction practices in occupied Palestinian territories,
which specifically undermine the two-State solution
and violate the provisions of the Council pursuant
to resolution 2334 (2016). Those illegal practices
must cease.
We also believe it essential to condemn hate speech,
anti-Semitism and discrimination in all its forms. In any
society, ethnic, cultural and religious diversity must be
seen as an asset and never as a threat. In line with its
sensitive responsibility to maintain international peace
and security, the Security Council must also be able to
achieve minimum consensus and act when the situation
on the ground so warrants.
The emphasis placed on political and security
developments should not in any way detract from
the urgent need to immediately address in parallel
the humanitarian crisis looming over the Palestinian
people, aggravated in recent years by recurrent episodes
of violence and reductions in the funding of assistance
programmes. In particular, we believe it vital to meet
the basic needs of the people of Gaza, since poverty and
marginalization are fertile ground for radicalization
and violent extremism. It is important to continue
to promote a lasting peace by linking humanitarian
assistance with development plans that provide hope
and opportunities to the youngest. We also call for
stepping up efforts to advance the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process, as its success would alleviate
the humanitarian situation and give impetus to the
resumption of dialogue with Israel.
19-41970

18/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would like to conclude by expressing our
gratitude for the written report (S/2019/938) on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which was
requested of the Secretary-General by 10 members
of the Council. We hope that that practice will be
maintained in a semi-annual format, since it brings
greater transparency to the consideration of this
sensitive issue.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing and for the work
that he and his team do in difficult circumstances. I also
thank Ms. Raemer for her briefing and the perspective
that she shared, which was of great interest.
Three years since the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) by the Council, the United Kingdom notes
with concern the Secretary-General’s assessment
that the situation on the ground since then has only
deteriorated. In the light of the continued increase in
Israeli settlements, we reiterate that settlements are
illegal under international law, present an obstacle
to peace and threaten the physical viability of a twoState solution.
The United Kingdom notes the Israeli Defence
Minister’s instructions to act for the advancement of a
new Jewish neighbourhood in Hebron. We understand
that that does not signal the start of a formal planning
process. However, if such plans were to advance, it
would be of grave concern given the sensitivities of
the location.
Demolitions of Palestinian-owned homes and
structures have also increased. The United Kingdom is
concerned in particular by the targeting of donor-funded
structures in Area C, which are provided on humanitarian
grounds to support vulnerable communities. As we
have made clear before, any suggestion that parts of the
occupied Palestinian territories should be annexed is
contrary to international law and damaging to peace
efforts and could not pass unchallenged.
As the United Kingdom made clear last month
(see S/PV.8669), following the escalation of hostilities
in Gaza, the indiscriminate attacks against Israeli
civilians by the Palestinian Islamic Jihad were
completely unacceptable. All countries, including
Israel, have a legitimate right to self-defence and the
right to defend their citizens from attack. In doing so,
it is vital that all actions are proportionate, in line with
international humanitarian law, and are calibrated to
avoid civilian casualties.

S/PV. 8690

It is critical that the Palestinian leadership continue
its efforts to tackle terror and incitement. The Israeli
security forces must also avoid the use of excessive
force, and we encourage Israel to properly investigate
all potential breaches of law, holding those responsible
to account.
The United Kingdom is concerned to hear of a
further increase in the number of attacks by settlers
on Palestinians. As the occupying Power, Israel has a
responsibility to protect the Palestinian population. We
urge Israel to thoroughly investigate every instance and
bring those responsible to justice.
Turning to positive steps, the United Kingdom
welcomes the progress made on the implementation
of the package of interventions for Gaza endorsed by
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians. However,
we remain concerned about the dire humanitarian
situation. We again call on Israel to ease restrictions
on water, electricity, movement and access, which
impact the livelihoods and life prospects of ordinary
Palestinians in Gaza and breed resentment.
We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and encourage partners
to step up with more funding and more predictable
disbursements, as the United Kingdom has done. We
also welcome continued work towards genuine and
democratic national elections for all Palestinians,
which is crucial for the establishment of a viable and
sovereign Palestinian State.
Finally, at this highly sensitive time in the region,
we call on the parties to show real leadership, including
the willingness to make tough compromises, in order to
achieve a secure Israel standing alongside a sovereign
Palestinian State.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the most recent written report submitted by
Secretary-General Guterres on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/938). We thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. We also listened
carefully to Ms. Raemer’s remarks.
In December 2016, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016) on the question of Palestine,
reflecting the common expectations and aspirations
of the international community and in response to
a call for justice from Palestine and Arab States.

19-419709/24

S/PV.8690

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Regrettably, however, three years later, the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory has witnessed no
improvement; in fact, it has deteriorated even further.
Settlement activities continue to advance and expand
significantly as we speak. More Palestinian homes are
being demolished. Acts of violence and inflammatory
rhetoric by the parties concerned are escalating, and the
Middle East peace process has stalled.
China finds all the foregoing deeply concerning.
We call on all parties to earnestly and effectively
implement resolution 2334 (2016), stay on track towards
a political solution, adhere to the fundamental principles
of fairness and justice, and give full play to the key role
of the United Nations so as to form a synergy between
regional and international efforts aimed at pushing
for a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli question at an early date.
First, we must adhere to the two-State solution
as the basis for the ultimate goal of establishing an
independent Palestinian State. Foreign occupation is
the underlying cause of the decades-long PalestinianIsraeli issue. The parties must remain committed to the
overarching goal of the two-State solution and pursue
dialogue on an equal footing and political negotiation
on the basis of the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as other
international consensus and norms so as to resolve the
differences between the Israeli and Palestinian sides
and find a mutally acceptable solution.
Resolution 2334 (2016) clearly stipulates that the
establishment of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, constitutes a
violation of international law. The parties concerned
should immediately cease all settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory and refrain
from demolishing Palestinian homes and destroying
Palestinian property.
Secondly, we must promote a rapprochement
between Palestine and Israel and encourage the relaunch
of peace talks as soon as possible. Historical grievances
lie at the root of the intricate and complex PalestinianIsraeli question. Fighting violence with violence will
get us nowhere; it is only with the gradual building of
mutual political trust, for the benefit of common security,
can there be a steady and solid long-term solution. The
parties concerned should proceed from the overall
interest of providing safety for local communities and
10/24

18/12/2019

peace and stability in the region, exercise calm and
restraint in seeking rapprochement, cease military
actions and refrain from inflammatory remarks. They
must also cease and desist all acts of violence against
civilians, with a view to enabling an effective easing
of tensions, rebuilding and accumulating mutual trust
and creating favourable conditions for the restart of
the Palestinian-Israeli peace talks. China supports
all efforts of the international community that are
conducive to peace between Palestine and Israel, and
we appreciate the good offices of Special Coordinator
Mladenov and Egypt, among other parties. We firmly
oppose any irresponsible remarks made by any country.
Thirdly, we need to follow the Palestinian
economic and humanitarian situation closely and work
to improve it by adhering to a holistic approach that
promotes peace through development. At present, the
economic and humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Gaza, remains grim.
The international community should scale up its input,
place a greater focus on economic reconstruction and
prioritize livelihood-related projects so as to make a real
difference in the lives of the Palestinian people. China
supports the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) as it
continues to play its important role. The adoption by an
overwhelming majority of General Assembly resolution
74/85, on the extension of UNRWA’s mandate, also
speaks to the international community’s support for
and recognition of UNRWA’s work. China calls on
the parties concerned to fully implement the relevant
resolutions and immediately and completely lift the
blockade on Gaza.
China supports the establishment of an independent
and fully sovereign State of Palestine, based on the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We
stand ready to continue to uphold justice and fairness
and play our part as a steadfast builder of peace in the
Middle East, a facilitator of stability and a contributor
to the region’s development.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, for his excellent briefing on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
We also welcome Ms. Adele Raemer’s contribution to
this meeting.
19-41970

18/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8690

Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned about the ongoing
deterioration of the security situation, the continued
violence and violations of relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2334 (2016). Despite the repeated calls of
the international community for the de-escalation of
tensions, we have not witnessed any progress. In fact,
my country notes with regret that, in his most recent
report (S/2019/938), the Secretary-General once again
highlights the lack of implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) in a list of acts contrary to the spirit of
the resolution. So as not to undermine the two-State
solution for peacefully coexistence, it is urgent that
the parties refrain from any provocative actions or
statements that would exacerbate tensions, which often
degenerates into violence against the populations.

My delegation therefore encourages Hamas and the
Palestinian Authority to pursue dialogue in order to
achieve the Palestinian Authority’s effective return to
Gaza, which would allow for better management of
the current humanitarian situation. Furthermore, my
country welcomes the prospect of the first Palestinian
elections since 2006 being held in 2020 and hopes that
the elections will be held throughout the Palestinian
territory on the basis of a broad consensus.

These deadly acts of violence remind us of the
urgent need to work for the relaunch of the IsraeliPalestinian dialogue, which unfortunately has not seen
any significant progress since the Oslo Accords of 1993
and 1995. Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges the international
community to tirelessly pursue its mediation efforts
towards the resumption of the political process among
the various parties, with a view to reaching a just and
lasting solution based on mutual recognition of the
legitimate aspirations of all concerned, including the
right to self-determination for the Palestinians and the
right of Israel to live in peace and security. Any new
initiative must therefore be aimed at achieving the twoState solution within the 1967 borders — a solution to
which my country remains profoundly attached.

Since this is the last time that Côte d’Ivoire will
speak in the Council on the situation in the Middle
East, given that our term of office ends at the end of
this month, my delegation would like to reiterate its
full support for Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his tireless
efforts towards a peaceful resolution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and for his determination to create
the conditions necessary for finding a definitive and
lasting resolution to that conflict. A lasting solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is an absolute necessity
not only for the Palestinian and Israeli populations, but
also for the security and stability of the region.

My delegation also remains concerned about the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Gaza, which remains strongly affected by the blockade
in force, water and electricity shortages in a context of
acute economic crisis, and mass unemployment among
young people. We call on the international community
to provide the necessary humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people in need, as well as to work towards the
economic recovery and reconstruction of the Gaza Strip
through adequate funding and investment. My country
also welcomes the announcements of contributions
to the budget of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, with a
view to reducing the budget deficit it is facing.
In parallel to the need to de-escalate the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, Côte d’Ivoire believes that
inter-Palestinian unity is essential to advance national
aspirations for independent statehood and sovereignty.

It is important that the Security Council, which
has the primary responsibility of maintaining of
international peace and security, regain its unity in
order to send a single message to all parties to reduce
tensions and invite them to reopen peace talks under
the auspices of the United Nations.

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset let me
thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing. Let me also thank Ms. Adele Raemer
for her input. Regrettably, as we have just heard from
the Special Coordinator, the situation on the ground
continues to deteriorate. The reporting period was
characterized by acts of violence, including the firing
of rockets by Palestinian militants from Gaza against
civilians in Israel, on the one hand, and by Israel’s use
of lethal force against Palestinians, on the other hand.
Casualties occur on both sides of the conflict.
In 2016, the Security Council adopted resolution
2334 (2016), reaffirming its previous resolutions with
regard to applicable international law and the parameters
of a peaceful solution through the Middle East peace
process. The only way forward for the Palestinians and
Israelis is to negotiate a two-State solution — the State
of Israel as an independent and democratic State and
a viable Palestinian State in the West Bank and Gaza,
the two living side by side in peace and security, with
borders negotiated on the basis of the 1967 lines.

19-4197011/24

S/PV.8690

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Poland’s position on the Israeli settlement policy is
clear and remains unchanged. It is also the European
Union’s position. All settlement activity is illegal under
international law. The illegal Israeli settlements erode
the viability of the two-State solution and the prospects
for a lasting peace.
We also reiterate our concern about the calls for a
possible annexation of areas in the West Bank. Such a
move would constitute a serious breach of international
law and deeply damage peace efforts. Poland would
like to echo the concern with respect to the demolitions
and seizures of donor-funded humanitarian projects.
Let me now turn to the situation in Gaza, which
remains dire. We call on all parties to take urgent
steps towards achieving a fundamental change in
the humanitarian, political, security and economic
situations in Gaza by ending the closure policy and
facilitating the sustained opening of the crossing points
important for the daily lives of the people of Gaza.
At the same time, we must address Israel’s legitimate
security concerns.
On the political track, we have to acknowledge
that the process is currently almost entirely blocked.
Intra-Palestinian division only aggravates the situation
of the people of Gaza and weakens the national
aspirations of the Palestinians. Poland welcomes
ongoing discussions on the holding of Palestinian
general elections — the first Palestinian elections to
be held since 2006. They must be organized across
the occupied Palestinian territory, and a broader
intra-Palestinian agreement must be reached on the
modalities of these elections. It is critical that the
important Egyptian-led intra-Palestinian reconciliation
efforts continue.
We remain gravely concerned at the continuing
violence, terrorist attacks against civilians and
incitement to violence that greatly exacerbate mistrust
between Israelis and Palestinians, and which are
incompatible with a peaceful resolution. There is
no justification for terrorism. The indiscriminate
rocket and mortar attacks against the Israeli civilian
population are totally unacceptable and must stop. Such
attacks are prohibited by international humanitarian
law, and Palestinian militants must cease the
practice immediately.
The security situation in Gaza remains very fragile,
with three serious military escalations occurring in
2019. The killing of the nine members of a family in an
12/24

18/12/2019

Israeli air strike, whose home was mistakenly targeted,
must be investigated. The situation continues to be at
risk of a major escalation, and the immense suffering
of the people continues.
Let me stress that the Israeli security forces must
fully comply with the principles of necessity and
proportionality when using force. On the other hand,
relevant authorities and protest organizers in Gaza must
ensure that protests remain peaceful. Furthermore, both
sides have a legal and moral obligation to fully protect
the rights of children and prevent violations and abuses
of their rights. Neither Palestinian nor Israeli children
must suffer the consequences of this conflict.
Allow me to conclude with a word about the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA). The Agency remains a key
contributor to the stability and security of the region.
Accordingly, Poland welcomes the General Assembly’s
renewal of the UNRWA’s mandate last week (resolution
74/83). We will continue to support the Agency in
its efforts aimed at providing necessary services and
assistance to Palestinian refugees.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing. Council members may rest assured that we
will continue to support his work. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/938).
We also heard Ms. Adele Raemer’s story, from which
it is quite clear that we need to faithfully implement
resolution 2334 (2016).
The Security Council must also conduct a field visit
to Gaza and the West Bank of the occupied Palestinian
territory. I have been wondering — and still fail to
understand — why the Security Council is not able to
effectuate an official visit there, but it does show that
clearly much still needs to be done.
Indonesia fully concurs with the Secretary-General
that illegal settlement activities continue to undermine
the prospects of ending occupation and achieving
the two-State solution. We heard from Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov that the situation has deteriorated and that
much still needs to be done. We therefore join other
Council members in again urging Israel to immediately
and completely cease all settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
19-41970

18/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jerusalem. Against this backdrop, I would like to stress
the following points.
First, the Council must devise the necessary
means to ensure the full implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). When the Council adopted the resolution
three years ago, it set the right course for reviving the
peace process based on international law and agreed
parameters. The resolution rejected any efforts that
undermined international consensus on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, including the settlement issue. It
also entailed preserving and protecting the status quo at
the holy sites in Jerusalem, in line with the special and
historical role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as
custodian of the Muslim and Christian holy sites.
It is clear that the occupying Power has much to
do to ensure the full implementation of the provisions
of resolution 2334 (2016). The deteriorating situation
on the ground compels the Council to urgently devise
practical and effective ways and means to end the
illegal settlements. We cannot continue with business
as usual. Failure to devise such measures would be a
case of the Council undermining its own authority and
decisions, which would further destabilize the situation
in the occupied territory and the wider region.
Secondly, with regard to the need for more
concerted action to support the Palestinian cause, if we
are truly serious about our support for the Palestinian
cause, surely it is time for more concerted action. We
need to reinvigorate our commitment to the peace
process in order to achieve the two-State solution, on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions
and the internationally agreed parameters. Given the
current negative trends, we are doubtful that a credible
process will ever materialize. To reverse those trends,
members of the international community have the
obligation to undertake necessary actions against Israel
and its settlement policy, including by distinguishing
between Israel and the territories occupied since
1967 in their relevant dealings with that country. The
recent ruling by the Court of Justice of the European
Union — that foods from Israeli settlements should
be specially labelled, encouraging consumers to mull
over ethical considerations while shopping — is a
commendable example.
Lastly, on the need to sustain humanitarian
assistance for the Palestinian people, while we defend
the fate of the two-State solution, let us not forget the
humanitarian crisis facing the Palestinian people in

S/PV. 8690

Gaza, the West Bank and in various refugee locations.
In that connection, we reiterate our call to the
international community to extend its utmost support
for the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East with
urgency and by whatever means possible. We need to
remain steadfast in our efforts to assist the Palestinian
people not only in humanitarian terms but also in
enhancing the capacity of the Palestinians to fully
govern themselves. As for Indonesia, the Government
and its people have stood and will always stand by our
Palestinian brothers and sisters. We support the plan to
hold a Palestinian general election and fervently hope
that it will unify all Palestinians towards their dream
State of Palestine.
In conclusion, let me once again remind members
of the international community that resolution 2334
(2016) is much more than a mere document produced
by the Council. It is a beacon of hope for the Palestinian
people and a pillar that upholds international law against
the fabricated reality being advanced by the occupying
Power. Our action or inaction against that false reality
will determine not only the credibility of the United
Nations but also the fate of the Palestinian people and
of the Middle East.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): As always, we are grateful to Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing, as we
are to Ms. Adele Raemer.
Unfortunately, the current state and trends of
the situation in the Middle East continue to cause us
great concern. We are witnessing an ever-worsening
downwards spiral, jeopardizing the possibility of
achieving just, lasting and comprehensive peace
based on the only viable solution to the protracted
conflict — two States that align with the 1967 borders
and supported by serious dialogue between both parties.
We would once again like to reiterate our
position concerning the Israeli settlement activities
taking place throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around East Jerusalem.
The Dominican Republic considers the Israeli policy
to be illegal under international law, including under
resolution 2334 (2016), and that its continuation also
has serious consequences for the civilian population,
which is forced to move without protection guarantees.
Not only do the settlements contribute to an escalation
of tensions on the ground, but they increasingly hinder

19-4197013/24

S/PV.8690

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and reduce the possibility of a peaceful two-State
solution based on social inclusion and hope for lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
At the same time, the Dominican Republic recognizes
the need for an intra-Palestinian reconciliation process
that allows for the national consolidation necessary to
advancing the country’s legitimate aspirations and paves
the way for a process of political renewal based on free
and inclusive elections. We encourage the Palestinian
leadership and the international community to direct
all their efforts towards strengthening national unity
and supporting the election process. Restoring hope
among Palestine’s young people should be a priority
for the authorities, which bear the responsibility for a
better future for them and future generations.
The Gaza Strip continues to be a theatre for
persistent violence that undermines the right of both
Israelis and Palestinians to coexist in conditions of
peace and security. While the humanitarian situation
in that area is less severe, the constant threat of fresh
violence makes it more fragile and hampers economic
development, leading to an increase in poverty,
unemployment and food insecurity, as well as other
central drivers of humanitarian need. We therefore
support the 2020 humanitarian response plan for the
occupied Palestinian territory and encourage donor
countries to contribute to its full funding so as to meet
the most basic needs of the Palestinian population living
under occupation and working to lay the development
foundations to break free from it.
In conclusion, the Dominican Republic reiterates
its emphatic condemnation of rocket launches on
areas populated by civilians. There is no justification
whatsoever for carrying out those indiscriminate attacks
that end the lives and dash the dreams of real people.
It is imperative that we undertake all efforts necessary
to achieving a speedy, comprehensive and definitive
de-escalation of the situation. We urge all parties to
act with the utmost restraint in order to guarantee the
maintenance of the ceasefire and the protection of the
civilian population.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Let me also add
our voice of thanks to Mr. Mladenov for his briefing
and to Ms. Raemer for the perspectives that she shared
with us.
South Africa thanks the Secretary-General and
welcomes the second written report for 2019 on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/938).
14/24

18/12/2019

We hope that the practice of written reports continues
and look forward to the next written report in June 2020.
South Africa fully supports the negotiations
in pursuit of the two-State solution and the agreed
peace processes aimed at ensuring two viable States
coexisting side by side to the mutual benefit of all
peoples in the region. The continued disregard for those
prevailing and longstanding internationally accepted
concepts cannot be allowed, particularly with regard
to the circumvention of final-status issues such as the
borders, the status of Jerusalem and the right of return
of refugees.
As we and other Member States have stated on
numerous occasions, the only way to achieve sustained
peace and security in the Middle East is through
reaching a lasting agreement between the Palestinians
and the Israelis themselves, based on the agreed peace
process and the relevant United Nations resolutions and
international terms of reference, including the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, among others.
That can be done only if all sides abide by their
obligations under international law, including Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, South Africa remains
extremely concerned about the continued settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory. As
reported by the Secretary-General, over 3,000 housing
units were advanced or approved in the occupied West
Bank, including 300 units in East Jerusalem, during
the reporting period alone. In relation to the expansion
of illegal settlements, the seizure, destruction or
demolition of Palestinian property has led to the
displacement of 260 people, including 133 children.
Additionally, the Secretary-General’s report
highlights incidents of Israeli security forces in Hebron
firing teargas canisters and stun grenades at schools
in response to children throwing stones at a military
patrol. Such disproportionate and undue reaction by the
Israeli security forces cannot be allowed and must be
condemned. We cannot allow children to fear places
that are supposed to be places of learning and refuge.
South Africa emphasizes that those actions
undermine the prospects for peace and contravene the
decisions of the Council, effectively undermining its
own credibility. If the Council is unable or unwilling
to uphold its own decisions, it loses its effectiveness. In
that regard, my delegation will continue to insist on the
19-41970

18/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) and all
other Council resolutions on the matter.
The situation in Gaza is of grave concern to South
Africa. The recent increase in tensions has led to further
killings and a perpetuation of the conflict. South Africa
calls on all parties to cease those violent attacks, which
only drive the parties further away from each other and
diminish any hope for the restoration of negotiations.
South Africa welcomes the significant progress
made on implementing the package of intervention
for Gaza of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians, particularly in the delivery of electricity
and health-care services. However, despite those
interventions, the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situations remain dire. We echo the SecretaryGeneral in that the provision of health care should
not be determined by political considerations but
should be based on the needs of the people of Gaza.
We commend and support the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East in ensuring that those and other vital needs of the
Palestinian people are met.
In conclusion, South Africa welcomes the efforts
of the Special Coordinator to ensure that inclusive
Palestinian elections are held in the near future. We
note Hamas’s acceptance of the proposed election plan
of President Abbas and call on all parties to ensure that
safe and inclusive elections are held throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Mr. Mladenov for his
intervention and Ms. Raemer for her testimony. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) (S/2019/938). Three years after the adoption
of the resolution, France regrets that it has not
been implemented.
The Secretary-General’s report is unequivocal.
There is an unprecedented intensification of settlement
activities, with decisions affecting more than 22,000
housing units at different stages of the approval process,
as well as 8,000 others that have been put out to tender
since the adoption of the resolution, in December 2016.
France recalls that Israel’s settlement policy
in the occupied Palestinian territories is contrary
to international law. We are very concerned about

S/PV. 8690

ongoing colonisation in areas likely to undermine the
territorial continuity of the future Palestinian State,
particularly in Gilo. We are concerned about reports of
the construction of new housing units in particularly
sensitive areas, such as in the Nof Tzion settlement in
East Jerusalem and in the former market in Old City of
Нebгоn. France deplores the infrastructure works aimed
at strengthening integration among all the settlements
in the Jerusalem area and between those settlements
and central Israel. The destruction and seizure of
Palestinian property have also been on a steep rise
this year in East Jerusalem and Zone C. We note with
concern the destruction of 26 elements of infrastructure
financed by the international community, including by
the countries of the European Union, over the past three
months. Finally, the repeated announcements by Israeli
officials on the annexation of settlements or entire
parts of the West Bank are a major source of concern. If
implemented, they would constitute a serious violation
of international law.
We therefore call on the Israeli authorities to
renounce any project leading to faits accomplis that
would run counter to the two-State solution. We will
remain particularly attentive to developments in the
situation and ready to react, in conjunction with our
European partners.
The situation in Gaza also remains fragile. France
has unequivocally condemned the firing of rockets
from Gaza into inhabited areas of Israel, in violation of
international law. We recall our unwavering commitment
to Israel’s security. We have also recalled the right of
both Israelis and Palestinians to live in peace, dignity
and security and have deplored the civilian casualties
on both sides. It is now important that the ceasefire
reached on 14 November through the efforts of Egypt
and the Special Coordinator be fully respected.
Beyond the need to respect the ceasefire, there will
be no lasting stability in Gaza without a lifting of the
blockade paired with credible security guarantees for
Israel or without the return of the Palestinian Authority,
in the context of inter-Palestinian reconciliation. The
holding of credible Palestinian elections in the West
Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem would be an essential
step towards inter-Palestinian reconciliation and the
strengthening of Palestinian institutions established
pursuant to the Oslo Accords. In that context, I call on
the Palestinian authorities to continue their efforts to
that end and reiterate our readiness to support them in
those efforts.

19-4197015/24

S/PV.8690

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/12/2019

I would like to recall that there is no alternative to
an agreement negotiated by the parties on the basis of
internationally agreed parameters. Only the two-State
solution, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States,
will fulfil the aspirations of Israelis and Palestinians by
enabling them to live side by side in peace and security
and bring lasting peace to the region. Any solution that
deviates from the parameters agreed by the international
community would necessarily be doomed to failure.

Germany remains firmly committed to a negotiated
two-State solution based on the internationally agreed
parameters. We continue to believe that the two-State
solution is the only viable solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict that meets Israeli and Palestinian
security needs, fulfils Palestinian aspirations for
statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that
began in 1967, resolves all permanent-status issues and
guarantees equal rights for all inhabitants.

There is no status quo on the ground but, rather, a
deterioration of the situation that is unsustainable in the
long term; that is not in the interest of either party. It
contributes to increased tensions, undermines the twoState solution and postpones lasting peace, which can
only fuel despair and the temptation of extremism.

We support any effort that is aimed at reviving
the political process as long as it is in line with
international law, ensures equal rights and is acceptable
to both parties, Israelis and Palestinians. Unilateral
actions or creating facts on the ground will, however,
neither help to reach a just and lasting solution nor
lead to a sustainable peace. We therefore call on all
the parties to the conflict, but also on all international
stakeholders, to refrain from taking any measures that
risk undermining the viability of a negotiated two-State
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis
of the internationally agreed parameters.

The mandate of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) will remain crucial until a lasting peace
that provides a just, realistic and lasting solution to the
refugee issue is found. In that regard, France welcomes
the renewal of the Agency’s mandate for three years
and calls for a surge in international mobilization to
make up its financial deficit by the end of the year. For
its part, France doubled its contribution to UNRWA
this year.
Three years after the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016), it is time to implement it. The credibility of
the Security Council and of us all depend on it. In
that connection, the Secretary-General’s report refers
to the decision of the European Court of Justice
of 12 November on the labelling requirement for
products from the occupied Palestinian territories and
Israeli settlements. The labelling measures meet the
requirement of resolution 2334 (2016) to introduce a
differentiation policy. France will continue to engage
to ensure the implementation of the resolution.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing and
Ms. Raemer for her remarks.
Three years have passed since the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), but as the Secretary-General
notes in his latest report (S/2019/938), the situation
on the ground has continuously deteriorated over that
period. We thank the Secretary-General for his balanced
report. We are greatly concerned by his observations
with regard to the implementation of the resolution and
the current status of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
16/24

One of the main obstacles to a political settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains the ongoing
Israeli occupation and the continued settlement
activities in the territories occupied since 1967. We
reiterate our position that Israeli settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under
international law and undermine the prospects for
ending the occupation and achieving a negotiated twoState solution.
The year 2019 marks a record year in the expansion
of Israeli settlement activity and the legalization of
settlement outposts since the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016). This is a matter of serious concern to us.
We also remain gravely concerned about an increased
number of demolitions and seizures of Palestinianowned structures across the West Bank, including
donor-financed humanitarian projects and evictions
of Palestinians from their homes in East Jerusalem.
As noted by the Secretary-General in his report, these
demolitions also affected 26 structures financed by
international donors. We therefore call upon Israel to
end the expansion of settlements, the legalization of
settlement outposts, the confiscation of Palestinian
land and evictions from and the demolition and seizure
of Palestinian-owned structures.
We remain extremely concerned about repeated
statements alluding to or even announcing an intended
19-41970

18/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

annexation of the Jordan Valley and other parts of the
occupied West Bank. Should such statements turn into
actual Government policy or law, that would constitute
a clear violation of international law. We strongly
advise any Israeli Government against taking any steps
in this direction as they would have serious, negative
repercussions on the viability of the two-State solution
and the entire peace process.
We also reiterate that Germany will continue to
distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel
and the territories occupied since 1967 and that we will
not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines,
including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those
agreed by the parties.
Resolution 2334 (2016) needs to be fully
implemented, not only with regard to settlement
activities but also with regard to acts of terror, violence
against civilians, incitement, provocative actions and
inflammatory rhetoric. We welcome the fact that the
report of the Secretary-General also focuses on these
obstacles to achieving peace and share his grave
concerns about the continuing violence, terrorist
attacks against civilians, incitement and provocative
rhetoric and actions.
Germany condemns all attacks on Israel in the
strongest possible terms, including the repeated firing
of rockets from Gaza into Israel. Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad must stop firing rockets into Israel. There
is no justification for the firing of rockets into Israel
or any other form of terrorism. We remain steadfast
in our commitment to Israel’s security and stress
Israel’s rights to self-defence and to react adequately
and proportionally to attacks against its territory.
Incidents with innocent civilian victims must, however,
be thoroughly investigated and accountability for
violations of international law must be ensured.
I should like to say a word on the situation in Gaza.
The three serious military escalations in 2019 in and
around Gaza are deeply concerning and highlight the
urgent need for a sustainable, long-term solution to the
ongoing humanitarian and economic crisis in Gaza.
We call upon both Israel and the Palestinian Authority
to do their respective part in order to improve the
situation in Gaza. In this context, we welcome the
ongoing intra-Palestinian discussions on the holding
of legislative and presidential elections in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem and Gaza, as this could

S/PV. 8690

give renewed democratic legitimacy and strengthen
national unity.
Before I conclude, let me also say a word on the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Germany
welcomes the renewal of the UNRWA mandate for three
years as UNRWA continues to contribute to stability in
the region by providing humanitarian assistance, health
services and education. As the largest bilateral donor,
Germany remains firmly committed to UNRWA and
continues to significantly contribute to the UNRWA
budget. Against the background of the critical financial
situation of UNRWA, we encourage other donors to
similarly continue their financial support to the Agency
by disbursing the funds they have pledged.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, as well as Ms. Raemer for their briefings.
We welcome the consistent practice of receiving two
written reports per year.
The date of 23 December marks the third
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016)
and there is no reason to be optimistic. The situation
on the ground is bogging down, making a solution
seem more distant than ever. We regret to note that the
negative developments on the ground go hand-in-hand
with the questioning of the fundamental legal principles
on which the settlement of the conflict is based.
One of the fundamental legal principles is the
illegality of the settlement policy. The Belgian and,
more broadly, the European position is clear in this
respect. Settlement-building is a flagrant violation of
international law, including resolution 2334 (2016).
It makes the prospects for a two-State solution
more remote.
However, we must note that, since the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), the settlement policy has been
pursued at a steady pace in the West Bank, targeting
particularly symbolic locations, such as the old city
of Hebron or East Jerusalem. The settlement policy
is implemented through actions like demolitions and
evictions, the total number of which have sharply
increased over the past two years, according to the
2019 figures. We call on Israel to end this policy.
In that context, we also emphasize the importance
of preserving the status quo of the holy places in
Jerusalem. We reiterate our deepest concern at the
declarations relating to a possible unilateral annexation

19-4197017/24

S/PV.8690

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of all or part of the West Bank. Such annexation is illegal
under international law and will not be recognized
by Belgium.
Finally, we reiterate our deep concern at the
worrisome increase in demolitions and the confiscation
of infrastructure and humanitarian projects in Area
C. We urge the Israeli authorities to put an end to that
practice and to restore or grant compensation for the
damage incurred.
The security situation in Gaza remains extremely
fragile. We recall the critical obligation of parties to
respect the rules of international humanitarian and
human rights law. We call on all parties to continue to
exercise the utmost restraint in order to avoid another
violence episode. Thorough investigations must be
carried out with respect to accusations of international
humanitarian rights violations.
We reiterate the importance of respecting the right to
peaceful protest and the responsibility of the organizers
to ensure the peaceful conduct of such demonstrations.
There will be no lasting solution in Gaza without
the return of the Palestinian Authority. In that view,
we reiterate our call on the Palestinian factions to
engage in the reconciliation process in good faith. We
encourage Palestinian leaders to work to build strong,
inclusive, accountable and democratic institutions,
based on respect for the rule of law and human rights.
It is important that elections take place throughout
Palestinian territory in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and in the Gaza Strip. We call on all parties,
including Israel, to facilitate the process to this end.
We remain convinced that there is no other option
than a negotiated solution, based on the coexistence
of two States, with the city of Jerusalem as the capital
of both States, in accordance with internationally
agreed parameters. Belgium will continue to work to
that end in order to meet the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): As always, we thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his very comprehensive and clear
briefing this morning. In the two years in which we have
seen his and his team’s work close up, we have noted
their tremendous dedication, honesty and commitment,
all very praiseworthy qualities. We encourage them to
continue on that path in order to facilitate the Council’s
18/24

18/12/2019

work concerning the region. We also thank Ms. Raemer
for her briefing.
We welcome the fact that consideration is being
given to the request that many members have frequently
made to have the reports on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), as well as other reports
submitted to the Council on other items on its agenda,
distributed in written form before the relevant meetings,
in order to avoid the possibility of mistaken analyses.
Assuming no emergency situations arise during
the remainder of this month, I think this will be my
delegation’s last statement on the question of Palestine.
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to once
again express our deep concern about the fact that no
visible progress has been achieved over the past two
years either in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or in the
relationship between the main Palestinian factions.
When Equatorial Guinea began its term on the Security
Council in January of last year, resolution 2334 (2016)
had reached its one-year anniversary. At the time, there
was no sign of any meaningful improvement regarding
the resolution’s demands, and today, three years on,
almost nothing has changed.
According to the report before us (S/2019/938),
the situation on the ground has only deteriorated
over the past three years. Settlements have expanded
significantly, demolitions have accelerated and
violence and incitements to violence also persist. We
note that the situation has continued to contribute to the
tension between the parties, endangering the lives of
Israelis and Palestinians and compounding the severe
socioeconomic destabilization in the Gaza Strip. As a
country that has friendly relations with both Israel and
Palestine, and in accordance with international law,
Equatorial Guinea considers the settlement activities
to be an obstacle to peace, and their expansion is a
categorical threat to the physical viability of a twoState solution. We therefore urge the Government of
Israel, in line with its stated aim and desire to seek a
resolution to the conflict, to relax its policies in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including by ending its
demolition of Palestinians’ homes and property and all
of its settlement activities in general. We nevertheless
also recognize Israel’s right to legitimate self-defence.
As we all know, most of the Israeli attacks on
Gaza, while they are sometimes disproportionate,
are responses to insurgent acts from within the Gaza
Strip itself. As the largest Palestinian force in the area,
Hamas must abandon its path of arms and terror and
19-41970

18/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

instead work diligently to prevent any provocations or
attacks aimed at civilian areas in Israel. Those attacks,
and the unacceptable exchanges of years past, are the
main causes of the insecurity, lack of services and all
the socioeconomic inequalities facing the inhabitants of
the region today. In that regard, we urge the Palestinian
political elite to work seriously on a strong, definitive
Palestinian reconciliation that prioritizes the interests
of all of its people rather than those of individual
factions. Palestine needs to be united and to address
issues that will enable its people to live dignified and
safe lives, as well as ensure prosperity for current
and future generations. In that regard, we support the
efforts of Egypt, which to date has continued to work
with the parties.
As I did in January (see S/PV.8449), I would like to
remind the parties that there have been difficult periods
in the history of their conflict, including very bloody
and destructive events, and yet despite that, Israel has
not achieved the security it seeks, nor has a Palestinian
State been established that is recognized by Israel and
the international community. Violence is therefore not
the best option for resolving this conflict, nor will it
ever be. We believe that both parties have the right to
live in peace and security.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming the position
of Equatorial Guinea, which, in line with the United
Nations resolutions and other international instruments
in force, supports a two-State solution based on the
1967 borders, with Jerusalem as the capital of both
States, based entirely on negotiations between the
parties and ensuring their safe and friendly coexistence
in harmony with the other countries of the region.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his informative report on the situation in the Middle
East and the occupied Palestinian territories. We also
listened carefully to Ms. Adele Raemer’s briefing.
We can only concur with the Special Coordinator’s
key conclusion that negative trends with regard to a
settlement in the Middle East are not simply dominant
but are approaching a critical point. We have been seeing
dangerous tendencies in that direction recently, with the
growing use of unilateral steps and aggressive revisions
of previously concluded agreements. The voting in the
General Assembly this month and last month on the
Middle Eastern block of resolutions has affirmed the
unity of an overwhelming majority of States Members

S/PV. 8690

of the United Nations with regard to the generally
recognized principles for a settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. Russia has always supported a
just solution to the Palestinian issue on a basis of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative, which provide for the establishment of
an independent, sovereign, and territorially contiguous
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
We disagree profoundly with the United States’
recent decision that it would no longer consider Israeli
settlement activities to be a violation of international
law, claiming as its excuse that it is recognizing what
it calls the real situation on the ground. It is of a piece
with the United States Administration’s decisions on
Jerusalem and on its illegitimate recognition of Israel’s
sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan, which are
flagrant violations of international law. In that context,
we once again want to affirm that the Golan Heights
are unquestionably part of Syrian territory. We believe
that attempts to remove the task of finding a lasting
resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict from
the agenda are counterproductive. The only reliable
way to resolve all the existing disputes is through
direct negotiations between the parties. In our view,
it is pointless and dangerous to abandon the aim of
relaunching the negotiations and replace them with
economic initiatives that are mere palliatives.
Unfortunately, in our recent discussions on this
subject we have been going in circles and repeating
the same things again and again. The fact that there is
still no resolution of the Palestinian problem, which is
key for the entire region, continues to fuel extremist
attitudes inside and outside it. Armed clashes around the
Gaza Strip erupt periodically and discontent is growing
among ordinary Palestinians and Arabs. The Israeli
settlement activity and the demolition of Palestinians’
homes remain constant sources of contention and their
expanding use is mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
recent related report (S/2019/938).
In the circumstances, it is more important than ever
to mobilize the efforts of the constructively disposed
representatives of the international community in
support of the generally recognized foundations of a
settlement in the Middle East. We want to coordinate our
efforts with international stakeholders with influence
and with the United Nations. It is essential to continue
working with our Palestinian and Israeli partners and

19-4197019/24

S/PV.8690

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with the States of the Middle East and North Africa.
Sending a Security Council mission to the region would
seem timely in that regard.
In the interests of calming the situation and creating
conditions conducive to the quest for political solutions,
we urge the Israeli and Palestinian sides to refrain from
aggressive rhetoric or action. We consider settlement
activity, the demolition of Palestinian homes, attacks
on Gaza and announcements about plans to annex the
Jordan Valley unacceptable, as are rocket strikes on
Israeli territory and incitements to violence.
Israel and Palestine have important religious
significance for millions of followers of the monotheistic
religions. The city of Jerusalem has a unique status
and is a place where the need to find ways to ensure
peaceful coexistence for the followers of all religions
is acutely felt. We want to point in that regard to the
historical role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as
the custodian of Jerusalem’s holy sites. Establishing
lasting peace in these places is in the interests of all
Christians, Muslims and Jews.
We also consider it extremely important to support
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We
have said many times that UNRWA’s activities possess
a political dimension as well as a humanitarian one,
and they have a stabilizing effect on the Palestinian
territories and the countries of the Middle East. In
that regard, we consider attempts to discredit UNRWA
and deprive it of its funding short-sighted. It is naive
and dangerous to hope that the problem of Palestinian
refugees will disappear along with the Agency, and we
hope that the Agency’s change of leadership will not
affect its activities, which have shown their relevance
and effectiveness for decades.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. As always
while addressing the political process, he never loses
sight of the well-being of the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples. I would also like to thank our second briefer,
Ms. Adele Raemer. Far too often, we talk about this
issue without truly understanding the human impact of
the violence that emanates from Gaza. In this season
of lights, it is important for the Council to take stock
of the things that we see clearly and the things we fail
to see. What I must note yet again is how the Council
seems either unwilling or unable to see the reality
20/24

18/12/2019

that Israelis live in constant fear of attack. Instead
of recognizing that reality, the Council tolerates an
endless string of condemnations of Israel. But I will
not stand for that. I have said it before and I will say it
again today that Israel has no better friend than Kelly
Craft. It will surprise no one in this Chamber to hear
me say that the Trump Administration strongly opposes
resolution 2334 (2016). It is one-sided and unfairly
critical of Israel. Had I been Ambassador at the time
of the vote on the draft resolution, I would have vetoed
it. We would not normally dignify this resolution with
further discussion of its contents.
However, given the comments we heard this morning
about rocket attacks that threaten innocent people, it
would be of some benefit to explore one element of this
resolution. Resolution 2334 (2016) is unambiguous in
one important respect. It condemns all acts of violence,
including acts of terror, provocation and incitement.
Lest we dismiss rocket fire as something other than an
act of violence, we should recall that millions of Israelis
live under the threat of attack each and every day. A
little more than a month ago, Ms. Raemer was one of the
many Israelis trapped in bomb shelters in her home as
more than 150 rockets launched by Palestinian Islamic
Jihad rained down around them. During those kinds of
attacks, Israelis cannot leave their homes, so they do
not. During those attacks, it is impossible to go about a
normal life, so they do not. It hardly needs saying, and
yet I feel that I must, that unguided rocket fire affects
both Israelis and Palestinians. In Gaza, Palestinian
women were also forced to take shelter as rockets fired
by terrorists from crowded civilian neighbourhoods
flew overhead. That constant threat of attack is the
painful reality of daily life for hundreds of thousands
of people, Israelis and Palestinians. It is the continued
threat of such a violence to so many that precludes the
possibility of lasting peace.
Moreover, these acts of violence are clearly
condemned by resolution 2334 (2016). So I must
ask — will the Council also condemn them? Will it
even take them seriously? While Israel’s poor treatment
in United Nations venues is now so commonplace as to
have become unremarkable, what truly is remarkable
is the resilience of the people of Israel. Because
despite living among the echoes of rocket fire, the
people of Israel promote and defend freedom. They
build universities, they win Nobel prizes and conduct
innovative research. Israel is a gleaming light for the
world. Is it to be condemned? No. It is to be emulated.
19-41970

18/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is the spirit of determination, of resilience in the
face of threat that keeps alive the hope for a peaceful
solution, one that promotes and protects the security
of Palestinians and Israelis alike. But that solution will
be forged only when the two parties can return to the
negotiating table. For that to happen, the Council and
the parties in question must take more seriously the
threat of violence from Gaza, especially from Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad. So when our task ahead
is difficult and the political world is dark, let us be the
ones to bring the candles to illuminate the way.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council during
this month. We thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/938). We also listened to Ms. Raemer’s briefing.
As Christians around the world prepare to celebrate
Christmas, Palestinian Christians join them in
decorating trees, singing carols and praying for peace
in the Holy Land and across the globe. But the reality
of occupation has not spared them, even in this special
period of the year. Palestinian Christians from Gaza
have been barred by Israel from celebrating Christmas
in Bethlehem and Jerusalem, the two twin cities
separated, for the first time in history, by a shameful
wall. As Palestinians prepare to welcome another year,
their ordeal is nowhere close to an end. They continue
to fear for their lives, their families, their homes and
their future. And yet every day they find the courage
to persevere. The Palestinian people are a very resilient
people. They remain steadfast in the face of adversity
and carry the hope that they will be able to live and
thrive on their own land in dignity and freedom.
Here I would like to draw a map of our reality,
which can be summarized in two words — confinement,
for Palestinians, and expansion, for illegal Israeli
settlements. When I say “confinement”, the members of
the Council may have in mind, and rightly, the 2 million
Palestinians besieged in the Gaza Strip. But Palestinians
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have also
been confined to the areas where they already lived in
1967. In the so-called Area C, which represents 60 per
cent of the West Bank and includes the resource-rich

S/PV. 8690

Jordan Valley, only 1 per cent has been planned for
Palestinian development, while 70 per cent of the area is
included within the boundaries of the regional councils
of illegal Israeli settlements. Similarly, only 13 per
cent of East Jerusalem, much of which is already built
up, is zoned for Palestinian construction, while 35 per
cent of the land in East Jerusalem has been confiscated
for Israeli settlement use. The purpose of that policy
is crystal clear — to acquire the maximum amount of
Palestinian land with the minimum of Palestinians.
The illegal annexation of Palestinian land is not an
unexpected result of the Israeli occupation. It is its
overarching objective.
Three years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016), reaffirming the international
consensus concerning a just and lasting peace, based
on international law and identifying the obligations of
the parties and the international community at large.
Had there been enforcement and accountability, I
assure the Council that the report of the SecretaryGeneral today would certainly be different. Instead,
Israeli exceptionalism and impunity have continued,
emboldening Israel to pursue and entrench its illegal
occupation, to the detriment of the Palestinian people’s
inalienable rights. Peace requires the fulfilment of
those rights, not acceptance of their continued denial.
This morning, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 74/139 on the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, including the right to
their independent State. The resolution has garnered
the support of more than 90 per cent of the United
Nations membership, with 160 Members voting in
favour and five against. Is such support for our right
to self-determination, which is a principle enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and has been a
cornerstone policy of the United States of America since
President Wilson, an expression of bias against Israel?
Can resolutions on Palestinian rights, the peaceful
settlement of the conflict and Jerusalem or against
Israeli settlements be characterized as anti-Israel?
The General Assembly resolutions on Palestine
are firmly rooted in the Charter of the United Nations,
international law, human rights and the resolutions
of the Council itself. Yet it is cynically called biased
and one-sided, with the Israeli representative calling
the countries making up the General Assembly
“morally bankrupt”. The General Assembly is not
morally bankrupt. Those who are occupying us and
promoting occupation are morally bankrupt. The

19-4197021/24

S/PV.8690

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

General Assembly is more universal and representative
today than at any point in history. Israel therefore
cannot celebrate resolution 181 (II) — as the Israeli
representative celebrated it not long ago in the General
Assembly — and commend the General Assembly for
adopting it 70 years ago, while dismissing all other
resolutions adopted since then. Israel’s very selective
approach to United Nations resolutions and international
law, claiming rights and dismissing obligations, should
never be condoned or encouraged.
The claim that the United Nations adopts a
disproportionate number of resolutions on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is a distortion that disregards key
facts and the relevant context. Any reference to the
number of resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
on the Palestine question must be seen in the context of
the paralysis of the Security Council when it comes to
the conflict. Therein lies the real imbalance and bias.
In the past decade, out of 636 Security Council
resolutions, only two have been adopted on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict — only two over the past 10
years — namely, resolution 1860 (2009), to stop the war
of aggression against our people in Gaza in 2009, and
resolution 2334 (2016). Likewise, out of 271 presidential
statements adopted over the past decade, only three
concerned Palestine and Israel — only three out of 271.
Therefore, claims that the United Nations is singling
out Israel through an inordinate number of resolutions
are selective and misleading at best and biased at worst,
as such claims ignore the situation in the Council, where
the opposite is true and any effort to address Israel’s
blatant contempt for international law, the authority
of the Council and its resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016), as conveyed once again in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, is obstructed.
The Security Council has not adopted any resolution
regarding the Palestinian-Israeli conflict under Chapter
VII, although more than 50 per cent of the resolutions
adopted concerning other conflicts in the past 10 years
have been under Chapter VII. Of 50 per cent of the 636
resolutions that were adopted under Chapter VII over
the past 10 years, not a single one has had to do with
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, although the situation
demonstrates the need for such an endeavour.
The fate of the region depends to a great extent
on the ability of the international community to
demonstrate that the international will to achieve peace
is stronger than Israel’s will to colonize Palestinian
22/24

18/12/2019

land. We call on the Council and all States to act now to
advance accountability, justice, freedom and peace for
the sake of the Palestinian people, the Israeli people,
future generations, regional and global peace and
security, and the international rules-based order.
Before concluding, I would like to take a moment to
express our deep appreciation to the outgoing Security
Council members on the completion of their service on
the Council with principle and distinction. We thank
and congratulate the delegations of Kuwait, Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Peru and Poland. I also
wish everyone happy holidays.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I would like to start by
congratulating you, Madam President, on assuming
your role as President of the Security Council. Your
leadership and moral clarity have already had a
palliative effect on the work of the Council, and I am
sure that they will continue to do so.
I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing, and I also
thank Ms. Raemer for sharing her touching story with
us today. Her courageous testimony was moving and
enlightening. I hope that Council members will take it
to heart.
Ms. Raemer’s testimony illustrated how Iranianfunded Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad have been
terrorizing civilians living on the border of the Gaza
Strip for more than a decade. An entire generation has
never known a life without having to be aware at all
times of where the closest bomb shelter is located. An
entire generation suffers from the trauma caused by
the fear that the noise heard at night is that of a terror
tunnel being dug under the bed.
We have been reminded by Council members today,
as we have been reminded many times before, that it is
also hard to live on the other side of the border, and they
are right. It is indeed hard to be a civilian in the Gaza
Strip. In fact, it is hard to be a civilian in all places
where the Iranian regime’s tentacles of terror have
reached. The Iranian regime is dedicated to forcing
a radical and dangerous revolution on the region.
Central to that strategy are its proxies. Wherever they
are, they spread terror and violence against innocent
civilians. The regime’s proxies do not care about the
host countries’ civilians. They use those civilians as
19-41970

18/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

shields in the pursuit of Tehran’s extremist ideology.
They traumatize the innocent and hurt the vulnerable.
That is why it is hard to be a civilian in Israel next
to the border. It is hard to be a civilian in the Gaza Strip,
Iraq, Lebanon, Yemen and Syria. The Iranian regime
abuses civilians on both sides of the border of the Gaza
Strip. It funds Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad. It
directs them to aim rockets at Israeli civilians. It helps
Hamas use the funds provided by some members of the
Council to build terror tunnels and rockets, instead of
hospitals and schools.
Just last week, the 2020 humanitarian response
plan was issued in this building, with the aim of
providing hundreds of millions of dollars to the Gaza
Strip. We hope that it will go to help the people of Gaza.
It will not. Instead, I can assure those present that it
will once again be wasted on furthering an extremist
agenda through terror tactics and harming civilians,
Israelis and Palestinians alike. While there is a need for
funds in Gaza, we can be sure that the money will not
serve its purpose, so long as Hamas is in power with the
support of Iran.
Nineteen-year-old Amir Abu Oun was one of
thousands who took to the streets in Jabalia to protest
against Hamas’ policies in March. On his first day of
peaceful protest, he was beaten by Hamas forces. On the
second day, he was detained for five days, during which
he was deprived of food and, once again, beaten. The
Islamic Republic does not care about the civilians of the
Gaza Strip; it cares only about its extremist ideology.
It is not only in Gaza that the Iranian regime
abuses civilians, but also in Iraq. Iranian Shiite militias
violently crushed the recent protests in Iraq. They
share responsibility for the death of more than 400
Iraqis and wounded more than 20,000. Those civilians
were protesting the economic conditions and corrupt
Governments that are the result of Iranian interference
in the country. Twenty-three-year-old medical student,
Ayat, tweeted that there were demonstrators on the
streets near Tahrir Square in Baghdad. Her patients
were teenagers. She said, “At any moment, they could
fire at us. At any moment, we could die.” The Islamic
Republic does not care about the civilians of Iraq; it
cares only about its extremist ideology.
The Iranian regime abuses civilians in Lebanon.
The Iranian regime created Hizbullah in the 1980s. For
over three decades, Hizbullah has worked to further
the extremist ideologies it shares with the regime.

S/PV. 8690

Hizbullah leader Hassan Nasrallah has been quoted
saying that Hizbullah believes in Ayatollah Khamenei
more than it believes in the Lebanese Constitution.
Last month in Beirut, protesters chanted: “This is
Lebanon, not Iran”. In response, they were beaten and
attacked by Hizbullah. The Islamic Republic directs
Hizbullah to use civilian homes and schools to store
rockets and to build tunnels into Israeli towns and
villages. Very critical for us is the fact that the regime
provides Hizbullah with kits to convert rockets into
precision-guided missiles that could provoke war in the
region — a war that would endanger Lebanese civilians
only to promote the regime’s ideology. The Islamic
Republic does not care about the civilians of Lebanon;
it cares only about its extremist ideology.
The Iranian regime also abuses civilians in Yemen.
The regime funds arms and trains the Houthi forces.
The Houthis’ flag bears the slogan: “Allah is the
greatest of all, death to America, death to Israel, curse
upon the Jews, victory to Islam”. That is the exact same
rhetoric that comes out of the Islamic Republic. The
Iranian regime allows the Houthis to use weapons that
they provide them to arm young children. The Houthis
have over 18,000 child soldiers in their forces. Yemen’s
humanitarian crisis is the largest in the world. Some
80 per cent of the population is in need of humanitarian
assistance, including more than 12 million children. The
Iranian regime’s support of the Houthis is responsible
for prolonging that crisis. The Islamic Republic does
not care about the civilians of Yemen; it cares only
about its extremist ideology.
Syria is another example. The Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps ground forces, the Quds Force and
intelligence services have all been deployed to keep
Bashar Al-Assad in power, no matter the cost — billions
of dollars — although 400,000 Syrian civilians have
lost their lives in the civil war, many of them killed
by people who were trained by the Iranian regime and
were using the weapons that the regime had provided
them. I repeat again that the Islamic Republic does not
care about the civilians of Syria; it cares only about its
extremist ideology.
The Iranian regime abuses civilians even in its own
country. Iranian citizens recently took to the streets to
exercise their basic right to criticize their Government’s
policies — policies that place the regime’s expansionist
ideology over the well-being of Iranian civilians. In
response, the Iranian regime killed more than 200
civilians and injured thousands more. Pouya Bakhtiari,

19-4197023/24

S/PV.8690

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a 27-year-old electrical engineer, was shot and killed
during the protests, which he attended with his mother
and sister on 16 November in Mehrshahr, Iran. Pouya
had an active Instagram account, with over 14,000
followers, on which, despite threats, he shared his
opinions on the regime. On his way to the protest,
during which he was murdered, he recorded a video
message for his followers, saying,
“People, do not miss this opportunity. Once
and for all, let us destroy this criminal and corrupt
regime that for 40 years has made the dear Iranian
people miserable.”
While blood is flowing in the streets of Tehran,
cash continues to flow to the regime’s proxies and
allies, causing further bloodshed across the region.
Meanwhile, it is expected that by March 2020, 57 million
Iranians will be living below the absolute poverty line.
It is therefore no wonder that protesters are chanting in
Iran: “No to Gaza, no to Lebanon. I give my life only
for Iran”. But the Islamic Republic does not care about
its civilians; it cares only about its extremist ideology.
Wherever the Iranian regime’s tentacles of terror
reach, civilians suffer. The Islamic Republic remains
the biggest threat to security and stability in the region,
yet many members of the Council and the international
community try to appease the regime. For years, Israel
has warned that the regime’s nuclear and expansionist
ambitions pose a threat to the entire world. We have

24/24

18/12/2019

warned that the regime will sacrifice everything, even
innocent civilian lives, to promote its agenda. Such
appeasement has done nothing to slow it down.
Today we heard from Ms. Raemer from Israel about
what it means to be a civilian affected by the Islamic
Republic for years. We could have heard today from a
civilian in Gaza, Iraq, Lebanon, Yemen, Syria or Iran,
and his or her experience of living under the influence
of the regime would have been similar. Civilians across
the Middle East are risking their lives to protest the
regime’s presence in their countries. They are doing all
they can to hold back the regime’s regional ambitions.
It is time that the international community took
action and join them. Let their courage serve as a
catalyst. More pressure must be applied on the Iranian
regime to stop its terror in the region and around the
world and to stop promoting its nuclear programme. We
must follow in the footsteps of our American ally, leave
the Iran deal and apply more sanctions. The Iranian
regime does not care about the civilians in the region,
but the civilians of the region are counting on the hope
that the Security Council does.
The President: There no more names inscribed on
the list of speakers.
I now invite council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

19-41970
