78

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

crease their assistance to thc people of Ethiopia for
relief, rehabilitation and rccovery of the droughtstricken areas;
4. Calls upan all conccrned to cnsure that the
international assistancc provided be used for the sole
purpose of relief and rehabilitation;
5. Invites the Secretary-General, the United Nations Disaster Relicf Co-ordinator and the Administrator of the United Nations Developmcnt Programme
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session and to the Economic and Social Council at its
sixty-fourth session on the implementation of paragraphs 2 to 4 above and of other rclevant resolutions
of the Assemhly and the Council.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/56.

Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 Deccmber ] 971, establishing the Office of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, 3243 (XXIX) of 29
Novembcr J 974 on the strcngthening of that Office.
3440 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, which provides,
inter alia, for measures to be taken in support of thc
activities of the Office, and 3532 (XXX) of 17 December 1975 on the financing of emergency relicf
assistance and technical co-operation activities of the
Office,
Recalling also section II, paragraph 14, of its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of I 6 September ] 975,
Reaffirming its resolution 31/ 173 of 2 I Deccmber
1976 in which, in ter alia, it recognized the need for the
maintcnance of the activities of thc core programme of
the Office of the United Nations Disastcr Relief Coordinator and provided for measures for securing a
sound financia! basis for the Office as well as fo~ a
review by thc Economic and Social Council in 1978
of alternative sources of funding for thc technical cooperation activities of the Office,
Bearing in mind that the Office of thc United Nations
D!sa_ster Reli~f Co-o~dinator. as a permanent body
w1thm the Umted Nat10ns system, is rcsponsihle, ínter
alia, for co-ordinating international disaster relief assistance,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the Officc
of the United Nations Disaster Rclief Co-ordinator; 2 º
2. Commends the Unitcd Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator for his efforts on behalf of the victims
of disasters;

3. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 2102 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977 on measures
to expcdite international relief;
4. Invites Governments of disaster-prone countries
to undertake measures of planning and preparedness
for the provision of relief to victims of natural disasters
and to co-ordinate their efforts with those of and
co-operate with, the international community,' and
requests the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
20 A/32/64 and Corr.l.

Co-ordinator to assist those countries m this work to
the extent possible;
5. Urges rcsident representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme, in collaboration with
the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator and appropriate specialized agencies, to cooperate with and assist Governments that wish to
include in their country programmes projects to reduce
thc impact of disasters and lessen their long-term socioeconomic cffects;
6. Reafjirms that the Sccretary-General should continuc to have the capacity to contributc emergency
relief assistancc to countries as a first response to disastcr situations:
7. Decides to examine at its thirty-third session the
question of future financia} arrangements for ensuring
a sound financia! basis for the core programme of the
Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator with a vicw to including in the draft programme
hudget for the hiennium 1980-1981 proposals for a
further transfcr of appropriate costs from voluntary
funding to the Unitcd Nations regular budget;
8. Requests the Committee for Programme and Coordination to take thc prescnt resolution into consideration whcn formulating its recommendations on thc
medium-term plan for the period 1980-1983.
98th plenary meeting
R December 1977

~2/;"i7.

Examination of long-term treurls in f'<'O•
nomi<' deYelopment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of l May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New Intcrnational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 197 4 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Dutics of States and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
Scptembcr 1975 on dcvelopment and international cconomic co-operation.
RecognizinR that the United Nations activities initiated by General Assembly resolution 3508 (XXX) of
15 Deccmbcr 1975, entitled "Examination of long-tcrm
trcnds in the cconomic development of the regions of
the world". ~o be continued and expanded on the basis
of Econom1c and Social Council resolution 2090
(LXIII) of 25 July 1977, should contributc to the
establishment of the ncw international economic order
and, in this context. to the process of international
cconomic negot_i~tions relating, inter alia, to trade, prim ary commod1t1es, food problems, industrialization,
monetary problems and other issues of primordial importancc for cconomic and social dewlopmcnt on a
global scak,
Bearing in mind that the regional studies involved
should be so designed as to reach practica! conclusions
rcgarding (he expansion of cconomic co-opcration on
hoth a regional and an international scalc,
Bearing a/so in mind the need to study long-tcrm
prospects for the social and economic development of
~he vari_ou~ regions of t_h_e world and on global scale,
mte: alta,_ m order to ut1hze, as appropriate, thc results
ach1cvcd m the work 011 the new intcrnational developmcnt strategy,
