United Nations

asdf

Security Council

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7003rd meeting

Wednesday, 17 July 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. DeLaurentis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 

Mr. Stancanelli
Mr. Lumb
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Xie Jifeng
Mr. Cabouat
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Flies
Ms. Bouhamidi
Mr. Siddique
Mr. Lee Kyung Chul
Ms. Taratukhina
Ms. Nzeyimana
Mrs. Balli
Ms. Jobbins

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Protection of journalists
Letter dated 3 July 2013 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the United States
Mission to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/393)

13-39773 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1339773*

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Uganda to participate in this meeting.

contribution to gathering information on violations
of international law. In that way, representatives of
the media play a non-negligible role in preventing
such violations and participate in the fight against the
impunity of their perpetrators.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the text in writing and deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

As long as journalists continue to be harassed
or even killed because of their work, freedom of the
media will remain but an empty promise. Not only do
journalists have the right to be protected, but the acts
of violence against them must be promptly, impartially
and effectively investigated.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Switzerland.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.

Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
was recently interviewed by Swiss journalist Patrick
Vallélian. The interview would not have taken place if
the journalist in question had not been extremely lucky.
Indeed, he miraculously survived an incident in Homs
last year. If one believes his story, the incident was
nothing less than a trap. His French colleague, Gilles
Jacquier, however, was killed in the same incident.

Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I would like
to express my congratulations to the United States on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month.

That is but one example among many that
demonstrate that around the world journalists face
threats, assaults, abductions, disappearances and
even murder. A worldwide increase in murders and
imprisonment of journalists has been noted during the
past few years.
Switzerland recalls that journalists engaged in
dangerous professional missions in areas of armed
conflict are civilians and should not be taken for targets
unless they are directly participating in hostilities. We
also recall resolution 1738 (2006), which calls on States
to prevent attacks on journalists and emphasizes the
importance of protective legal instruments such as the
Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions.
Impunity, often a result of the political impact of
the work of journalists, can be seen as one of the major
causes of repeated attacks on them. And the media
cannot be free if journalists are deliberately targeted or
if those who attack them go unpunished.
That is why I thank the United States for
organizing today’s debate. Without freedom of opinion
and expression there can be neither democracy nor
good governance. Moreover, during armed conflicts,
reliable and independent information is essential for
the international community to play its role. The work
of journalists can, for example, make an important

2

My delegation welcomes the timely convening
of today’s open debate. We are particularly alarmed
that in 2012 alone, 121 journalists were killed and
hundreds of others targeted and imprisoned. In fact,
Malaysia too lost a journalist in Somalia last year.
We are also concerned over reports that journalists
were being targeted and killed while covering events
in Gaza during Israel’s attacks under Operation Pillar
of Defense in November 2012, as described in recent
testimony to the United Nations Special Committee
to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories. In 2012, 147 violations against
journalists were reported.
Journalists are civilians and must be protected
in times of conflict, in accordance with international
law. My delegation also agrees that the perpetrators
of violence against journalists in conflict situations,
such as kidnappings, torture and murder, must be held
accountable and brought to justice. There can be no
impunity whatsoever.
While recognizing the need to enhance protection
for journalists, we must also recognize that journalists
are unique. Their uniqueness stems from the nature of
their job, which is to report on a particular situation.
More often than not, the greater the risk, the higher the
demand for the journalist to report on what is taking
place on the ground. In general, we can say that the
job of a journalist often finds the person in precarious
situations. The more danger he or she faces, the more

13-39773

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

credible the story is supposed to be. Because of that, the
protection of journalists presents a greater challenge, as
opposed to protecting other civilians.
Malaysia believes that the main responsibility
to protect journalists lies with the States. States are
responsible for ensuring the safety of journalists and
should accord protection to them in conflict areas to the
fullest extent of the law. In that regard, my delegation
calls for strict adherence to resolutions 1738 (2006) and
1894 (2009), as well as the relevant international law,
including humanitarian and human rights laws, in the
protection of civilians.
My delegation shares the views reflected in the
2012 United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, as prepared by
UNESCO. We are appalled at the findings that there
is an increasing trend of targeted killing of journalists
worldwide. We condemn the acts of violence that cost
the lives of 372 journalists between 2006 and 2011.
Again, Malaysia believes that impunity must end and
that the acts of violence committed against civilians,
including journalists, must cease. My delegation agrees
that the United Nations has an important role to play in
combating impunity, as reflected in the Plan of Action.
Such measures would include enhancing coordination
amongUnited Nations agencies on the ground in
addressing the issue of the safety of journalists.
The advancement of information and communications
technology could play an important part in improving
protection for journalists. We are now accustomed to live
visual feeds connected via satellite links from conflict
areas which bring home important developments across
the globe. The same technology could greatly enhance
the safety and security of journalists by allowing them
to report on the situation on the ground without actually
being close to the conflict zone.
Malaysia neither disputes nor questions the
important role of journalists in the dissemination of
information in armed conflicts. The protection of
journalists requires the involvement of States and
the media industry and a better understanding of the
role of the journalist. Journalists are a vital tool for
supporting economic progress, the development of
political consciousness and the intellectual growth
of societies. We call on Member States to uphold the
highest standards of adherence to international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law, in order
to protect journalists.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Let me join other
delegations in congratulating you and your country,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We sincerely hope we
shall be able to support you.
At the outset, let me reiterate the importance that
Botswana attaches to the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. For that reason, we have
consistently called on the international community to
act in tandem to prevent the systematic and sometimes
institutionalized attempts to prevent journalists from
conducting their noble profession.
We further believe that there should be growing
commitment on the part of the international community
to implement the ideals espoused in international
human rights law and humanitarian law. Such efforts
should be tailored to complement national systems
aimed at protecting the human rights of those who
are not party to conflict. My delegation welcomes the
Security Council’s continued focus on this important
topic, particularly as it takes place against the backdrop
of ongoing and erupting conflicts around the world.
Botswana notes with concern that in their quest
to provide the international community with valuable
information, journalists often face arbitrary arrests,
brutal harassment and even murder.
Journalists are by their nature data collectors,
record keepers, information specialists and preservers
of knowledge, whether in times of war or in times of
peace. Their role is to record events as they unfold,
analyse them and share them with the international
community or with the public. It is therefore deeply
regrettable that, despite calls by the international
community to respect the rights of journalists, there are
reports of escalating and widespread violations against
those working in conflict situations. Such atrocities are
often committed by those who perceive journalists not
as stakeholders in peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
but as irritants and unwelcome witnesses. Thus
perpetrators wish journalists could abort their noble
mission, primarily because they want their blatant
abuse of human rights hidden from the outside world.
It is our conviction that the existing international
legal frameworks provide a realistic basis for the
protection of journalists in conflict situations. We

13-397733

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

therefore call on all warring factions across the world,
irrespective of their character and formation, to abide
by those normative frameworks.
We also wish to point out that while opposing
parties in times of war have a responsibility to ensure
the protection of journalists, it however remains the
primary responsibility of States to put in place measures
to respect and protect journalists. That should be done
by enacting and aggressively enforcing laws that
punish serious violations of human rights, as set out in
the Hague Convention and the Geneva Conventions, as
well as in their Additional Protocols.
Having said that, it is our belief that prior to
unleashing journalists into conflict zones, media
institutions should provide the necessary counselling
for journalists to enable them to confront extreme
situations. Such counselling should also be provided to
their families and other support structures so that they
may cope with unfriendly situations.
Botswana calls for cooperation among States, the
Security Council and the International Criminal Court
(ICC) to hold States accountable for the protection of
journalists, whether in times of conflict or in times
of peace. The Security Council can also do its part,
perhaps more vigorously, in referring all situations that
threaten international peace and security to the ICC as
the only Court that can open investigations into war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank Ambassador Rosemary DiCarlo,
of the United States of America, as President of the
Security Council, for the invitation to participate in this
open debate and for giving us an opportunity to share
the comments of the Government of Colombia with
regard to the protection of journalists.
The Government of Colombia promotes and
protects the freedom of the press. As President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderón — who is a journalist by
profession — has said on several occasions, journalists
in Colombia can rest assured that the Colombian
Government has arranged all the measures necessary
to promote and protect, at all costs, the freedom and
independence of their selfless work without exception,
to the extent that, as he reaffirmed, criticism from the
press, far from antagonizing us, serves to encourage

4

self-evaluation, self-reflection and the continued
improvement of the Government.
Colombia shares the concern expressed in various
Security Council statements with regard to violence
against journalists. Journalists covering armed conflicts
exercise the fundamental right of providing citizens
with necessary information when crises turn violent,
which in turn leads to conflicts and lends even more
urgency to journalists’ work. In that context, Colombia
sees the Security Council’s interest in those matters as
a contribution to the specialized work being carried out
in other forums that have the competence to speak and
act on such matters, such as the Human Rights Council,
the special rapporteurs and UNESCO.
My country considers it extremely important
that the bodies of the United Nations system, in their
spheres of competence and in accordance with their
mandates under the Charter, be fully familiar with
the work of national Governments in the field of the
protection of civilians when establishing priorities for
their own work and when informing the Organization
on the respective situations.
Colombia sees the freedom of speech and of the
communications media as a pillar of the democratic
system. In that line of thinking, and given the
challenges faced in a conflict environment, such as that
experienced in Colombia with its many violent factors,
the Colombian State decided to afford special treatment
to journalists, bearing in mind the threats they could
face. That special treatment is based upon article 20 of
Colombia’s Constitution, which states that every person
is guaranteed the freedom to express and disseminate
their thoughts and opinions, to inform and receive
truthful and impartial information and to establish
mass communications media.
In 2010, Colombia also enacted Act 1426, by
which it established measures with regard to criminal
actions against the rights of legally protected groups
of human rights defenders and journalists. More
recently, the National Protection Unit was established,
under the Ministry of the Interior, to unify the State’s
frameworks to protect civilians in order to provide
security to judges, prosecutors, human rights defenders
and journalists, among other vulnerable groups.
With that conviction, the Colombian Government
supports and vehemently defends the right to freedom
of speech in all its forms. Colombia believes that
the important role played by the United Nations to

13-39773

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

identify national deficiencies and challenges should be
accompanied by a recognition of the progress achieved
in each country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mr. Spinellis (Greece): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize this
important debate. I also welcome the remarks made by
the Deputy Secretary­
- General, Mr. Eliasson, on the
issue.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Endangering or taking the life of journalists is
an extreme form of censorship, not only because it
silences one voice, but because it aims, and usually
succeeds, at intimidating others. It therefore remains
a highly problematic issue. According to reports and
live testimonies by journalists and the representatives
of non-governmental organizations who are in the
Chamber with us today, the number of journalists
or press operatives killed, kidnapped, wounded or
threatened while carrying out their professional duties
remains alarmingly high.
In most cases, the root cause of the targeting
of journalists remains the fact that they report on
unsettling truths and expose crimes, the perpetrators
of which — whether political autocrats, criminal
organizations or terrorist groups — have something to
lose when a journalist brings their illegal actions into
the forefront. States do indeed have the instruments
necessary to protect journalists in armed conflicts.
Both resolution 1738 (2006) and the Fourth Geneva
Convention and Additional Protocol I contain
unequivocal provisions on the obligation to protect
media professionals reporting in dangerous situations.
More recently, a third tool has been added — the
United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists
and the Issue of Impunity, which is a comprehensive
and practical approach to the issues of the safety
of journalists and impunity. Strong support for the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression, as well as for the work of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, is essential
to ensuring full implementation of the principles and
objectives of the Plan of Action. And enhancing the

United Nations reporting mechanism is essential to the
effective protection of journalists.
Combating impunity will undoubtedly reduce
the unusually high numbers of deaths, abductions
and detentions. Insufficient investigation, too few
convictions and simple impunity perpetuate the
cycle of violence against journalists. The problem
of impunity is not limited to failure to investigate
murders of journalists, but also directly targets
freedom of expression. Curtailing journalists’ freedom
of expression deprives society as a whole of their
contribution and damages press freedom even more,
since a climate of fear results in self-censorship. States
must ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes are
brought to justice and punished for their actions.
Beyond that of States, the role of civil society
in the protection of journalists is crucial. Several
non-governmental organizations are dedicated to
combating attacks on journalists and preventing
violence against them. Greece attaches great importance
to the issue of the protection of journalists and the fight
against impunity. To that end, and in cooperation with
UNESCO and Costa Rica, on the occasion of World
Press Freedom Day in May we organized a side event on
the protection of journalists for the second consecutive
year. Freedom of expression is a fundamental right,
as expressed in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and one that should be universally guaranteed.
Journalists and media professionals are the main actors
in the process of the delivery of news and information.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Sarkowicz (Poland): I would like to begin,
Mr. President, by thanking you and the delegation
of the United States for your initiative in organizing
this important debate on the safety of journalists.
Poland fully aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union on behalf of its
member States.
Let me add just a few remarks. Freedom of
expression is a cornerstone of democratic societies.
It is crucial to the promotion of the rule of law,
democracy and good governance. Although affirmed
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
it is being violated as we speak, often because the
safety of journalists, who seek, receive and transmit
information, is in danger.

13-397735

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

Press and media coverage is beneficial to all.
Journalists play a key role in the democratic process;
they are the eyes and voices of civil society. They
are a check on Governments and monitor those
Governments’ deliverables. Citizen journalism has
contributed greatly to the political changes in Tunisia
and Libya. Journalism still gives hope to people who
struggle under undemocratic regimes, and it alerts the
international community.
The protection of journalists should cover all
news providers, professional and non-professional,
as well as journalists’ sources, and should exist in
time of peace as well as conflict. Recognizing the
importance of freedom of expression for the process of
democratization and journalists’ key role in it, Poland
has consistently raised the issue of journalists’ safety
on the international stage. We support activities that
promote freedom of expression and raise awareness
of the significance of a free media environment. In an
effort to share our experience from our own transition
period, we organize lessons-learned workshops on
democracy for journalists, one of which was held in
Myanmar last year. Since 2011, we have organized, with
Poland’s Reporters Foundation, the Eastern Partnership
Journalism Prize contest, which sends a clear signal
that journalists’ work is appreciated and noticed.
We are happy that 2012 bore so much fruit in the
form of commitments aimed at strengthening the safety
of journalists. The United Nations Plan of Action on
the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, the
guidebook on the subject issued by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and,
lastly, the Human Rights Council’s resolution 21/12 on
the safety of journalists have been very useful.
Poland continues to work on international standards
and on further improving guarantees of reporters’
safety. In April of this year the Polish Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, in cooperation with the embassies of
Austria and Switzerland, organized an international
conference in Warsaw on the safety of journalists.
Among the participants were representatives of
the State, the OSCE, the Council of Europe and
UNESCO, along with journalists and representatives of
non-governmental organizations. Participants discussed
specific recommendations and exchanged views on the
legal framework for the protection of journalists, the
security of investigative journalists and best practices.
The recommendations were subsequently submitted to
the Human Rights Council, UNESCO, and the OSCE

6

and yesterday were also sent to every United Nations
mission in New York.
The challenge here is to further promote and
enhance respect for international standards in this area.
Journalists should be protected from threats to their
security. More must be done to address the root causes
of violence against them. Preventive mechanisms must
be discussed and formulated. We should not hesitate
to ask questions about the most serious threats to the
safety of journalists, the existence of common threat
patterns, successful solutions and how we can ensure
respect for international obligations. And we should do
our utmost to find the answers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I would like to begin
by aligning myself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union.
Journalists, including bloggers, are still all too
often the targets of aggression, harassment, arbitrary
detention and even extrajudicial killings. The adoption
of resolution 1738 (2006), though an important step, has
not put an end to attacks on reporters, so more must
be done. This open debate will be instrumental to that,
in our view, and I would therefore like to thank you,
Mr. President, and through you to commend the United
States delegation for organizing this important event.
The role of journalists before, during and after
conflict is indispensable. The very fact that they are
intentionally being targeted testifies to that. The
media play an important role in preventing conflict
by ensuring that their reporting separates facts and
tangible realities from assumptions and spin. And
after a conflict has broken out, the media also have a
responsibility to provide a reliable account of what is
really going on. Their stories and images show what
is actually happening, which can help a community to
understand the conflict that is taking place. Real insight
may also help to generate international commitment to
conflict resolution.
Resolution 1738 (2006) summed it up well.
Intentional acts of violence against journalists are
unacceptable and should be condemned and prosecuted
by the authorities, because attacks on the media have
the sole and illegitimate purpose of curtailing freedom
of expression, and through that the people’s voices. And
we need more voices to be heard, not fewer. Thanks

13-39773

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

to the advent of the Internet, that is exactly what is
currently happening. Everyone can now reach large
audiences with their story or footage. Citizen journalism
has become an important source of information during
conflict and real-time images often have enormous
impact, which also makes them an attractive instrument
for manipulation for some.
The Netherlands has therefore decided to
encourage new forms of journalism and to contribute
to the protection of its messengers. We provide
such encouragement by financially supporting the
development of the StoryMaker application. This
application enables citizen and professional journalists
in conflict areas to immediately tell and share their
stories by mobile phone with millions of people around
the world without endangering their online privacy and
security. The application also includes an interactive
training guide on independent and safe reporting. It
is available for free and can be downloaded through
www.storymaker.cc.
We are promoting our second priority, protection,
by establishing the Freedom Online Coalition. This
cross-regional coalition, now numbering 21 countries,
was set up in 2011 and is committed to respecting
human rights and fundamental freedoms offline and
online alike. As a part of that, several members of
the Freedom Online Coalition have set up the Digital
Defenders Partnership to promote innovative solutions
in keeping access to the Internet open. The Partnership
is also used to support journalists, bloggers and
cyberactivists who find themselves under attack and to
facilitate deployment of emergency Internet access in
countries where the Internet is not accessible.
These are just two examples of concrete action to
protect the freedom of expression and its messengers.
But more still needs to be done. The Netherlands looks
forward to collaborating with the members of the
Council to ensure better protection for the courageous
journalists who help to ensure that the truth is not the
first casualty in conflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I wish to thank Ambassador
Rosemary DiCarlo for the initiative to convene this
very important meeting. Impartial media work plays an
important role in increasing the understanding among

peoples and nations, and it is of great importance for
humankind.
Today, an armed group killed Mr. Mohammad
Jamous in southern Lebanon as he was returning home.
He was accompanied by his 17 year-old daughter.
This armed terrorist group is receiving military and
financial support from States and Governments that are
assisting terrorist groups in my country. Lamentably,
this honourable man died even as we participate in this
very important meeting.
The Syrian Government has been working to treat
the media openly throughout the events occurring
in Syria. We have adopted a reformed media law to
promote the work of the media and guarantee greater
freedom and transparency. The Syrian Government is
working to ensure that the truth and facts emerge. We
worked with United Nations Special Envoy Kofi Annan
to establish his six-point plan, including its fifth point
on media access and work. The Syrian Government
periodically gave Mr. Annan a list of the names of
journalists who have access to Syria. Those journalists
numbered 160 in the Arab and foreign media, from
25 March 2012 to 21 April 2013. According to the
Ministry of Information, access has been given to
300 members of the media from around the world, and
we have enabled all of them to work freely.
The Syrian Government attaches particular
importance to the security and safety of journalists. We
have urged them not to enter Syrian territory illegally,
as that would expose them to danger. We have also
urged them to avoid areas where armed terrorist groups,
including Al-Nusra, gather.
Unfortunately, terrorist groups have targeted
foreign journalists as well as Syrians. They have been
killed, assassinated and abducted. Mr. Richard Engel,
for instance, was himself abducted by a terrorist group.
We had hoped that Mr. Engel would reveal the identity
of those hostage-takers, which might have helped
the Council to understand in greater detail what is
happening in Syria. Two French journalists are still
being held captive by terrorist groups. Unfortunately,
we have lost other journalists, including Gilles Jacquier,
who was assassinated by terrorist groups.
The Syrian Government has striven to cooperate
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
in seeking to ensure the freedom of these abducted
journalists, as well as the return to their home countries
of the remains of journalists who have been killed.

13-397737

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

Some journalists are infiltrating Syrian territory
through common borders with neighbouring countries.
This is illegal and is being carried out with terrorist
assistance. Accordingly, some of those journalists have
been exposed to danger or have been arrested then
freed to return home. On behalf of my Government,
I have sent official letters to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council containing
information about some journalists who have illegally
entered Syrian territory. In those letters, we confirm
that those journalists alone bear the legal responsibility
for any consequences ensuing from their illegal
accessing of Syrian territory.
Some Governments are seeking to promote their
geopolitical objectives, destroy the Syrian State and
undermine its infrastructure and national institutions. A
vigorous media campaign has been mobilized to incite
violence and terrorist, spread lies, distort the situation
and fuel divisions within Syria. This is a flagrant
violation of resolution 1624 (2005). The Council cannot
be unaware that that resolution was adopted with the
aim of ending incitement to terrorism.
In that context, Syrian media were placed on a
targeted list in an effort to muzzle them. Journalists and
media professionals have been threatened to prevent
them from carrying out their task of disseminating the
truth. When those efforts failed, some media officials
were abducted and assassinated. Furthermore, a number
media institutions were the targets of terrorist attacks
and destroyed, including the offices of a satellite
channel, which were attacked on 27 June 2012, their
premises looted, four security guards killed and three
journalists executed in cold blood. Other buildings
were targeted on 6 August 2012 with explosives.
We arrested the perpetrator of that terrorist attack,
who has admitted that he received his instructions from
Saudi Arabia. The toll of the attack was nine journalists
killed. Twenty-three Syrian and 39 foreign journalists
have been abducted by a terrorist group.
This media war has not stopped there. It has been
carried on by an embargo imposed on the Syrian
media through a resolution adopted by the League of
Arab States on 2 June 2012 to stop the broadcasting of
certain satellite channels on Nilesat, Arabsat, and the
European Hotbird channel.
Despite the ferocious campaign against Syria, many
courageous, honourable and professional journalists
have contributed to raising public awareness of the

8

reality of the situation in Syria and exposed terrorist
attacks perpetrated by extremist groups, including
foreign extremists and mercenaries who came to Syria
to spread chaos and destruction at the behest of certain
countries that are known to all.
The Taliban movement in Pakistan has announced
that hundreds of these elements have participated
in clashes against Syrian forces at the request of socalled Arab friends, who have also provided help in
Afghanistan. Many honourable journalists have taken
noble positions and have resigned from the chain that is
promoting division and inciting hatred and carnage in
Syria, Egypt and in other countries. These resignations
have played a very important role in revealing the
destructive approach adopted by some media that have
failed to respect the values and objectives of noble
media workers.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I should like to thank the
United States presidency for organizing this debate
on the protection of journalists in conflict situations
under the theme of the protection of civilians. I should
also like to thank the presidency for the concept paper
on the subject (S/2013/393, annex). We have benefited
greatly from the briefings given today by the Deputy
Secretary-General and other briefers.
Before making our observations on this subject,
we would reiterate India’s consistent view that the
protection of journalists in all situations is the foremost
responsibility of every State. In India, articles 19 and 21
of our Constitution guarantee the right to life, personal
liberty, freedom of speech and expression. Such
constitutional rights are of fundamental importance
in any democratic society. Journalists play a crucial
role in ensuring that citizens exercise these rights in
reality. As the world’s most populous democracy, India
is committed to the protection of these rights for all its
citizens, including journalists.
Our ingrained awareness of these rights is an
integral part of our participation in the peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations, to which India has
been the largest contributor. Indian United Nations
peacekeepers have helped to restore peace and security
in conflict situations around the globe and thereby
facilitated the creation of an environment conducive
to the exercise of the right to freedom of speech and
expression.

13-39773

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

Since 1950, India has adhered to and fully supported
the Geneva Conventions. We also recall the Council’s
demand in resolution 1738 (2006) that all parties to
armed conflict comply fully with the obligations
applicable to them under international law related to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including
journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel. Such compliance is necessary not only for
access to information, but also for the resolution of
conflict situations and for post-conflict peacebuilding.
While discussing best practices for protecting
journalists in conflict situations, we would recommend
certain basic precautions. These recommendations are
meant to put in context issues of access and security
in conflict situations. First and foremost, journalists
should function within the relevant domestic laws of the
countries concerned so that they have full recourse to
the protection afforded by such laws to them. Secondly,
their access to conflict zones should be secured in a
legal manner. Thirdly, they should maintain strict
neutrality and impartiality and not become a party to
the conflict. When journalists follow such precautions,
it will become easier for States to protect them, facilitate
their professional work, and ensure that they become a
catalyst for conflict resolution and peacebuilding. For
their part, national Governments must come together
and pledge to provide protection to journalists in
conflict situations, especially where their whereabouts
and coordinates have been provided in advance.
We have witnessed the tremendous dynamism
and professionalism of journalists in reporting from
conflict situations. Many journalists, including women,
have performed their professional duties at grave
personal risk. The protection that these journalists have
received from responsive mechanisms, established by
States under the rule of law, demonstrates the need to
further support the development of such mechanisms.
The efforts of the Council and of the international
community must be directed at assisting national
authorities in augmenting such mechanisms, and in
generating greater awareness of these issues. That is the
most sustainable method for sovereign Governments to
discharge their responsibility to protect journalists in
conflict situations.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
protection of civilians in armed conflict, including

journalists, is undoubtedly a subject of major
importance. I therefore welcome the inspired decision
of the United States presidency to bring this issue to
our attention in order to further spur salutary action
to better protect rights and freedoms throughout the
world.
First, I should like to congratulate the United States
presidency on its excellent conduct of the Security
Council’s work in July, and reiterate my delegation’s
ongoing readiness to support it in the discharge of its
responsibilities. I should also like to express my full
gratitude to Mr. Jan Eliasson for his briefing today and
to all those who kindly agreed to share with us their
views and experiences on this topic.
The protection of journalists in armed conflicts is
an increasingly pressing issue, according to the 2012
report of the UNESCO Director-General, Ms. Irina
Bakova. Indeed, with 600 deaths over the past decade,
including 121 in 2012 alone, the situation of journalists,
staff and freelance alike, is going from bad to worse.
Media professionals continue to be subject to the
most unacceptable treatment, such as abductions,
intimidation, illegal arrests, harassment or rape,
in flagrant violation of article 79 of the Additional
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions. I therefore take
this opportunity to pay a strong tribute to all those
martyrs whose sacrifices attest to the importance of
our responsibility.
The international community’s response to such
practices should be commensurate with the threat they
represent to international security and to fundamental
freedoms. Media professionals play a crucial role in
bringing the truth to light in times of armed conflict.
They make a considerable contribution to raising
awareness among the international community
about the full extent of the security situation and the
underlying causes of insecurity.
Whatever the nature, sensitivity and issues at stake,
the information that is relayed and dealt with by the
press cannot excuse the reprisals that take place, often
going as far as killings. We must therefore establish
an inclusive approach to strengthen protection for
press workers and, above all, to ensure accountability
for perpetrators of such abuses or those who provoke
them. Such persons must be identified and punished
with the full force of the law. I am pleased in this
regard to commend the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,

13-397739

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

which is aimed at ensuring the ideal of a free and safe
environment for media workers.
The Plan of Action’s relevance resides in its vision
of the role of the press in maintaining global peace and
the modus operandi that should lead to achieving it
through the invaluable contribution of United Nations
agencies, Member States and non-governmental
organizations. We are therefore pleased to note that
the Plan of Action promotes the strengthening of the
mechanisms of the United Nations system, cooperation
with States, the development of partnerships with other
international institutions and organizations, including
non-governmental organizations, and awarenessraising in order to end the targeting of journalists.
This mission is of course very complex, given the
risks facing journalism in times of conflict, but we
must make this noble fight a priority concern. With
that in mind, we should help Governments in need to
establish the legal and institutional instruments that
will enable them to pursue perpetrators of acts of
violence against journalists. Such cooperation with
Governments is all the more important in that, as the
report of the UNESCO Director-General shows, out
of the 29 countries on the 2009-2010 list of murdered
journalists, only 18 responded to UNESCO’s call. The
report also informs us of the low rate of convictions.
Only nine cases out of 245 killings perpetrated between
2006 and 2009 led to convictions and punishment.
This range of measures to strengthen security
for journalists should also include the cooperation of
media professionals to prevent or limit the dangers
they face. It should be fully understood that my
delegation in no way advocates self-censorship; this is
simply a question of not uselessly inviting what could
be perceived in a difficult situation as a provocation
without compromising fundamental tenets. I welcome
the drafting of a charter on security for journalists in
areas of conflict where they are working in areas of
war.
The Security Council should also strengthen action
to protect journalists in conformity with the spirit of
resolution 1738 (2006). In this context, it would be useful
to provide United Nations peacekeeping missions with
the necessary human, technical and legal capacities to
protect journalists.
Lastly, I should like to encourage the Council in
the dynamic already under way, which requires the
international community as a whole to take decisive

10

action commensurate with the challenge that journalists
face in times of conflict. I therefore reiterate my
country’s commitment to contributing to freedom of
information, including in times of conflict.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Červenka (Czech Republic): Let me start by
thanking the United States presidency for scheduling
this important debate, Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson for his dedication to the protection of
journalists, and the media representatives for their
moving briefings. The Czech Republic aligns itself
with the earlier statement made by the European Union.
Journalists and other media workers play an essential
role in informing the public and the international
community about current events, both in conflict
and in non-conflict situations. The Czech Republic is
therefore deeply worried about continuing restrictions
of free expression and independent journalism by State
and non-State actors in some countries, as well as by
escalating trends of harassment, arrests, torture and the
persecution of journalists worldwide.
The protection of journalists in armed conflict is
of vital importance in order to ensure their safety as
well as the freedom of information. We therefore highly
value the recent efforts of the Human Rights Council in
this regard, especially the adoption of resolution 21/12
on the safety of journalists in September 2012, which
the Czech Republic co-sponsored. Furthermore, we
commend the progress achieved by UNESCO and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
this area.
In recent years, we have witnessed unprecedented
violence against journalists in some countries,
especially in the Middle East and northern Africa.
By the end of 2012, attacks on journalists in these
countries escalated significantly, making Syria in
particular one of the most dangerous places in the
world. Unfortunately, this negative trend continues in
2013. Violent attacks on journalists indicate a serious
deterioration of the freedom of expression in the region
and highlight violations of the right to publish and
exchange information and views.
In this context, the Czech Republic believes that it
is absolutely crucial for United Nations Member States
to respect and ensure respect for the applicable rules of
the international humanitarian law on the protection of

13-39773

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

journalists. Article 79, the key provision of Additional
Protocol I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, clearly sets
out that journalists engaged in dangerous professional
missions in areas of armed conflict shall be considered
as civilians, and that they shall be protected. The
Council itself unanimously stressed this principle in its
landmark resolution 1738 (2006), recently recalled in the
presidential statement of 12 February (S/PRST/2013/2).

UNESCO and aiming at securing greater cooperation
among United Nations organizations, Member States
and other stakeholders in supporting the creation of a
free and safe environment for journalists and media
workers in conflict and non-conflict situations. We
particularly appreciate the United Nations Plan’s
concrete implementation strategy for the global and
national levels.

In conclusion, the Czech Republic would like to take
this opportunity to recognize, honour, and underscore
the essential role of independent media and civil society
in protecting freedom of expression and democratic
principles. I should like to pay tribute to the work of all
fearless journalists who dedicate their lives, sometimes
at great personal cost, to this cause. We would like to
express our solidarity with all those who have lost their
lives in the fight for freedom of expression and the
promotion of democracy in the world.

The increasing violence across the world against
journalists undermines the very foundation of open and
democratic societies in which freedom of expression is
a cornerstone. The Nordic countries welcome the first
resolution on the safety of journalists adopted by the
Human Rights Council in September 2012 (resolution
21/12).

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Sweden.
Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
At the outset, I should like to thank the United States
for taking the initiative to hold an open debate on the
protection of journalists in armed conflict. I should
also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his
briefing and the distinguished journalists for sharing
their valuable insights and experiences with us today.
The Nordic countries greatly value the crucial
role of journalists in enhancing the international
community’s understanding of conflict areas, and we
are deeply committed to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts, including the protection of journalists.
The work of journalists in armed conflict — witnessing
and reporting on violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of humanitarian law — is in the
international public interest. The presence of journalists
often helps to prevent atrocities being committed. Yet,
many journalists and media workers are persecuted
during armed conflicts precisely because of their work.
It is often said that truth is the first casualty of war;
this sometimes translates into a deliberate targeting of
journalists.
In light of the worsening situation over the past
decade, the Nordic countries very much welcome the
creation of the United Nations Plan of Action on the
Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, led by

Many different forms of media play a key role in
the exercise, promotion and protection of the right to
freedom of opinion and expression. Journalists, like
everyone else, are entitled to the same rights online
as they have offline, as affirmed by the Human
Rights Council in its landmark resolution 20/8, “The
promotion, protection and enjoyment of human rights
on the Internet”, adopted in July 2012.
We, the international community, must demand
and ensure that the protection under international
humanitarian law given to journalists, as recognized
war correspondents and as civilians, is fully respected
and upheld. The Security Council must be clear and
strong in its messages and resolutions that violations
against civilians and journalists cannot be tolerated.
We, the international community, must also put pressure
on those who fail to respect the basic yet vital rules that
apply. Journalists also play a crucial role in witnessing,
gathering information, and reporting on violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law. This is an essential element in
ensuring that such crimes do not go unpunished.
Neither should crimes against journalists
themselves go unpunished. Promoting the safety of
journalists and fighting impunity requires preventive
actions to address the causes of violence against
journalists and impunity. This encompasses the need
to deal with issues such as corruption, organized crime
and an effective framework for the rule of law.
At the thirty-first International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent in 2011, the States
parties agreed in a resolution on a four-year action
plan to enhance the protection of journalists and the

13-3977311

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

role of media workers. We must report on progress at
the next Conference in 2015. Education is also needed
in preventative actions and to underline causes of
violence against journalists. For this purpose, we have
a common responsibility to educate our armed forces
on the protection of civilians and journalists under
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
and we must make sure that crimes against them are
brought to justice.
The Nordic countries support a range of initiatives
that are relevant to the topic of today’s debate. Let
me mention just a few. Norway, in partnership with
Argentina, Austria, Indonesia and Uganda, has
led a series of regional conferences on the theme
“Reclaiming the protection of civilians under
international humanitarian law”. At the final global
conference held in May this year, the protection of
journalists was specifically underlined in the co-Chairs’
recommendations.
The Swedish Folke Bernadotte Academy and the
Swedish National Defence College have produced
a handbook on assisting international criminal
investigations with very hands-on information to all
those — including journalists — who are present in
conflict environments on how to correctly identify,
gather and forward information on possible international
crimes to international criminal courts and tribunals.
UNESCO and Reporters Without Borders have
developed a practical guide for journalists in conflict
zones. Sweden, together with the Swedish Reporters
Without Borders, is in the process of translating this
handbook to ensure its wider distribution.
In closing, this debate today has underscored
the difficult circumstances under which journalists
operate, while providing the international community
with vital information from conflict areas. It is our
common responsibility to make sure that they can play
this indispensable role without risking their own lives.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Ecuador.
Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to thank the United States presidency for
convening this debate on the security of journalists
in armed conflict. To me personally as a professional
journalist, this subject is of particular interest, as it is for
my country, which is a champion of the right of access
by all to truthful, timely and verified information.

12

It is important to note the duty of States to protect all
their citizens in any situation that puts their lives at risk
as a result of criminal and delinquent activities. This
protection should be for all, regardless of condition or
profession. We must, however, be careful not to consider
that every murder of an individual who happens to be a
journalist is necessarily an infringement of the freedom
of expression when in reality it may simply be a case of
common crime. In every circumstance, Ecuador calls
on all States not to allow the killing of journalists to go
unpunished.
The specific theme of today’s debate is the protection
of journalists in armed conflict. This protection is
defined, first and foremost, as that which international
humanitarian law grants to civilians in cases of armed
conflict. In that context, Ecuador condemns the deaths
of all civilians and non-combatants — most certainly
including journalists — as a result of collateral damage
in actions not directed against military objectives, as
defined by the laws of war, or in extrajudicial executions,
which are illegal under international law and may even
be carried these days using remote-controlled means
that do not distinguish between armed combatants and
civilian populations, including journalists, who must be
protected in all circumstances.
A second element underpinning the need to
protect journalists in armed conflicts is the right of
society to have access to truthful information, and its
corresponding right, that of freedom of expression. The
presence of journalists in the midst of armed conflicts
has helped societies to better understand the horrors of
war and clearly understand who are the true aggressors
and who are the people exercising their right to selfdefence and self-determination.
This role of a committed, independent and truthful
journalist must be protected. However, we believe it
necessary to reflect on the situation of those who, in
the exercise of journalistic activities, are really more
the agents of propaganda, even if involuntary, of one
of the Powers in conflict when they are embedded in
military units that are subject to censorship behind
which war crimes are often hidden. There are ethical
and ontological considerations in that regard that should
not be overlooked in this debate.
As on other occasions, my delegation reiterates its
appeal for respect for the basic mandates of the various
United Nations bodies in order to avoid ineffective
duplication of effort and, above all, distortions from the

13-39773

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

appropriate treatment that these issues deserve. While
we value the attention that the Council and UNESCO
are now giving to the safety of journalists, we believe
that it is up to the Human Rights Council specifically,
and its Special Rapporteur in general, to address the
issue of journalists’ safety, in particular because of the
valuable tools at its disposal, including its emergency
appeals and its universal periodic review mechanism.
In our view, the ever-present risk of politicizing
matters related to the protection of human rights, in
this case for journalists, by taking them to bodies that
are eminently political, as is undoubtedly the case of
the Security Council, weakens the necessary message
of complete and total respect of the human rights of
all human beings. At least this is our reading and our
understanding; of course, there are many others. Who
knows how many other readings there may be? A
number of opinions have been expressed on this very
same issue, and from this diversity everyone will draw
their own conclusions.
That brings us to an issue that should be key and
ineluctable — context. Journalists have died in my
country. There were recently two disturbing cases in
Ecuador. The first one, this year, involving Fausto
Baldiveso, is currently being investigated. My country’s
prosecutor and police have detained seven suspects
to date, all of whom have been linked to usury and
drug trafficking in the past. The other case, of 2012,
involves Juan Antonio Serrano Selgado, the brother of
Ecuador’s Minister of the Interior, a photojournalist
who was murdered by a group of young people who
had been taking drugs. According to the investigations
to date, neither of those two unfortunate cases are
linked to the journalistic lives of those citizens. When
Ms. Kathleen Carroll read out this morning a list of
countries — an incomplete one at that, without context
or qualification — she was undertaking a perverse
exercise that belied a lack of serious and honest
journalism. At a time when that is what we are seeking
today, it seems that when haste is placed before rigour,
the result is politicization.
In conclusion, I cannot fail to mention that the type
of indiscriminate electronic monitoring that the world’s
citizens have experienced in recent weeks can also
jeopardize the lives of journalists and their sources,
especially in situations of armed conflict. As an
associated State of the Common Market of the South,
Ecuador endorses the comments of the Permanent
Representative of Brazil this morning with regard to the

need to adopt multilateral rules governing the Internet,
in order to ensure the protection communications, the
privacy of individuals and respect for the sovereignty
of States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to thank you
very much, Mr. President, for having organizing this
important meeting. We would also like to pay tribute
to all journalists who have lost their lives in the context
of the circumstances mentioned in the invitation to this
meeting.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela hopes and is
working for a world of peace free of violence, which is
the only real way to avoid such tragic events, So long
as war persists, we will continue to regret such events.
We are therefore working towards a world of justice
and peace, both of which are mutually reinforcing. We
need such a world so that we need not regret not just
the killing of journalists, but also the loss of so many
innocent lives. All death is regrettable. My statement
is aimed primarily at finding ways of ensuring peace.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
its support for the need to protect civilians in armed
conflict, including journalists and all media personnnel.
We also reiterate that responsibility to protect lies
primarily with sovereign States, which need to abide by
international humanitarian law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
The best way to protect civilians, including
journalists and media personnel, is through diplomacy
and dialogue, not by using force. It is also the best way
to attain peace. We must strive to protect civilians in
armed conflict without resorting to the use of force.
In that regard, the role of the United Nations must be
to serve as an honest, objective, neutral and impartial
mediator between the parties to a conflict, paving the
path for a durable, peaceful solution. That is the only
way not just to avoid the loss of innocent lives, but any
loss of life. Peacekeeping operations must focus on
using their political influence and their role of providing
comprehensive support for parties to a conflict in the
search for a peaceful solution. Peacekeeping operations
must be a part of political solutions to conflicts, not an
alternative to them.

13-3977313

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

In that connection, my delegation expresses its
concern at the Security Council’s adoption of resolution
2098 (2013), last March, which refers to the establishment
of an intervention brigade responsible for neutralizing
certain armed groups and reducing the threat they
pose to the authority of the State and to security in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, thereby creating some scope for stabilization
activities. Venezuela stands by the Government and
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
also recognize the imminent need to protect civilians
affected by the conflict, and we reject the atrocities
committed by certain armed groups. However, we also
fear that the establishment of that intervention brigade
might set a negative precedent for how peacekeeping
operations are carried out. For the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, it is important to emphatically reiterate
that the establishment of the brigade cannot and must
not, under any circumstances, set a precedent for how
the Council conducts itself.
We are also deeply concerned that unmanned aerial
systems — drones — are being used in the context of
peacekeeping operations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. While such aircraft are currently being used
to protect civilians, United Nations staff and facilities,
we have very few assurances that in the near future
they will not be used as instruments of war. Judging by
the establishment of the intervention brigade, the trend
seems to be that the protection of civilians justifies
anything.
Before I conclude, I would like to clarify that when
we speak of journalists and media personnel we are
not just referring to the reporters and columnists of the
major media conglomerates. We are also referring to all
of those who from their communities or places of work
reveal to the their societies and the world at large the
abuses and violations that are taking place on a day to
day basis.
Let us not forget to mention that, on more than a
few ocassions, some information outlets appear to act
as instruments for inciting violence and war. We should
therefore take note of the fact that such networks are
also responsible for the deaths of journalists in armed
conflict; for, whether deliberately or not, they expose
them to dangers for which they are not prepared.
This is therefore about journalists in general,
working within their own communities and workplaces.
With all due respect to them, however, reporting is not

14

carried out just by them. We are also speaking about
people such as Julian Assange and Edward Snowden,
who, acting for truth and justice, while putting their
lives in danger, have exposed the enormous reach of
one of the greatest threats to international peace and
security: cyberwar. Those reporters also deserve the
protection of the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank the President for her leadership in convening this
open debate. I would also express my appreciation for
the valuable briefings given by His Excellency Mr. Jan
Eliasson, DeputySecretary-General, Mr. Richard Engel
of NBC News, Ms. Kathleen Carroll of the Associated
Press and the Committee to Protect Journalists,
Mr. Mustafa Haji Abdinur of AFP and Mr. Ghaith
Abdul-Ahad of The Guardian.
In 2012, the number of journalists killed globally
was tragically high, totalling more than 120, a number
that includes several Japanese journalists. We would
like to express our sincere condolences for those who
have fallen in the course of their efforts to investigate
and deliver facts to all the world’s people. Against that
backdrop, it is both timely and meaningful that the
Security Council is holding an open debate focused on
the protection of journalists. It is especially important
that the Council, which is responsible for international
peace and security, hear directly the views of journalists
who have worked in the field and who have broad
experience covering active conflicts in the face of
grave personal danger.
Attacks against journalists are assaults against
freedom of expression. As pointed out in the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity, without freedom of expression,
and particularly freedom of the press, an informed,
active and engaged citizenry is impossible. In particular,
without the courageous actions of journalists, the world
would not know about the suffering of people during
ongoing conflicts, when numerous human rights abuses
and humanitarian crises occur. Protecting journalists
means shedding light on suffering, informing people
of the truth and contributing to improving the situation.
In other words, journalists are not only defenders of
freedom of expression; they also play a significant role
in consolidating democracy through their reporting and
contributions to the advancement of human rights.

13-39773

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

The Geneva Conventions constitute the first legal
framework for protecting journalists, one that was
further developed through the adoption of resolution
1738 (2006) and the Plan of Action I just mentioned.
However, we still face challenges in implementing
those frameworks.
In particular, the fight against impunity, especially
in terms of prevention, is of critical importance. In cases
when Japanese journalists have died or been killed,
the Government of Japan has requested the countries
concerned to provide detailed information on each
incident, and it expects justice to be done. Japan both
commends and emphasizes the importance of efforts
to document instances of the killing of journalists,
to monitor Government responses to such acts and to
publicize the outcomes, including activities undertaken
by the Committee to Protect Journalists and UNESCO.
Resolution 1738 (2006) clarifies the issue of
protecting journalists. However, the security conditions
for journalists have yet to improve. Furthermore, we
should remember that many non-conflict related
cases also exist where journalists are in grave danger.
The Security Council should find ways to prevent
journalists from falling prey to tragic situations and
further encourage good practices.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Pyvovarov (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
delegation of the United States for organizing today’s
meeting of the Security Council, which is devoted to
the important issue of protecting journalists in armed
conflicts.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.
We express our gratitude to Mr. Eliasson for his
comprehensive briefing, as well as to the representatives
from the leading media entities present here today.
No one doubts that today information directly
impact the key global political processes. Over the
past two years, the world witnessed a steady increase
in the number of journalists killed or injured while
performing their professional duties. Unfortunately, a
key reason for that unacceptable situation is the increase
in zones of instability, inadequate international legal
mechanisms to protect journalists, the impunity of
those committing crimes, the creation of obstacles

to journalists’ professional activities, and the state of
global information campaigns.
The events of the Arab Spring, especially in Syria,
and the alarming news from other countries in the region
demonstrate the true price we pay for being informed of
the real situation inside conflict zones. While ordinary
people try to escape and save themselves from chaos
and bloodshed, journalists, in contrast, attempt to
reach such areas in order to provide us with the latest
news. Unfortunately, their courage and professionalism
sometimes cost them their lives or their health.
I would like to recall that, thanks to a successful
escape attempt a few months ago, the Ukrainian
journalist Anhar Kochnyeva was able to return home
from captivity in Syria, where she had spent almost six
months. Over the past 10 years, more than 20 Ukrainian
journalists have died while performing their duties in
the line of fire.
That is why, in our view, today’s debate should
answer the question of how the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, can contribute more
effectively to protecting journalists from violence
and safeguarding them from danger when working in
conflict zones.
Strengthening the freedom of expression and
developing a solid framework of international
humanitarian law, one that would guarantee journalists
the right to work in an environment free from fear of
persecution and aggression, is one of the main priorities
of Ukraine’s 2013 chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and of its
vice-presidency of the United Nations Committee on
Information.
Ukraine believes that free, independent, responsible
and professional journalism is the basis for a modern,
democratic civil society. Our country supports all
international mechanisms aimed at strengthening the
global protection of journalists throughout the world, in
particular those promoted by the Human Rights Council.
We supported the resolution adopted by the Council in
September 2012 to improve the situation in this domain.
Ukraine is also actively engaged in UNESCO’s work to
strengthen the intergovernmental response to violent
and aggressive acts against journalists working in highrisk areas and danger zones.
My country strongly supports the full
implementation of the principles set out in the United

13-3977315

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists
and the Issue of Impunity. We consider it an important
document in the global fight against the impunity of
persons and criminal entities that threaten media
personnel directly in conflict zones.
Strengthening the activities of professional
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) worldwide
could also become an important part of efforts aimed
at improving journalists’ security in general. Such
NGOs should continue to draw Governments’ attention
to the shortcomings of the existing physical and legal
protections for media personnel. We believe that
close cooperation between different governmental
agencies and NGOs could provide a positive impetus,
including revising the list of new areas of informational
activity — for example in the blogosphere — where
journalists would have the same rights as when they
worked in conflict zones.
Ukraine believes that one of the most problematic
aspects in protecting journalists in armed conflicts is
not the absence of an international legal framework,
but of specific implementation mechanisms. A case
in point is the difficulty in bringing to account those
responsible for acts of aggression against media
representatives in conflict zones. In our view, it is also
extremely important, at the level of the United Nations,
to make a clear distinction between journalistic activity
during armed conflicts and espionage. Unfortunately,
in some States accusations of spying often serve as a
legal basis to deny journalists access to conflict zones
and as a reason for their illegal detention.
In that context, Ukraine is extremely alarmed by
the current tendency of increasing media confrontation
that could deepen the crisis of mutual confidence
between States and affect some positive trends
elaborated at the United Nations to protect the freedom
of journalists and freedom of speech. We again stress the
unacceptability of spreading manipulative and biased
information, especially that obtained illegally, in order
to achieve situational political benefits. Supporting and
empowering journalists who are involved in covering
events in conflict zones serves as an essential tool for
a healthy and high-quality media environment in the
world.
Ukraine strongly believes in the necessity of
improving expertise aimed at upgrading the processes
of investigation and making accountable those who

16

inhibit the legitimate right of journalists to work in
zones of instability.
Finally, we also pay tribute to journalists who
have died or been injured when performing their
professional duties. Our country will remain an active
supporter of free and safe journalisms. We consider the
United Nations and the Security Council instrumental
actors in strengthening the basic rights and freedoms
of journalists.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
oun your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We would also like to
express our appreciation to the delegation of the United
Kingdom, which competently led the work of the
Council during the past month. We also wish to thank
you, Sir, for your initiative in convening this debate. We
are also grateful to Mr. Eliasson and to the journalists
here today — Mr. Engel, Ms. Carroll, Mr. Abdinur and
Mr. Abdul-Ahad — for their informative briefings.
As members are aware, this is not the first time
that the Security Council has considered the issue of
the protection of journalists. As the previous meeting
on the subject was held under the Qatar’s presidency
during the month of December 2006 (see S/PV.5613),
we are especially honoured to participate in today’s
meeting and to see other Member States participating
as well.
Conflicting views as to what is taking place on
the ground pose a major obstacle to the international
community taking a positive role in resolving conflicts.
That situation can be overcome only by the presence
of professional, competent and qualified journalists
who can convey the real story from the field. Although
advances in technology and communication have
enhanced the ability of individuals to communicate, the
importance of journalists remains crucial to conveying
the truth about situations, both in time of war and peace.
We deeply regret the fact that instances of the
killing, imprisonment and abduction of journalists are
rampant. In fact, they have increased during the past
few years. Our region has had the largest share of such
violations.
According to the Committee to Protect Journalists,
45 journalists were killed during the past two years

13-39773

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

in Syria alone. In addition, a large number of other
journalists and media professionals have faced
oppression, torture, arbitrary detention, intimidation
and threats. The fact that the Syrian regime’s security
forces use draconian measures to suppress the freedom
of information was one of the reasons for the popular
uprising against that regime. In fact, that regime is still
using its media as part of a campaign to mislead the
world about what is taking place in Syria.
Journalists in occupied Palestine face similar
serious violations, including acts of aggression by
the Israeli occupation forces, all of which is being
documented.
The State of Qatar has demonstrated its desire to
strengthen the freedom of speech and the freedom to
information, including enhancing its professionalism.
We have done so based on our belief in the decisive role
that information and media play in boosting knowledge
and understanding in society and in fostering and
entrenching those values as the cornerstone of
civilization. The information sector can only perform
its noble task if it is completely free and if journalists
are allowed safe access to all areas, including zones of
conflict.
In January 2012, the State of Qatar hosted an
international conference on the theme of protecting
journalists in dangerous situations, organized by the
Qatari national committee for human rights, with
a view to enhancing coordination and to uniting
initiatives. The Doha Centre for Media Freedom has
been making considerable and commendable efforts
in training journalists on ways to secure their safety.
This programme is named for Ali Hassan Al-Jaber,
the famous Qatari photographer who was killed when
covering the war in Libya in 2011.
Ensuring the protection of journalists is one of
the priorities of those working to achieve peace and
security throughout the world. However, we must also
draw attention to such civilians working in zones of
conflict, who are more vulnerable and more exposed to
danger. Journalists reporing from conflict zones must
act in total freedom. We also emphasize that occupation
forces must respect the freedom of journalists. In order
to secure their commitment to that freedom, there must
be consequences for those who oppress journalists or
create obstacles for them. We must not tolerate such
actions. We must hold all those responsible accountable

We must look into the provisions that exist to
ensure accountability for those who harm journalists.
We should also consider how to give effect to article
79 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions,
relating to the Protection of Victims of International
Armed Conflicts. We reaffirm the provisions of
resolution 1738 (2006), as well as the presidential
statement of 12 February 2013 (S/PRST/2013/3),
concerning the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. We hope to achieve the goals set in those
documents.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I am grateful for the opportunity to
participate in this Security Council debate.
We have listened closely to a number of statements
in the course of today’s meeting that have served to
enrich this debate on the aspects that cause journalists
in armed conflict zones to be put in harm’s way; the
need to distinguish between journalists and activists;
and the need to implement measures at the State level
and within the international community to protect the
lives of those individuals.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia of course endorses
the language of resolution 1738 (2006), adopted in
December 2012, indicating that journalists, media
communications professionals and associated personnel
carrying out dangerous professional activities within
armed conflict zones should be considered as civilians
and afforded respect and protection as such. Since the
resolution was adopted, the safety of journalists in
armed conflict has been a matter of concern for the
Council and the entire United Nations.
Year after year, we learn that a growing number of
media professionals have been killed. We have heard
the Deputy Secretary-General state that 600 journalists
have been killed in the past decade and that, in over
90 per cent of those cases, the perpetrators have gone
unpunished.
In addition to highlighting the contributions made
in today’s debate, Bolivia would like to emphasize a
few other points concerning the risks that journalists
face and the situations that put them at risk. Clearly,
one of those is increased war propaganda, which uses
information as a further weapon in armed conflict.

13-3977317

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

I recall that two years ago, before the fall of the
then-President of Libya, Al-Qadhafi, a number of
international news networks were transmitting images
of the arrival of the then-rebels in Tripoli’s Green
Square. Soon afterwards, we learned that it had all
been staged, as if on a film set, and then broadcast
by a number of television networks. That type of war
propaganda — using journalism as an instrument — is
also one of the factors putting the lives of journalists
and media personnel at risk.
The second factor involves something mentioned
today by the representative of Argentina, namely, the
difficult, precarious working conditions in which many
journalists are forced to carry out their tasks, putting
their lives at risk. However, it also involves the economic
interests behind the major global communications
networks that, in many instances, are linked to one of
the parties to a given armed conflict. Rather than being
objective, neutral and impartial, they become a part
of the conflict, distorting reality and thereby putting
journalists at risk.
The third aspect I would like to mention in terms
of danger to the lives of journalists has already been
touched on by my colleagues from Brazil and Ecuador
and relates to a decision made by the Common Market
of the South that clearly condemns the massive
surveillance discovered worldwide in recent weeks.
Such espionage can also put journalists at risk, in that
their sources might be exposed; while it also endangers
their physical well-being and their work as journalists.
We fully agree with the need for the United Nations
to work to develop institutional structures to ensure
global governance of digital communication networks,
which, unfortunately, at the moment, reside either in
private hands or under the control of a handfull of
States.
Addressing the protection of journalists surely
involves the freedom of expression, which is recognized
under international law and by the vast majority of
the constitutions of the States Members of the United
Nations. But beyond freedom of expression there is also
freedom of the press, both of which concern journalists
and media professionals. However, those freedoms also
entail a fundamental counter-weight, which is the right
of societies to communicate and to receive information.
That right must therefore also be considered and
protected.

18

Recent months have proved that the flow of
information, which has revealed to the global public the
existence of massive, systematic and broad-reaching
spying networks, has exposed a situation that not only
endangers journalists or those providing information,
but that also threatens Heads of State members of the
United Nations. The arrogance of some has reached
such a level that it risks not only the lives of journalists,
but beyond that, the life of a Head of State — as in the
case of President Evo Morales Ayma. Some countries
denied him the right to overfly their airspace, while
others allowed him to do so on the condition that the
presidential plane, which, as everyone knows, enjoys
both immunity and inviolability, be inspected.
All of those issues are intimately related, forming
part of the same design. In that sense, we believe that it is
important, on the stage of the United Nations, to debate
on equal footing those topics related to strengthening
democracy, international governance and, indeed, the
Organization itself.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, focusing on protection of
journalists. We are grateful for the first-hand insights
in the briefings by media practitioners from the NBC
News, the AP, the AFP and The Guardian.
Uganda welcomes the concerted efforts by the
Security Council and various actors at the national,
regional and international levels aimed at ensuring more
effective protection for civilians in armed conflict.
Nevertheless, the fact that civilians still account for the
vast majority of casualties in such situations shows that
a lot remains to be done.
While in many cases the warning signs of threats
to civilians are detected in good time, they are often
not acted upon promptly, due to a number of factors,
including political sensitivities and lack of adequate
capacity. We therefore underscore the necessity for
redoubling collective action towards preventing
conflicts, resolving them peacefully and protecting
civilians, with national authorities and non-State actors
bearing the primary responsibility. In that regard, the
parties to armed conflict should fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law
to ensure the protection of affected civilians.

13-39773

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

Turning to the specific issue of the protection
of journalists, the Geneva Conventions of 1949, the
Protocols additional to the Conventions and other
relevant instruments provide a solid foundation for
the protection of civilians, including journalists, in
situations of armed conflict. Article 79 of Additional
Protocol I in particular provides that journalists are
entitled to all the rights and protections afforded to
civilians in armed conflicts.

conflict, especially those posed by non-State actors,
and should be accompanied by practical guidance on
the safety of journalists.

The briefings we heard today put in sharp focus the
dangers that journalists covering conflicts often face,
including violent attacks, arrests, detention and, in
extreme cases, death. Indeed, this issue deserves serious
attention, given that, over the past 10 years, nearly to
1,000 journalists have lost their lives, including an
estimated 121 killed in 2012.

It has been seven years since the adoption of the
landmark resolution 1738 (2006), which identifies
the issue of the protection of journalists in armed
conflict as a matter of international peace and security.
Unfortunately, recent statistics indicate that journalists
and media workers in armed conflict continue to be
killed, tortured, detained, targeted, wounded, harassed
and kidnapped.

We recognize the important role that journalists
play in drawing the attention of the national, regional
and international communities to the impact of conflict
situations through their reports, which, in the digital
age, can be received in real time. Many journalists
carry out their responsibility with professionalism
and objectivity. However, there have also been cases
of journalists working with some media outlets whose
reports appear to take positions that favour one side of
a conflict, as well as incidents of others who engage
in activities incompatible with their status, including
espionage.
The work of journalists can be fraught with risks,
especially if they report from one side of a conflict
and are accused by the other of collaborating with the
enemy. While embedded journalists may gain exclusive
access to frontline reporting, they may also jeopardize
their status as civilians.
It is therefore important to take into account all those
and other factors vis-à-vis the role and responsibilities
of journalists working in conflict situations in order to
devise more effective strategies for their protection.
In conclusion, we welcome the adoption, in April
2012, of the United Nations Plan of Action on the
Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, and
look forward to its implementation in cooperation
with Governments, media outlets, professional
associations and other stakeholders. Those efforts,
which complement resolution 1738 (2006), should be
underpinned by enhanced awareness of and respect
for existing international instruments and conventions,
and with regard to emerging threats to journalists in

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this very
timely debate.

The stories, personal experiences and images
brought to us by journalists from the frontlines serve
to remind us all of the human consequences of conflict.
They help us remember that protecting international
peace and security is a crucially important task that
affects the lives, livelihoods and future of millions
of civilians suffering in war. Journalists help expose
illegal and inhuman practices in conflicts and bring
suffering and abuse to light. They help the international
community by providing crucial facts in their effort to
prevent conflict and influence world opinion.
The important and honourable work of journalists
and media workers is often undertaken in the most
dangerous circumstances. Their vital functions increase
their vulnerability, and they are sometimes deliberately
targeted for their reporting.
The most recent example is the Syrian crisis.
Turkey, as a neighboring country, has become a hub
hosting journalists on their way to cover the conflict in
Syria, and does its best to help media workers conduct
their professional duties and facilitate their passage to
and from Syria. Turkey also does its utmost to grant
access to journalists wishing to report on Syrian
camps in Turkey, helping them acquire the necessary
permission and providing them with informative
briefings. Since 2011, 406 delegations of foreign
journalists have been received in the public areas of
the camps, where they have been allowed to film and
conduct interviews. In addition, Turkey has extended
a helping hand to domestic and foreign journalists who

13-3977319

S/PV.7003 (Resumption 1)

have been kidnapped or wounded, most recently in
Syria and Libya.
I would like to note that legal and administrative
gaps persist in addressing the issue of the protection
of journalists at the national and international levels,
along with problems related to implementation and
enforcement.
Turkey expresses its appreciation for all efforts
undertaken by the United Nations and its agencies
in this area and commends the Security Council for
keeping the issue on its agenda. I would also like to take

20

this opportunity to stress that a sustainable solution
to the protection of civilians and journalists can be
achieved only through conflict prevention. It is the
duty and responsibility of the international community
to act collectively and decisively to that end.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

13-39773
