S/PV.7529

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7529th meeting

Wednesday, 7 October 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region (S/2015/735)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2015/741)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-30252 (E)
*1530252*

S/PV.7529

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2015/735)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2015/741)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO); and Mr. Said Djinnit, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to express our
gratitude to Mr. Martin Kobler, who is today delivering
his last briefing to the Council in his capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
have deeply appreciated his leadership of MONUSCO
and sincerely wish him every success in his future
endeavours.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/735, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region; and
to document S/2015/741, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
2/11

07/10/2015

Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I
should like to convey my warmest congratulations to
Spain on its accession to the presidency of the Security
Council. My mandate as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is approaching its end. It is therefore an
honour for me to present the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2015/741) for the final time, to inform the Council
on the latest events in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and to present an overview of what we have
achieved and what remains to be done.
Today, I would like to address three specific issues:
the domestic situation and the electoral process, the
security situation in the east, and the strategic dialogue.
(spoke in English)
At the end of my more than two years in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I depart with a
feeling of satisfaction and pride, but also with a sense
that our mandate has not yet been fulfilled. I cannot
say with certainty whether the progress attained is
sustainable or whether the specter of violence can erupt
again and reverse what has been achieved so far.
The political situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is increasingly marked by the electoral
process. Political tensions are running high ahead of
the 2016 elections, and that will have an impact on
the security situation, on the strategic dialogue and,
ultimately, on the fulfillment of our mandate. The
conduct of peaceful, timely and credible elections in
November 2016 would send a clear message to the
world that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
nation that respects its Constitution, a nation keen on
a peaceful transition of power, and a nation that will
consolidate peace.
I am, however, concerned by the increasing number
of human rights violations related to the electoral
process, particularly violations of freedom of peaceful
assembly. Reducing political space ahead of the
elections will undermine the credibility of the electoral
process. I urge the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to take all necessary measures
to ensure that the legislative and presidential elections
slated for November 2016 are transparent, credible and
inclusive.

15-30252

07/10/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I appeal to the authorities to decisively and
immediately address open questions related to the
sequencing of the electoral calendar, while respecting
the constitutional deadlines; the electoral budget; and
the update of the voter registry to include eligible
individuals who turned 18 since the elections of 2011.
Nothing should be done to impede the timely holding of
legislative and presidential elections in November 2016,
as foreseen by the Constitution. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) will continue
to play its good offices role in support of all political
stakeholders and the people of the Congo.
The human rights situation warrants our attention
as well. On 29 September, the Human Rights Council
in Geneva expressed its concerns regarding the state of
human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
where more than 2,200 human rights violations affecting
5,400 victims have taken place this year so far. Half of
these abuses were committed by State agents. Despite
repeated calls, there has been only limited progress in
bringing senior perpetrators to justice.
I turn now to the situation in the east. When I
first arrived in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in August 2013, Goma was still recovering from the
takeover by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23). In
August 2015, I flew into a newly renovated airport in
Goma with a major international commercial airline.
The slow return of investors is a sure sign of improving
stability and security in the city. In some islands of
stability in the east, the State has demonstrated its ability
to enhance the presence of the army and police, while
a justice system is being established and basic services
are delivered. In some parts of the east, displaced
persons are gradually returning home. However, the
population remains wary of a fragile peace that still
needs to be consolidated. As a consequence, many
Congolese continue to call on MONUSCO to protect
them.
I am proud that the performance of the force has
improved in recent years. This is due to the relentless
efforts of the Force Commander and his Deputy. Foot
and night patrols are now routine activities of the force.
Though preventive action is difficult to quantify, I
have no doubt that our presence and our early-warning
mechanisms regularly protect the most vulnerable
populations.
In the past two years, the M-23 has been militarily
defeated, but military success alone is not durable.

S/PV.7529

M-23 ex-combatants still sojourn in camps in Rwanda
and Uganda. All efforts towards reintegration on the
basis of the Nairobi Declaration have not succeeded
thus far. This is a time bomb that must be urgently
defused. The Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) has been
weakened while the area of its activities has shrunk.
Last month, I visited Kamango, a town not far from the
Ugandan border. For years, the town was terrorized by
the ADF. Close to 120,000 people — 90 per cent of its
population — fled out of fear for their lives in 2013,
turning Kamango into a ghost town.
However, the brave combat of the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC)
and the deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
forces have resulted in the gradual return of 80,000
refugees since early 2014. I have seen a revitalized
town centre with a flourishing market and vibrant
economic activity. And the one consistent message I
heard repeatedly during my visits is that MONUSCO’s
presence remains critical.
But this is ultimately not sufficient. It is the State
that is needed to provide protective, judicial and
administrative functions. FARDC and police capacity
is still limited in the territory due to a lack of resources
and personnel. We are indeed looking forward to
seeing the Congolese forces taking over more and more
of these crucial responsibilities from us, and we will
remain available to support such a progressive, even
tentative transfer.
Further West in the Beni area, however, the
population continues to experience the anguish of
armed conflict. The figure of 440 terror victims in
one year alone speaks a clear language. The ADF is
far from being defeated. I must admit that we should
have done better. One victim is one too many. But still,
through active patrolling and proactive action, we have
prevented numerous killings.
The existence of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) remains one of the most
important hindrances to peace in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Nearly 12,000 FDLR
ex-combatants have been repatriated over the past
12 years, but the last mile is always the most difficult.
I welcome the criminal convictions and long prison
terms recently handed down against two FDLR leaders
by a court in Germany. I was particularly gratified
by that court’s designation of the FDLR as a terrorist
organization. There is no question about it; still 1,100
FDLR elements continue to carry out numerous acts of

15-302523/11

S/PV.7529

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

murder, rape, mutilation and cruel treatment, among
other crimes. They have been oppressing the residents
of eastern Congo for years. We must put an end to
this reign of terror. I welcome the joint declaration of
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
24 September that they will cooperate in the eradication
of the FDLR. Neutralizing the FDLR in eastern Congo
remains the single most important political/military
objective.
The only efficient solution to address the security
situation is joint MONUSCO-FARDC operations. In
my most recent briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7484),
I urged President Kabila to give the green light for joint
operations. Unfortunately, the green light has not yet
been given. I again call on the President to instruct the
FARDC to resume cooperation, which produced so
many positive results in the past. Only united can we
ensure sustainable peace. Only united can we ensure
that women and men attend to their fields. Only united
can we ensure that children go to school.
MONUSCO has to gradually withdraw and exit
from the Congo. The United Nations commitment to
the people of the Congo, however, remains steadfast, as
MONUSCO’s exit strategy hinges on continued tangible
progress on the ground. We cannot and must not exit
hastily. The strategic dialogue between the United
Nations and the Government is a forum specifically
created to discuss and jointly agree on a progressive
reduction of the Mission in the context of a mutually
agreed exit strategy. Regrettably, our most recent joint
assessment revealed that the security situation has not
improved or even deteriorated in 21 territories out of 28
territories affected by armed conflicts.
Based on resolution 2211 (2015), I have proposed
to the Congolese Government a three-phase process
that would set in motion MONUSCO’s exit strategy.
Achieving our shared goal of a gradual withdrawal,
without jeopardizing the gains already attained, will
require further structured discussions between the
Government and the United Nations and the broader
international community. The Secretary-General has
taken note of the Government’s position in the context
of the strategic dialogue and has indicated readiness to
have a fresh look at the achievements presented by the
Government.
I thank the Congolese Government for its support
and its faith in MONUSCO. I am confident we will
resolve the remaining problems in a constructive spirit.

4/11

07/10/2015

The United Nations weight partly lies in the values
that it upholds and defends on a daily basis. Sexual
exploitation and abuse cases not only tarnish our
reputation, but also add to the suffering and burden
of the most vulnerable populations. They break that
fundamental trust that people have in us. To echo the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy, I, along with
the Force Commander and the Police Commissioner
sensitized thousands of civilian and military
peacekeepers in the last weeks. Moving forward,
prevention and accountability should become ingrained
in our modus operandi.
The implementation of the Addis Ababa agreement
needs to be invigorated. Key reforms in the security
sector, police, justice and corrections are essential for
the long-term stability of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The lack of good governance, the absence of
State authority, is one of the root causes of the conflict.
I commend my colleague Special Envoy Said
Djinnit for his work, in particular I wish the private
sector investment conference early next year plenty of
success. To bolster private investment, foreign direct
investment and Congolese investment, we must spare
no efforts to ensure continued stability, security and the
rule of law. The engagement of the team of the special
envoys has been crucial throughout my tenure. I thank
all colleagues for their unwavering support.
At the end, because this is my last meeting, allow me
to mention one important topic beyond MONUSCO’s
mandate. This is my deep concern about the degradation
of the environment and the deforestation of the
Congolese rain-forest. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s natural resources are a blessing. The country’s
unique natural heritage must be preserved for future
generations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in Africa and in the world.
I wish to thank the Security Council for its
unwavering support and for giving the Democratic
Republic of the Congo the attention it rightly deserves.
I also want to express my gratitude to Headquarters
colleagues, in particular Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Mr. Hervé Ladsous and his
team for the continuous support and valuable guidance
in difficult times. To Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her commitment
and tireless efforts in getting children out of the hands
of brutal armed groups. For Special Representative
Zainab Bangura for her engagement and support to

15-30252

07/10/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Mission in stopping the scourge of sexual violence
and easing the pain of thousands of women and girls
victims in the Congo.
Allow me also to thank all military, police and
civilian colleagues in MONUSCO in the United Nations
country team for working to fulfil our promise to the
people of the Congo. The friendship of the team was
one of the most rewarding experiences I have had in my
professional life.
(spoke in French)
For the past two years, I have travelled throughout
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I have actively
tried to listen to all segments of Congolese society
to truly understand and respond to the people’s
expectations. I met with representatives of women’s
and youth organizations, villagers in markets, former
child soldiers and many others whose lives have been
forever altered by war. They are a daily reminder of
the thousands of people who are counting on us. We
have the duty and responsibility to ensure that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is secure and stable,
and that the progress that has been achieved thus far
will not be lost.
Allow me here to commend the perseverance
and resilience of the Congolese who have witnessed
the horrors of war, the women who have suffered the
horrors of violence and the children who have lost their
innocence at the hands of brutal combatants. They
are the reason why MONUSCO stands firm and calls
for the respect for human rights. They are the reason
why we are calling for a gradual drawdown, and not a
hasty one, of the Force. They are the reason why our
civilian, police and military staff are working tirelessly
in the pursuit of peace. Allow me to warmly thank the
Congolese people for the hospitality that they have
always shown us as guests in their country. I have great
admiration for their strength and deep aspirations for
peace and progress.
The seeds of a stable, secure and resilient Congo
have already been planted. I will be following their
journey from afar with the hope that we will see them
bloom and prosper in the years to come. It was an
honour to serve the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Martin Kobler for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Djinnit.

S/PV.7529

Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I have the honour
to introduce the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2015/735). My colleague, Martin
Kobler, has just addressed the Council. On this occasion,
as he is about to leave his post as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), I would like to express my
utmost appreciation for his contribution to peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region. I also express my gratitude for
the support he has given me in carrying out my mission
and his support for MONUSCO.
Since the report submitted to the Security Council
in March (S/2015/173), there has been some progress
in the implementation of the Framework Agreement,
but it remains marked by challenges that have hindered
our efforts to achieve its objectives. The persistence of
armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the violence they have perpetrated against
our populations remain one of the greatest challenges to
peace and security in the region. These negative forces
perpetuate tension and foster a climate of distrust in the
region. Undoubtedly, for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, it is imperative that they be neutralized within
the framework of its efforts aimed at consolidating
State authority throughout the country and ensuring the
safety and security of its citizens and their property.
Their neutralization is also a regional imperative
in order to achieve peace and security in this region
in transition, to eliminate a source of suspicion and
distrust, and to create a more favourable environment
for cooperation, development and regional integration.
In this regard, I would like to commend once again
the operations carried out by the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) against
the armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, including the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda (FDLR). However, these
operations would benefit from being strengthened by the
full support of MONUSCO and its Force Intervention
Brigade, in accordance with the relevant decisions of
the Security Council. I take this opportunity, as was
done by the regional oversight mechanism during its
meeting of 29 September, held in New York, to call for
the resumption of joint operations between FARDC

15-302525/11

S/PV.7529

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and MONUSCO against all armed groups operating in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and, in
particular, the FDLR.
The decisive military action against the FDLR
must also be accompanied by determined efforts to
accelerate the repatriation of ex-FDLR combatants who
are in the transit camps in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. During my visit in July to Bahuma transit
camp in Kisangani in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I encouraged the ex-FDLR combatants and their
dependents to accept their repatriation to Rwanda, with
the support of the United Nations and other regional
actors. I also visited the Mutobo demobilization and
reintegration centre in Rwanda where I was able to
see that the structure is ready to accommodate the
ex-FDLR combatants and their dependants.
The issue of repatriation also concerns the former
fighters of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), several
hundred of whom are still in Uganda and Rwanda.
My Office and MONUSCO have encouraged and
neem associated with several initiatives led by the
International Conference of the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and aimed at facilitating
the repatriation of former M-23 combatants and
implementation of the provisions of the Nairobi
Declarations, in cooperation with Uganda and Rwanda.
They have not been successful, because the former
M-23 leaders have continued raise concerns about
security and other political issues in order to oppose
repatriation. It is urgent that M-23 ex-combatants be
repatriated to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and all the provisions of the Declarations implemented
in good faith. For my part, I will continue, in
collaboration with the ICGLR and MONUSCO, and in
concert with the group of Special Envoys, to support
current efforts to complete the process and encourage
decisive actions aimed at countering all the negative
forces in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region.
In that context, I would like to commend the
meeting between the Ministers of Defence of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda held
on 23 and 24 September, based on which they agreed
to develop practical ways to eradicate the FDLR and
speed up the repatriation of former M-23 combatants
cantoned in Rwanda and former FDLR combatants
cantoned in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is an important step forward in relations between

6/11

07/10/2015

the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
We should encourage States in the region to initiate
direct contacts and discuss their respective concerns in
order to reduce sources of suspicion and tension and
gradually build mutual trust.
In that spirit, I welcome the arrest of Jamil Mukulu
in Tanzania in April and his subsequent extradition to
Uganda. I also welcome the fact that on 28 September,
after four years of proceedings, FDLR leaders Ignace
Murwanashyaka and Straton Musoni were convicted in
Germany of crimes against humanity and war crimes
committed in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo between 2008 and 2009. I take this opportunity
to encourage States of the region to prosecute the
perpetrators of war crimes and strengthen their judicial
cooperation in combating impunity, in accordance with
the relevant ICGLR protocols, whose implementation
we support.
The other major challenge in the region relates to the
electoral process and the risks of tension and political
crises that can result from it. We are still dealing with
the problem of the disputed elections in Burundi,
which were accompanied by serious disturbances
marked by violence and violations of human rights.
We encourage all the parties involved to engage in
inclusive dialogue mediated under the auspices of the
East African Community, which the United Nations
is fully committed to supporting, together with the
African Union and other regional and international
partners. Like many of our partners who are anxious
to preserve this country’s stability and democratic
achievements, we call for this inclusive dialogue to be
resumed as soon as possible. We also sincerely hope
that the situation in Burundi can be resolved as quickly
as possible and will not further affect relations between
the States of the region.
In view of the fact that several States of the
region are preparing to hold presidential elections in
2016 and 2017, now is the time to urge all the parties
involved to exercise restraint, emphasize respect for
their constitutional documents and ensure that they use
legal instruments and inclusive dialogue to settle all
election-related issues in the region. We urge them to
do everything possible to consolidate their democratic
gains and maintain stability in their countries and their
region, whose peoples aspire legitimately to peace and
economic and social progress.
During the reporting period, we continued to pay
close attention to the underlying causes of instability
15-30252

07/10/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region, including the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, which continues to be a factor in regional
conflicts. My Office has also been working with other
institutions to promote an integrated regional approach
that will enable us to better manage the flow of refugees
and displaced persons and come up with sustainable
solutions to humanitarian crises.
Conscious of the key role that women will have
to play in transforming the region and promoting the
objectives of the Framework Agreement, my Office
continues to support development projects designed to
benefit women in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda within the framework
of resolution 1325 (2000) and other relevant Security
Council resolutions. Those efforts also fall into the
framework of a platform for women that we have
established to work within the ICGLR’s institutional
mechanism and women’s forum. My Office is also
supporting ICGLR initiatives for young people and
civil society and ensuring that those processes include
a contribution by those groups to the implementation of
the Framework Agreement’s objectives and follow-up.
On the economic front, we are preparing for a
conference on private sector investment in the Great
Lakes region, scheduled for 24 and 25 February 2016
in Kinshasa. This exciting and absorbing task has been
entrusted to our Office and the ICGLR secretariat,
together with the host country. We have obtained
the support of other United Nations institutions and
structures, along with that of multilateral and bilateral
partners and representatives of the private sector, to
help us create the right conditions for the conference.
Lastly, regarding the implementation process of
the Framework Agreement, in collaboration with the
African Union we have proposed a plan for reforming
the Agreement’s governance mechanism, the Regional
Oversight Mechanism and its Technical Support
Committee, designed to strengthen the signatory States’
ownership. The proposals were considered and adopted
at a ministerial retreat held in Nairobi on 10 July and
subsequently endorsed at the sixth High-level Meeting
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held here in
New York on 29 September.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, I note that since its signing in
February 2013, there can be no doubt that the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework Agreement has

S/PV.7529

contributed significantly to stabilizing the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including in
neutralizing the M-23, thanks to the joint operation
of the FARDC and MONUSCO’s Force Intervention
Brigade. It would appear, however, that the momentum
sparked by the combined impact of the Framework
Agreement and Security Council resolution 2098 (2013)
is fading. The lack of progress in neutralizing the FDLR
and implementing the Nairobi Declarations is probably
one of the reasons for the diminishing interest in the
Framework Agreement process. The challenges related
to the electoral processes in several countries in the
region may also have helped to divert attention from the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework process.
The proposals for reforming and reactivating the
Framework’s governance structures that were recently
endorsed by the Regional Oversight Mechanism have
the potential to renew interest in the process. I take
this opportunity to appeal to all the stakeholders
concerned to fully assume their various roles and to
the signatory countries to show greater political will
in implementing the commitments they have made. In
the weeks and months ahead, I will engage with the
signatory countries and guarantors of the Framework
to explore ways and means to increase the momentum
needed to implement this instrument for peace, security
and. cooperation in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Djinnit for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): Since this is the first
time I have taken the floor in the Council, I would like at
the outset to perform the pleasant duty of congratulating
you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. I would
also like to echo the unanimous commendations of the
Russian presidency of the Council last month.
I would like to sincerely thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his commitment to the defence and
promotion of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as for the tireless efforts
he continues to lead to restore peace in my country, the
Democratic Republic of Congo.
This meeting also gives me the opportunity to
greet Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and Mr. Said Djinnit, Special

15-302527/11

S/PV.7529

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region. I am grateful to them for their presentation of
the Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2015/741), and that on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of Congo and
the Region (S/2015/735). I also acknowledge the key
nature of the briefings that they have just made.
I would like to confine myself to briefly setting
out the points of view of my Government on a certain
number of questions raised in the reports before us.
In regard to child protection, in particular the issue
of child soldiers, my Government recalls that since
2001 the recruitment of children has been formally
outlawed in my country. Indeed, the Government has
taken drastic measures to eradicate the phenomenon,
first by carrying out a biometrics census within the
army, and then through the enactment and strict
enforcement of the law and other regulatory measures
on child protection.
To date, with 46,000 child soldiers identified by the
Government and returned to civilian life, there are no
more children within the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC), as attested to by
the joint audit mission conducted by UNICEF and the
Democratic Republic of Congo from October 2014
to March 2015, whose report was transmitted to the
United Nations on 22 May. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is determined to
neutralize all armed groups that recruit children. As
pointed out in paragraph 71 of the current report, and
citing the example of the decision of the Military High
Court dated 8 November 2014, which found a senior
officer of the national army guilty for sexual violence
and child recruitment and demoted him, we reaffirm
here our firm determination to bring to justice all
persons found guilty of engaging in child recruitment,
particularly the supposed perpetrators of the kinds of
violations inscribed on the list.
As to the issue of sexual violence, which rightly
alarms national and international public opinion, His
Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of
the Republic, has taken draconian measures to eradicate
these scourges, which were due mainly to newly
integrated armed groups. In response, the Supreme
Commander took strong measures, particularly by
decreeing zero tolerance in that sphere, by deploying
mobile courts throughout the country to render justice,
8/11

07/10/2015

by prioritizing the diligent judicial treatment of cases
of sexual violence for a total of 135 judgments handed
down in 2014, by targeting senior officers of the army,
and by appointing a special representative responsible
for combating sexual violence and the recruitment of
child soldiers.
Today, thanks to the active cooperation of the
United Nations system as a whole, multilateral and
bilateral partners, and civil society through the
implementation and supervision of the military plan on
combating sexual violence of October 2014, significant
progress has been made by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in combating sexual violence and the
recruitment of child soldiers. I would ask the Security
Council to take due note thereof, and to duly take into
account those positive developments of the situation in
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Turning to neutralization of the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the FARDC has
itself conducted operations of forced disarmament
against that negative force following the withdrawal of
MONUSCO forces. Initially estimated at 1,200 FDLR
elements — a figure confirmed by the joint mission of
the chiefs-of-staff of the countries of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR),
including that of the Republic of Rwanda — FDLR
numbers have been significantly reduced. The rise in
power of the FARDC and the effectiveness of their
operations against the FDLR have achieved significant
degradation of that negative force. Moreover, vast
human and material sacrifices have been made by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
allowing us to achieve the following results. During
the phase of voluntary surrender, from May 2014 to
20 January 2015, 438 FDLR surrendered; during the
intermediate phase, from 2 to 27 January 2015, 13
FDLR surrendered; and during the forced disarmament
phase, from 28 January to 31 July 2015, 415 FDLR were
neutralized. As to the residual FDLR force, 334 FDLR
fighters remain to be neutralised.
As the report of the Secretary-General states,
disarmed FDLR ex-combatants have been cantoned in
well-identified sites. Their number can therefore easily
be certified. Responding on 11 February to a question
from an elected member of the Standing Committee
on Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and Security of the
Rwandan Parliament, General James Kabarebe, the
Rwandan Minister of Defence, affirmed that the FDLR
no longer constituted a military threat to Rwanda. In

15-30252

07/10/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

other words, even the Rwandan authorities recognize
the remarkable progress achieved to put to an end to the
threat of that negative force.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of
Congo wishes to confirm its firm resolve to continue
operations against all negative forces until their total
neutralization. The support of MONUSCO and that of
the United States Africa Command, where it is most
needed, in support of the efforts of the Government, is
greatly appreciated and we thank them sincerely.
My Government reiterates its appeal for greater
involvement on the part of the international community
in general, and of the Security Council in particular, in
the repatriation to Rwanda or the swift reintegration in
a third country outside the Great Lakes region of FDLR
ex-combatants who have been disarmed and cantoned
in Walungu, Kayabayonga and Kisangali. Pending
their repatriation or reintegration, material provision
for those people and their families should continue to
be provided by the international community so as to
prevent any risk of backsliding, with unpredictable
consequences.
Turning to the specific case of the former
Mouvement du 23 mars (ex-М23), and the sluggishness
noted in the implementation of the Nairobi Declaration,
we note that this rebel movement was defeated militarily
on 5 November 2013 that and its combatants fled to
Rwanda and Uganda; 786 were taken in by Rwanda
and about 1,600 in Uganda. Two identification missions
were despatched by the Democratic Republic of Congo
to Rwanda and Uganda before the repatriation of the
defeated ex-М23s. While the results on the ground have
helped identify the presence of 1,600 ex-combatants in
Uganda, by contrast, in Rwanda, we have noted only
453.
As noted by the Secretary-General in paragraph 75
of his report, the lack of progress in the implementation
of the Nairobi Declarations of 12 December 2013
carries risks both for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes region. That failure
is mainly due to bad faith on the part of the ex-М23.
Indeed, the official representative of М-23 appointed to
the National Oversight Mechanism of the Framework
Agreement, Mr. René Abandi, never came to Kinshasa
to occupy his offices and participate in the various
meetings to assess the implementation of the Nairobi
Declaration road map. All invitations to him, as well as
the appeals of the international community, have so far
all gone unanswered.

S/PV.7529

In that context, the meetings scheduled for 20 May
2014 in Goma and 1 September 2014 in Kinshasa were
boycotted by Mr. René Abandi, who had proposed
instead a meeting in Kampala. In the presence of the
Special Representatives and Envoys, guarantors of the
Framework Agreement, and pursuant to the Nairobi
Declaration, an official invitation was sent to him for
the meetings of 7 and 8 November 2014 in Kinshasa. He
also declined that invitation.
The National Oversight Mechanism established a
road map to address the assessment of commitments
undertaken by the Government under the Nairobi
Declaration. Several meetings to assess the road map
were held in the presence of the guarantors of the
Framework Agreement, who all condemned the absence
of the representative of the former М-23, which blocked
any significant progress in the implementation of the
Nairobi Declaration.
The working group — made up of representatives
from the United Nations, the ICGLR, the Government
of Uganda and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and established at the request
of the Luanda Summit of May 18 — noted that the
political and military leadership of the ex-combatants
of the M-23, based in Kampala and headed by Messrs.
Sultani Makenga and Bertrand Bisimwa, continued to
influence former combatants by urging them to refuse
repatriation to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On that basis, it should be noted that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is the only party to implement
the Nairobi Declaration. On the other hand, the former
M-23 combattants refuse systematically to honour their
commitments and oppose the voluntary repatriation of
their combatants, despite the flexibility shown by the
President of the Republic in deciding to repatriate them
unconditionally to the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration sites and, thereafter, to allow them
to reintegrate within communities of each individual’s
own free choosing.
We agree with the Secretary-General that it is important
for all other stakeholders concerned — especially those
sheltering ex-combatants of M-23 — to translate their
commitments into actions and find lasting political
solutions to the obstacles preventing the repatriation of
these ex-combatants and their reintegration within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The conclusions of the meeting of 24 September
in Kigali between the Ministers of Defence of the

15-302529/11

S/PV.7529

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic
of Rwanda bodes well for moving the process forward,
both in terms of the repatriation of ex-combatants of
M-23 living in Rwanda, as well as the eradication of
residual FDLR forces in the Congo. My Government
continues to believe that if the command of the excombatants of M23 obstinately continues to refuse to
comply with the provisions of the Nairobi Declaration,
sanctions should be applied against them in accordance
with the decision taken by the Heads of State of
signatory countries to the Framework Agreement, who
met in New York on 29 September in the context of
the sixth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region.
Today, we can note a significant restoration of State
authority throughout the country. At the military level,
three rapid-reaction brigades are already operating
with personnel previously deployed and the scheduled
individual and corps equipment. Territorial authorities
have been created; the police have been deployed;
courts and tribunals are functioning properly again;
internally displaced persons and some refugees have
begun to return to their homes; and the army is present
throughout the country to combat armed groups, where
it is necessary and to protect the population.
On the political front, as Mr. Raymond Tshibanda
N’tungamulongo, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation has reminded us here at
the United Nations, in accordance with the electoral
calendar published by the Independent National
Electoral Commission, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is preparing for general elections for the
third time following those of 2006 and 2011. The
organization of those elections, scheduled for the
2015-2016 cycle, marks a definitive break in the spiral
of violence and instability that has characterized the
process in recent decades and engages the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in a perennial
democratic culture.
For the Congolese Foreign Minister, despite the
many financial and logistical constraints that have
marked the electoral process, the Independent National
Electoral Commission, with the help of the Government,
is doing all in its power to meet the challenge of
organizing elections that respect all international
standards in terms of inclusiveness, transparency,
credibility — and all of this against a backdrop of peace.

10/11

07/10/2015

To that end, convinced that dialogue is a central
pillar of democracy and a component of social cohesion,
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of the Republic,
has undertaken considerable efforts since May to
increase contacts with all segments of Congolese
society — including political actors, civil society,
and religious and traditional authorities — to launch
a national dialogue that seeks to establish consensus
on the electoral process under way. With each of these
segments having had the opportunity to express its
point of view, a review of all the opinions voiced will
allow us to reach a lasting consensus on the elections
that will truly reflect the will of the Congolese people,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Constitution.
The Government duly appreciates the valuable
observations and recommendations contained in
paragraphs 72 and 73 of the report, and calls on the
United Nations and the international community as
a whole to support steadfastly and at every stage an
electoral process that respects the Constitution, human
rights and fundamental political rights and freedoms.
Regarding the strategic dialogue between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations, official talks have stalled,
as the Secretary-General recognizes in paragraph
42 of his report. My Government has been hoping
for a successful outcome to the strategic dialogue
engaged with MONUSCO, on the recommendation of
the Secretary-General, since March 2015 with with a
view to developing an action plan and exit strategy for
MONUSCO, especially as its terms of reference have
been agreed by the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
because they cover all of the major concerns of the
Government.
Far be it from me to go into the details of the
exchanges. I agree with the Secretary-General that
the dialogue must offer an opportunity to rethink and
bolster the partnerships between the Government and
the United Nations. My Government, which remains
committed to continuing discussions with the United
Nations in a spirit of mutual trust believes, however, that
the United Nations presence in Congolese territory must
be reconsidered and that the personnel of MONUSCO
contingents must be progressively reviewed.
I take this opportunity to thank the international
community, which came to the aid of my country in
protecting its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
I also echo the Foreign Minister of the Democratic
15-30252

07/10/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Republic of Congo in commending the international
solidarity that the Republic has enjoyed on the part
of other Member States, in particular those that have
contributed troops to MONUSCO.
I hail the determination of the Congolese people,
who — having suffered the yoke of an unnecessary
and equally unjustified war — spared no sacrifice to
preserve the sovereignty and integrity of our national
territory against all odds. I also heartily commend the
defence and security forces of my country for their
concerted action in the service of peace. The obligation
now incumbent upon the Government of the Republic
of the Congo and all of its partners is to ensure the
consolidation of all of those achievements.
The strategic dialogue under way with the the United
Nations must therefore result in a recommendation for
a significant drawdown of the military component of
MONUSCO. My country expects the Security Council
to support this legitimate and responsible request of a

S/PV.7529

State Member of the United Nations, in full exercise
of its sovereignty — a request that already enjoys the
support of the regional economic communities of which
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a member:
the Southern African Development Community, the
ICGLR and the African Union.
In conclusion, I would be remiss if I finished
my statement without welcoming and expressing
my full appreciation of the partnership that has been
so successfully established between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Security Council for the
return of normalcy to my country, so that my people
can finally benefit from the peace dividends.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

15-3025211/11
