S/2016/619

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 July 2016
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
1.
The President of the Security Council, building on the measures set out in the
notes by the President of the Security Council contained in documents S/2016/170
of 22 February 2016, S/2014/393 of 5 June 2014, S/2012/937 of 17 December 2012
and S/2010/507 of 26 July 2010, and in an effort to further improve the
effectiveness of and to ensure continuity in the work of the Council, wishes to state
that all members of the Council are committed to implementing the measures set out
below concerning newly elected members.
Preparation of newly elected members
2.
The Security Council invites the newly elected members of the Council to
observe all meetings of the Council and its subsidiary organs and the informal
consultations of the whole for a period of three months, as from 1 October
immediately preceding their term of membership. The Council also invites the
Secretariat to provide all relevant communications of the Council to the newly
elected members during the above-mentioned period.
3.
Notwithstanding the foregoing measure, the Security Council will not invite
the newly elected members to a specific private meeting of the Council or to
specific informal consultations of the whole if a request to that effect is made by a
member of the Council where exceptional circumstances exist. The newly elected
members will not be invited to the meetings of the Council or the informal
consultations of the whole related to the selection and appointment of the Secretary General. The newly elected members may be invited to the monthly luncheon with
the Secretary-General held in December immediately preceding their term of
membership, at the discretion of the President of the Council for that month.
4.
The Security Council invites the Secretariat to continue to take appropriate
measures to familiarize the newly elected members with the work of the Council
and its subsidiary organs, including by providing briefing materials and holding
seminars before they begin to attend Council meetings.
Selection of Chairs of subsidiary organs
5.
The members of the Security Council should make every effort to agree
provisionally on the appointment of the Chairs of the subsidiary organs for the
following year no later than 1 October.
6.
To that end, the members of the Security Council will start an informal process
of consultations, with the participation of all Council members, on the appointment
16-12239 (E)

180716

*1612239*

S/2016/619

of the Chairs of the subsidiary organs from among the members of the Council for
the following year as soon as possible after each election of members of the
Council. The members of the Council should also consult i nformally with the newly
elected members in the process.
7.
This informal process of consultations will be undertaken in a balanced,
transparent, efficient and inclusive way so as to facilitate an exchange of
information related to the work of the subsidiary organs involved and will be
facilitated jointly by two members of the Security Council working in full
cooperation.
8.
All members and newly elected members of the Security Council should be
informed of the outcome of the informal process of co nsultations on the
appointment of the Chairs of the subsidiary organs in a transparent and substantive
way prior to the provisional agreement on the appointment.
Preparation of Chairs of subsidiary organs
9.
The Chairs of the subsidiary organs are encouraged, with the assistance of the
Secretariat as required, to provide those members of the Council that will take over
the chairmanships with written and oral briefings about the work done during the
outgoing chairmanship and to maintain informal meetin gs with the incoming Chairs,
as necessary, including with the assistance of the Secretariat.
10. The briefings will be accompanied by documents adopted during the outgoing
chairmanship and all informal documents and background information the outgoing
Chair deems pertinent for enlightening the incoming Chair, including draft
documents being discussed by the subsidiary organ. Taking into account that such
documents and information might not have been made public, they will be provided
to the members that will take over the chairmanships as soon as possible after the
chairmanships have been provisionally decided.
11. The members of the Security Council acknowledge the support given to
incoming Chairs by the Secretariat and request the Secretariat to consider further
measures to provide incoming Chairs and their staffs with additional substantive and
methodological briefings on the work of relevant subsidiary organs.

2/2

16-12239
