Resolutioni, adopted on reporta of the Fifth Committee

51

2. The appropriations voted by paragraph 1 above shall be financed by contributions from Members after
adjustment as provided by the Financial Regulations, subject to the provision of paragraph 1 of the resolution
relating to the Working Capital Fund. 18 For this purpose, miscellaneous income for the financial year 1953 is estimated at $US 6,238,200;
3. The Secretary-General is authorized:
(i)
To administer as a unit the following appropriations:
(a) Provisions under section 3a, section 20, chapter III, and section 2S, chapter VI;
(b) Provisions under section 13, section 20, chapter II, section 21, 2nd in respect of section 26 for
items relating to public information;
( c) Provisions under the various sections in part III for travel on official business;
(ii) To apply the reduction under section 33 to various sections of the budget;
(iii) With the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
to transfer credits between sections of the budget;
4. The Secretary-General is further authorized to enter into such arrangements with the competent authorities of the Republic and Canton of Geneva in connexion with the exchange of the property called Le Chine
owned by the United Nations for the property called Le Bocage owned by the Republic and Canton of Geneva
as he may sr.e fit under the provisions set forth in document A/C.5/510;
5. In addition to the appropriations voted by paragraph 1 above, an amount of $US 13,900 is hereby appropriated for the purchase of books, periodicals, maps and library equipment, from the income of the Library
Endowment Fund, in accordance with the object and provisions of the endowment.
410th plenary, metting,
21 December 1952.

675 (VII). Unforeaeen and extraordinary ex•
pemes for the &nancial year 1953
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for the financial year 1953,
The Secretary-General, with the prior concurrence
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions and subject to the Financial Regulations of the United Nations, is authorized to enter
into commitments to meet unforeseen and extraordinary expenses ; provided that the concurrence of the
Advi90ry Committee shall not be necessary for :
(a) Such-commitments not exceeding a total of
$US 2,000,000 if the Secretary-General certifies that
they relate to the maintenance of peace and security or
to urgent economic rehabilitation ;
(b) Such commitments not exceeding a total of
$25,000 as are occasioned by the holding of an intergovernmental commodity conference;
(c) Such commitments, not exceeding a total of
$50,000 as arc required for the United Nations Good
Offices Commission on the treatment of people of
Indian origin in the Union of South Africa;
(d) Such commitments, not exceeding a total of
$50,000 as are required for the Commission on the
question of race conflict in South Africa resulting
from the policies of aparthlid of the Government of
South Africa;
.
(e) Such commitments, not exceeding a total of
.$129,000 as are r,;quired for the purchase of Korean
service medals and ribbons ;
(/) Such commitments, duly certified by the President of the International Court of Justice, relating to
expenses occasioned :
'

( i)

By the designation of ad hoe judges ( Statute,
Article 31 ) ,
(ii) By the appointment of assessors ( Statute,
Ar:tide 30) , or by the calling of witnesses and
the appointment of experts ( Statute, Article
50),
(iii) By the holding of sessions of the Court away
from The Hague ( Statute, Article 22),
and not exceeding $24,000, $25,000, and $75,000, respectively, under each of the above three headings;
The Secretary-General shall report to the Advisory
Co,nmittee and to the General Assembly at its next
regular session all commitments made under the provisions of the present resolution, toeether with the circumstances relating thereto, and siiall submit supplementary estimates to the General Assembly in respect
of such commitment&
410th plniary me,ling,
21 D,c,mber 1952.
676 (VU). Worldnar C.pltal Fund for the
&nanctaf year 1953
The· G1n1ral As.rrmbly
Resolv,s thal:
1. The Working Capital Fund is established for the
financial year 1953 at the amount of $US 21,500,000
to be denved:
(a) As to $20,000,000 from cash advances by
Members in accordance with the proviaiaaa of paragraphs 2 and 3 of the present resolution;
(b) As to $1,239,203, by previous transfer of the
balance of surplus account as at 31 December 1950,
11 See raolution 676 (VII), above.

52

General Assembly-Seventh Session

-------------------------------------------··----·not already applied against Members' assessments for
1951 in accordance with General Assembly resolution
585 A (VI) of 21 December 1951;
( c) As to $260,797 by transfer of part of the balance of surplus account as at 31 December 1951 not
already applied against l\T embers· assessments for 1952;
2. Members shall make cash advances tu lthe \Vorking Capital Fund as required under paragraph I (a)
above in accordance with the scale adopted hy the
General AssemLly for contributions oi ;\)embers to the
eighth annual budget; "'
3. There shall be set off against this new allocation
of advances the amllunts paid by Members to the
· \Norking Capital Fund for the financial year 1952,
under Ceneral Assembly resolution 585 A (VI), paragraph 2; provided that, should the advance paid by any
Member to the Working Capital Fund for the financial
year 1952 exceed the amount of that ::\ I ember's advance mH.ler the provision of paragraph 2 hereof, the
excess shall be set off against the amount of contributions payable by that Member in respect of the eighth
annual budget, or any previous budget ;
4. The Secretary-Gener:.il is authorized to advance
from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance
budgetary appropriations pending receipt of contributions; sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon as
receipts from contributions are available for the purpose;
( b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance
commitments which may be duly authorized under the
provisions of the resolution relating to unforeseen and
extraordinary expenses. 20 The Secretary-General shall
make provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing
the Working Capital Fund;
( c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding for the same purposes, do not exceed $250,000
to continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities. Advances in
excess of the total of $250,000 may be made with the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. The SecretaryGeneral shall submit, with the annual accounts, an
explanation of the outstanding balance of the revolving
fund at the end of each year;
(d) Loans to specialized agencies and preparatory
commissions of agencies to be established by intergovernmental agreement under the auspices of the
United Nations to finance their work, pending receipt by
the agencies concerned of sufficient contributions under
their own budgets. In making such loans, which shall
normally be repayable within two years, the SecretaryGeneral shall have regard to the proposed financial resources of the agency concerned, and shall obtain the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for any cash
issues which would increase the aggregate balance outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and
outstanding) at any one time to an amount in excess
of $3,000,000 and for any issue which would increase
See resolution 665 (VII), p. 46.
(VII), p. 51.

11
10 See resolution 675

the balance outstanding ( including amounts previously
advanced and outstanding) in respect of any one
agency to an amount in excess of $1,000.0(Xl, provided that, notwithstanding the above provisions, the
Interim Commission of the International Trade Organization shall be authorized to postpone until 31
December 1953 re·payment of the outst:mding balance
of the loans made to the Interim Commission;
( e) Such sums as, together with the sums previously advanced an<l outstanding ior the same purpose, d•J not exceed $420,000 to continue the Staff
I lousing Fund in order to finance rental payments,
guarantee deposits and working capital requirements
ior housing the staff of the Secretariat. Such advances
shall be reimbursed to the \Vorking Capital Fund following the reco,ery of rental advances, guarantee deposits and working capital advances;
(f) Such sums not exceeding $90,000 as may be
required to finance payments of advance insurance
premiums and deposits where the period of insurance
extends beyond the end of the financial year in which
payment is made. This amount may be increased with
the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Dudgetary Questions. The Secretary-General shall make provision in the budget estimates of each year during the life of the related policies
to cover the charges applicable to each such year;
(g) Such sums not exceeding $1,000,000 as may
be necessary to complete the Headquarters of the
United Nations.
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

677 (VIl). Payment of honoraria to rapporteurs
of United Nations bodies
The General Assembly,
Recogni:;ing that the app~ntmerit of a person as rapporteur of a United Nations body confers honour upon
his country and distinction upon himself,
1. Considers that no such appointment should carry
remuneration;
2. Requests all organs of the United Nations to
bear in mind in future the views of the General Assembly as expressed in the present resolution.
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

678 (VIl). Annual report of the United Nations
Joint Staft' Pen1ion Board for the year ended

31 December 1951
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the ar.nual report 21 of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board for the year ended
31 December 1951;
21 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sroenth
Session, Supplement No. 8.
