S/PV.8993

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8993rd meeting

Monday, 14 March 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Wu Jianjian
Mrs. Gasri
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Asokan
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Eckersley
Ms. Saha

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-28603 (E)
*2228603*

S/PV.8993

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez,
Permanent Representative of Mexico, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
I now give the floor to Ambassador De la
Fuente Ramírez.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): As the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), I am honoured to address the Security Council
on the work of the Committee since the previous
briefing, on 30 March 2021 (see S/2021/325, Annex I).
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains a vital component
of the global non-proliferation architecture aimed
at preventing non-State actors, including terrorists,
from gaining access to weapons of mass destruction.
States have made significant progress in the full
implementation of the resolution. Nevertheless, gaps
remain and the full and effective implementation of the
resolution is a long-term task.
In 2021 and early 2022, in the face of continuing
travel and other restrictions due to the coronavirus
disease pandemic, the Committee maintained the
precautionary measures that were adopted in 2020.
Most business was conducted virtually, although
four in-person Committee meetings were held. In
comparison with 19 events in 2020, most of them
virtual, in 2021 the Committee participated in one
in-person and 23 virtual events.
In the reporting period, the Committee continued
to conduct the comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004), in accordance with the provisions of resolution
1977 (2011), as one of its main priorities. In April 2021
under resolution 2572 (2021), the Committee’s mandate
was renewed until 28 February 2022; under resolution
2622 (2022) adopted on 25 February, it was further
2/12

14/03/2022

extended until 30 November 2022 to allow for the
completion of the review.
A central theme of the comprehensive review is the
status of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
by Member States. The Committee is also addressing
its role in facilitating assistance matchmaking; its
collaboration with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations and other United Nations
bodies; and its outreach activities.
The review is an inclusive process. While
contributions by Member States who bear the primary
responsibility for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) will be given great importance, the Committee
will also invite international, regional and subregional
organizations, as well as relevant civil society
organizations, to participate in open consultations
in order to ensure wide-ranging consultations.
Further details on such open consultations will be
communicated soon since expectations and interest
have remained high.
Also during the reporting period, Mozambique
submitted its first national report containing information
on measures taken to comply with its obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004). That brings to 185 the number
of Member States who have now submitted first reports,
leaving eight States that have not yet done so.
One helpful activity, among others, in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) is the development of voluntary
national implementation action plans by States, as
encouraged by paragraph 5 of resolution 2325 (2016).
The number of States that have submitted such plans to
the Committee since 2007 now stands at 35, a number
unchanged since my last briefing to the Security
Council. However, during the reporting period, the
Committee supported two States, namely Botswana
and Mongolia, which are in the process of developing
said action plans.
Acknowledging that Member States are in the
best position to identify effective national practices
and to share them with the 1540 Committee and other
partners, peer reviews have been held all around the
world. The number of such reviews is unchanged since
my last briefing to the Council. The Committee looks
forward to hearing about the results of further peer
reviews and will continue to support States that wish to
conduct them, where appropriate.
22-28603

14/03/2022

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

To date, a total of 136 Member States, compared
to 127 in 2020, have informed the Committee of their
national points of contact for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). No training courses for
regional points of contact were conducted in 2021
due to pandemic-related restrictions, as I mentioned
before. The Committee hopes to resume such training
courses soon.
The Committee plays an important role in
facilitating assistance to Member States to fulfil their
1540 obligations by matching assistance requests
from States with offers of assistance from States or
international, regional or subregional organizations.
In 2021, States submitted to the Committee four new
requests for assistance, compared to six in 2020. The
Committee received assistance requests from Botswana,
Sierra Leone, Tajikistan and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines. The Committee web page lists States and
international, regional and subregional organizations
that offer 1540-related assistance. The Committee
stands ready to include new programmes or updated
information regarding available assistance on its
website. In addition to assistance provided by States and
international, regional and subregional organizations,
the Committee and its Group of Experts will undertake
visits to States, at their invitation, to discuss national
reporting, national action plans, Committee matrices
and assistance on implementation measures.
The Committee will continue to use its website
and the Chair’s quarterly message for outreach and
enhancing the transparency of its activities. Information
relating to participation in outreach events, as well as
statements, including video-messages, delivered by the
Chair or on his behalf are regularly uploaded to the
Committee’s website.
In closing, I wish to thank my fellow Committee
members for their efforts in support of the Committee’s
work and to the Group of Experts, officials in Office
for Disarmament Affairs and the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and my staff for the
invaluable support to the Committee during the most
recent period.
I will now make a statement in my national capacity.
Mexico reiterates its unequivocal conviction of the
need to strengthen the international non-proliferation
architecture in order to prevent the catastrophic
humanitarian consequences of weapons of mass

S/PV. 8993

destruction and to garner the essential multilateral
cooperation necessary to address global challenges.
In that connection, we are convinced that the recent
extension of the mandate of the 1540 Committee until
November will allow us to continue with the broad
review of resolution 1540 (2004). We hope that the
members of the Security Council and the rest of the
United Nations membership will participate actively in
adjusting and bolstering the mandate of modern reality.
We trust that together we will be able to identify those
elements and thus contribute to curbing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors,
including terrorists.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador De la Fuente Ramírez for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to warmly thank the Permanent
Representative of Mexico and his entire team for their
hard work in chairing the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Resolution 1540 (2004) is a pillar of the
international non-proliferation framework. Indeed,
more than 15 years after its adoption, the threat not only
remains, but is evolving. The channels of proliferation
are becoming more complex, and the risk of biological,
chemical and nuclear materials falling into the hands
of non-State actors persists. We therefore agree that the
current framework must be strengthened.
We regret that the comprehensive review process has
been delayed. This review is essential for maintaining
the relevance of resolution 1540 (2004), and we want it
to be inclusive, allowing all Member States and civil
society organizations to have their say. The extension
of the Committee’s mandate should enable us to carry
out this review. There are aspects of resolution 1540
(2004) that could be strengthened, such as the financing
of proliferation.
We attach particular importance to assistance and
cooperation. We stand ready to provide assistance
to States that request it. We need to improve the
coordination of assistance offers and needs. We must
also deepen cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons, the Biological Weapons
Convention, the export control regimes and other

22-286033/12

S/PV.8993

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

United Nations committees, such as those dealing with
terrorism. Finally, it is important to raise awareness
of resolution 1540 (2004) in order to enhance its
implementation. Useful proposals have already been
made in that regard.
Let me conclude by paying tribute to the Group
of Experts, whose analytical and advocacy work
remains indispensable.
Mr. Asokan (India): I thank Ambassador Juan
Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), for his briefing on the Committee’s
activities and for his leadership of the 1540 Committee.
Let me begin by reaffirming India’s commitment
to global efforts against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) and their delivery
systems. Resolution 1540 (2004) identifies terrorists
and terrorist groups as key non-State actors who may
acquire, develop, traffic in or use weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery. As indicated
in United Nations reports, the threat of terrorists
acquiring WMDs is no longer in the theoretical realm.
The findings of the recent report of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant on the position and use of WMDs by Da’esh
are deeply disturbing. Preventing terrorist groups from
acquiring and using weapons of mass destruction must
therefore be a central priority and responsibility of
the Council and the international community. Having
resolutely fought the battle against terrorism for many
decades, India, through its annual resolution in the
General Assembly, has drawn the attention of the
international community to the dangers of proliferation
of WMDs and the potential for its exploitation by
terrorists and other non-State actors.
First submitted in 2002, the resolution has
been adopted by consensus, thus reflecting the
global consensus on this matter. India accords great
importance to the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). With our long-standing commitment to
global non-proliferation, we have established a strong
statutory national export control system. India is also
among the few countries that regularly provide national
reports of implementation on resolution 1540 (2004)
to the Committee. In that regard, we are happy to
know that we are moving closer to achieving universal
4/12

14/03/2022

national reporting on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
We support the continuous and constant efforts
by the Committee towards the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) wherever possible by offering to
share our knowledge and technical expertise as part of
the Committee’s assistance framework.
Recognizing the key role of industry, academia
and other key stakeholders in the implementation of the
resolution, India has organized several outreach events
involving those stakeholders. We have been organizing
periodic outreach programmes on export controls for
industry, including sector-specific and region-specific
events in India, as well as for academic and research
institutions,
particularly
covering
intangible
technology transfers. We had earlier hosted a two-day
India-Wiesbaden conference on securing global supply
chains through Government and industry partnerships,
in New Delhi in 2018.
We also support the 1540 Committee’s enhanced
cooperation and coordination with international
organizations such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and other relevant United Nations
bodies, including the Office for Disarmament Affairs
and the Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee, to
prevent non-State actors from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction.
With respect to the current work of the Committee,
greater urgency needs to be shown in advancing the
Committee’s work. The mandate of the Committee has
already been rolled over twice. While the Committee’s
work was impacted by pandemic-related restrictions,
those have since been lifted. During the recent mandate
renewal, the Council provided a clear mandate to the
Committee to complete the comprehensive review of the
status of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and to submit a report before the expiry of its mandate.
Positive progress has been achieved towards that
goal, including through the provisional securing of
dates and a venue for the open consultations, and we
appreciate the Chair’s efforts in that regard.
However, greater urgency is required to ensure
that the mandate provided by the Council is fulfilled
within the prescribed period. The early adoption of
a 2022 programme of work with a clear timeline of
activities for completing the comprehensive review and
22-28603

14/03/2022

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

implementing the programme in a timely manner would
contribute immensely to fulfilling that mandate. India
will continue to engage constructively in the Council
and the Committee towards that end.
Let me conclude by reiterating the urgency of
advancing the work of the Committee to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. Procrastination cannot be an
option anymore.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I thank Ambassador
Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), for his briefing.
As a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of nuclear weapons (NPT), the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and the
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), we appreciate
the 1540 Committee’s role as an essential component of
the global non-proliferation architecture in preventing
non-State actors from gaining access to weapons of
mass destruction.
The briefing today provides very useful
information on the work and transparency of the 1540
Committee and the status of the implementation of
the resolution ahead of the comprehensive review on
the status of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The Committee’s resilience in pursuing its
activities, including facilitating assistance to Member
States to fulfil their 1540 obligations while maintaining
precautionary measures during the coronavirus disease
pandemic, is commendable.
I would like to recall that in April 2016 Ghana
submitted its national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Given how expedient
our national action plan has been in helping us to
implement resolution 1540 (2004), it is our hope that
efforts will be intensified to encourage other Member
States to develop voluntary national implementation
action plans, as encouraged by the Council in operative
paragraph 5 of resolution 2325 (2016). It is our belief
that maintaining transparency and information-sharing
through the Committee’s website will continue to serve
as a useful platform in facilitating further outreach to
Member States to fulfil their 1540 obligations.
In view of the all-inclusive nature of the
comprehensive review process, we encourage the
participation and contributions of all Member States

S/PV. 8993

as well as the relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations in the open consultations to
be organized.
We remain optimistic about the work of the
Committee and appreciate the support from the
Group of Experts and officials of the Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez for his
briefing today. This has been a difficult and challenging
year for him and for his work and for that of his team.
It has been really exemplary in guiding the progress of
the Council and the progress by the Committee, so I
wanted to thank him for that.
Ireland greatly values the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). It is more important than ever to reiterate
that any threat or use of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) is abhorrent. In seeking to prevent non-State
actors from acquiring and using WMDs, resolution 1540
(2004) is a critical part of the global non-proliferation
architecture. Its full implementation remains essential,
and we encourage States to continue to take seriously
their obligations under the resolution. The 1540
Committee and the Group of Experts, in our view, do
vital work in that regard.
Ireland welcomes the technical rollover of the
1540 mandate agreed last month. It allows us time to
complete the comprehensive review. It is important that
the comprehensive review and the open consultations
planned for the end of May be completed in the best
way possible, with the views and experiences of
Member States fully reflected in the process. That
will ensure strong and broad support for the mandate
going forward.
A meaningful review must also include the
effective participation of international and regional
organizations, industry, academia and civil society.
While the onus of implementation falls on States, of
course, the input of all relevant stakeholders is essential
to ensuring that we prevent non-State actors, including
terrorists, from acquiring, developing, trafficking in
or using nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and
their means of delivery. That is important not just for the
review but also for the ongoing work of the Committee.

22-286035/12

S/PV.8993

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

14/03/2022

We should build on the important work done under
resolutions 1977 (2001) and 2325 (2016), extending the
work of the Committee and the Group of Experts.

obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). We encourage
the remaining eight States that have yet to submit their
first national report to do so without delay.

Ireland sees the Committee’s monitoring, outreach
and assistance work as central to its mandate,
helping States to identify and address any gaps and
vulnerabilities in regulations and national control
frameworks. We hope to see that further strengthened
under this review.

Finally, Norway is working towards achieving
balanced, mutual, irreversible and verifiable nuclear
disarmament and preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. The 1540 Committee has
an important role to play in reaching these goals.

Finally, though the comprehensive review is a key
part of the Committee’s work this year, it is vital that
the regular work of the Committee continue in parallel.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Norway warmly
thanks Mexico for its work over the past year as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and for briefing the
Council today. We would also like to thank the Group
of Experts for its excellent work during another year of
challenging circumstances — not least because of the
ongoing restrictive coronavirus disease environment.
The Group of Experts has Norway’s full support.
It is true that the past year has been challenging for
the 1540 Committee as we faced a second year in which
activities had to be postponed and the comprehensive
review could not be completed, but we are encouraged
by the progress made in recent months.
In that respect, I have three comments on the work
of the Committee moving forward.
First, the open consultations are a key part of
the comprehensive review. It is important that those
consultations be robust and that a broad range of
stakeholders be included. Industry, academia and civil
society, including international organizations such as
the International Atomic Energy Agency, INTERPOL
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, play an important role in the implementation
and follow-up of resolution 1540 (2004). We are pleased
to hear that a pre-booking has been made for the open
consultations in May.
Norway looks forward to constructively engaging
with the 1540 Chair and other members with respect to
the remaining activities of the comprehensive review
leading up to the renewal of the Committee’s mandate.
Secondly, we would like to thank Mozambique
for having submitted its first national report with
information on the measures taken to comply with its
6/12

The prospect of the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their means
of delivery is a real and continuous concern. We
reiterate the continually evolving nature of the risk of
proliferation, including the rapid advances in science,
technology and international commerce.
Please be assured, Mr. President, of our full support
for the work of the 1540 Committee. We look forward
to continuing to work together towards the fulfilment of
the Committee’s important objectives for the duration
of its mandate.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to ask the
President to convey to Ambassador Lana Nusseibeh our
best wishes for a speedy recovery.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) for his very comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to commend him for his
tireless efforts aimed at coordinating the work of the
Committee and guiding its members through these
unusual times. I would also take this opportunity to
commend the Group of Experts for their invaluable
work in assisting the Committee to carry out its
functions, providing awareness of the resolution and its
requirements, assessing the status of its implementation
and responding to requests for assistance.
Almost 20 years after its inception, the Committee
remains an essential tool for preventing non-State
actors from acquiring nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons, their means of delivery and related materials.
Over the past two decades, the Committee has been
instrumental in assisting States to establish appropriate
domestic controls in order to address the risk of terrorist
organizations obtaining, proliferating or using weapons
of mass destruction.
Brazil has been a long-time supporter of the work of
the 1540 Committee. As an elected Council member, we
voted in favour of its creation in 2004 (see S/PV.4956).
In 2011, we also voted in favour of the extension of its
22-28603

14/03/2022

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

mandate for 10 years (see S/PV.6518). We once again
have the honour of being in the Security Council at a
crucial time for the future of the Committee, when we
have the responsibility of conducting a comprehensive
review of the status of implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), as well as of adjusting the future
mandate of the Committee to the current needs of the
international community.
Brazil supports the Chair’s approach as well as his
efforts to carry out the comprehensive review process in
a fully-fledged inclusive format, to which he has referred
in his briefing in the Chamber today. The holding of
open consultations with the wider membership of
the United Nations, as well as with relevant regional,
subregional and civil society organizations, will be
essential for us to have a clearer picture of the current
status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
of ways to further foster adherence.
In conclusion, I would like to remind Council
members that the most efficient way to combat
proliferation is through disarmament. At a time when
the rhetoric about the use of weapons of mass destruction
is resurfacing, it is important that States remember
their commitments to eliminating their arsenals. The
only way to guarantee that these abhorrent weapons
are never again used by anyone, anywhere, under any
circumstance, is through their complete, transparent,
verifiable and irreversible elimination.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank my colleague,
the Permanent Representative of Mexico, as Chair
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), and to express
to him and his entire team our appreciation for their
remarkable commitment in conducting the work of this
important Committee.
We welcome the extension of the mandate of the
1540 (2004) Committee until 30 November 2022 and
note the difficult conditions under which the Committee
has had to conduct its activities, particularly in the
context of the constraints imposed by the pandemic.
We also take note of the broad consultations that
will be conducted with State actors, civil society,
academia and parliamentarians, and the strengthening
of the Committee’s cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations as well as with
other United Nations bodies, with a view to raising

S/PV. 8993

their awareness and improving implementation of
the resolution.
Since the submission of Gabon’s most recent
report on its implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
in 2011, the situation with regard to my country has
not changed: Gabon does not possess or produce
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and has
strictly respected its commitments. Similarly, it does
not facilitate or support non-State actors in this area.
This commitment to international peace and security
is a constant for my country. It is also with that
objective in mind that my Government has committed
itself to strengthening its position in favour of the
fight against weapons proliferation by deciding last
December to launch the process of ratifying the Arms
Trade Treaty. We are also a party to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and all the
related safeguards agreements with the International
Atomic Energy Agency and additional protocols since
1974, as well as to the Pelindaba Treaty, which creates
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. We will continue
to maintain our commitment to denuclearization.
My country remains convinced of the relevance
and central role that resolution 1540 (2004) must play in
preventing the emergence of terrorist and other armed
groups and strengthening the fight against them when
they do emerge by preventing them from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction. I would also like to take
this opportunity to reaffirm our opposition to any use
of weapons of mass destruction.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would also like to
congratulate and thank the Ambassador of Mexico
for his leadership and commitment to advancing the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We also commend
the professional work of the Committee’s Group
of Experts.
We agree that resolution 1540 (2004) is an
essential element of the global non-proliferation
architecture, and we must ensure that the resolution
and its implementation remain effective and strong. We
encourage all the members of the Security Council to
remain united in supporting the work of the Committee
by strengthening its mandate and adapting it to the
new realities.
My country attaches great importance to the treaties
on arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation.
We remain committed to further cooperating with the

22-286037/12

S/PV.8993

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

international community to prohibit the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by States and non-State
actors as well as of the materials necessary for the
development of such weapons.
States have made significant progress in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). Nevertheless,
some gaps remain, and full and effective implementation
of the resolution is a long-term task that will require
continued efforts at the national, regional and
international level. We welcome the open consultations
on the in-depth review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) as a good opportunity to
remind Member States of their obligation to implement
the resolution.
The threat of non-State actors acquiring weapons
of mass destruction has not weakened. In this regard,
the in-depth consideration of the resolution with the
involvement of Member States, international regional
and subregional organizations and civil society is an
opportunity to make proposals aimed at strengthening
the work of the Committee in order to meet current
challenges and make it more effective. We hope that we
will find consensus when it comes to the strengthening
of the mandate of the 1540 Committee as part of the
2022 comprehensive review.
Albania is convinced that open consultations are
an essential step in ensuring that the resolution 1540
(2004) continues to play a central role in maintaining
international peace and security in future. We will
continue to support the work of the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons, as well as other international
organizations that deal with the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and disarmament and play
an important role in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
Finally, Albania has approved its national strategy to
combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and is actively contributing to regional security in that
field. We support the work of the Committee and will
continue to do so in the future.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I welcome the briefing
by the Mexican Ambassador and commend him for
the conduct of the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Weapons of mass destruction pose a grave danger.
The indiscriminate nature of those weapons can lead to
8/12

14/03/2022

immediate and long-term effects on people, societies
and the environment. That is why Kenya once again
reaffirms that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery constitute a
threat to international peace and security, as stressed in
resolution 1540 (2004). That threat can be eliminated
only by complete disarmament.
We call on Member States to adopt and enforce
appropriate and effective laws that prohibit any
non-State actor from manufacturing, acquiring,
possessing, developing, transporting, transferring or
using nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
means of delivery.
As the global fight against terrorism continues to
face enormous challenges, the 1540 Committee plays
a key role as one of the mechanisms established by the
Security Council in its efforts to combat terrorism.
In that regard, Kenya welcomes the extension of the
mandate ensuring the continuity of the work of the
Committee towards the universal adoption and full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We also welcome continued efforts to implement
the Committee’s mandate despite the challenges posed
by the coronavirus disease, including the conduct of
its comprehensive review, and are encouraged by its
intention to hold open consultations on the review.
In conclusion, we reaffirm Kenya’s strong
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and reiterate our full support for the work of
the Committee.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): We would like
to thank the Mexican Permanent Representative and
his team for their hard work in chairing the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) the very
clear briefing today. We also extend warm thanks to the
Group of Experts that supports the Committee.
Resolution 1540 (2004) has been a critical part of
the multilateral non-proliferation architecture since
its adoption in 2004. Since then, the Committee and
its Group of Experts have reviewed more than 500
national implementation reports from 185 countries.
The resolution remains an essential component of
the international disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture. We must remain extremely vigilant
against the risk of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons being used by non-State actors.
22-28603

14/03/2022

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The threat of weapons of mass destruction has
evolved since the Council adopted resolution 1540
(2004). The United Kingdom remains particularly
concerned about non-State actors’ attempted use of
crude toxin weapons such as ricin.
Key to maintaining the relevance of resolution
1540 (2004) and support from Member States is the
delayed but ongoing comprehensive review. We are
committed to supporting an inclusive and transparent
process that gives all Member States and interested
civil society organizations an opportunity to contribute
meaningfully to discussions on the Committee’s future
mandate. We urge all Member States to join us in
offering full support for the Committee’s work.
For our part, the United Kingdom stands ready
to work with other States to strengthen their national
regulatory frameworks, including their ability to
implement their laws and regulations governing
chemical, nuclear and biological activities. We would
also welcome the further consideration of aspects of
resolution 1540 (2004) that have not yet been fully
elaborated, including proliferation financing, as
mentioned by my French colleague.
Finally, let me stress that resolution 1540 (2004)
forms part of the wider international disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture, as well as the various
multilateral export control regimes. The strength of
that international architecture comes from all parts of it
working together effectively; we therefore continue to
support strong cooperation between the 1540 Committee
and the Group of Experts with those institutions.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Mr. Juan
Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez, for his thorough briefing
on the work of that subsidiary body of the Security
Council and his indication of the priorities for the
upcoming period.
The Russian Federation is unwaveringly committed
to the goals and objectives of resolution 1540 (2004). We
greatly value the spirit of global cooperation inherent in
the resolution and consider it essential to maintain its
preventive non-proliferation character.
The 1540 Committee has the important role of
monitoring the implementation of the resolution by
Member States and coordinating efforts to provide them
with technical assistance, upon their request. In order

S/PV. 8993

to achieve that fundamental goal — the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) by all countries, taking into
account their existing capabilities — much remains to
be done.
In that regard, it is necessary for the Committee
to focus on fulfilling the tasks assigned to it despite
the difficulties it may face, such as a pandemic or
complex international situations. We trust that we
will see a significant intensification of its activities
in all major areas. For that, it is important to maintain
a constructive atmosphere of cooperation within the
Committee, which should base its work on the principle
of consensus.
On 25 February, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2622 (2022) on the most recent technical
extension of the mandate of the 1540 Committee until
30 November 2022. Russia joined the consensus reached
in adopting that resolution in the interests of concluding
the comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), which unfortunately has been
postponed more than once.
We hope that as part of the review this year, it will
still be possible to hold open consultations with Member
States. We are convinced that those consultations must
be inclusive and involve as many countries as possible
in substantive discussions on non-proliferation and
preventing weapons of mass destruction and related
materials from falling into the hands of non-State
actors. We appreciate the efforts of the Chair of the
Committee, as well as the United Nations Secretariat,
to ensure that consultations are held in person, which
will make it possible to achieve that goal.
We expect the arrangements for the conduct of the
open consultations to be agreed as soon as possible and
that the Committee will send invitations to Member
States promptly so that they have enough time to prepare
for the event. Since it is States that are responsible for
implementing the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004),
their contribution to the open consultations is essential
for the Committee to prepare a full-fledged outcome
document of the comprehensive review for submission
to the Security Council.
I would like to note the unquestioned importance
of approving the Committee’s long-term mandate after
30 November 2022. We are convinced that it should
be based on the unifying principles of resolution 1540
(2004) and aimed at maintaining the fundamental
principles of the Committee’s work, without endowing

22-286039/12

S/PV.8993

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

it with intrusive or attributive powers. Only that will
enable this subsidiary body of the Security Council
to continue to carry out its essential role, which is to
promote the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
in the interests of the entire international community.
Mr. Wu Jianjian (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Ambassador De la Fuente Ramírez, Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his briefing.
Over the past year, the Committee has done a great
deal of good work to promote the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) by processing requests for
assistance, conducting international cooperation
outreach and advancing the comprehensive review
process. China appreciates the efforts made by the
Mexican Ambassador, as Chair, and his team and
thanks the Group of Experts and the Secretariat for
their contributions.
In the 18 years since the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004), the international consensus with regard to
non-proliferation has deepened. The non-proliferation
regime is being continually improved. International
cooperation on non-proliferation has steadily advanced
and international efforts to address the proliferation
activities of non-State actors have been effectively
enhanced. It should also be noted that the global
security situation remains complex and serious.

14/03/2022

international community, particularly major Powers,
should abandon the practice of double standards, cease
military cooperation that poses proliferation risks,
fulfil their obligations in good faith and further enhance
the authority, universality and effectiveness of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Biological Weapons Convention and the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
Secondly, we should pay attention to the
development of new technologies and eliminate the
risk of multidimensional proliferation. The rapid
development of emerging technologies, such as
artificial intelligence, 3D printing, gene editing and
synthetic biology, is leading to a new round of scientific
and technological revolution, which is injecting strong
impetus into human development progress. At the
same time, relevant technologies may be used by
non-State actors for the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) and their means of delivery.
States should strengthen regulation and international
cooperation to effectively eliminate the risk of the
misuse of emerging technologies for proliferation
activities by non-State actors.

In the new circumstances, China would like to put
forward the following four proposals on strengthening
global governance.

Thirdly, we should protect the right to peaceful uses
and promote relevant international cooperation. The
peaceful use of science and technology is an inalienable
and legitimate right of all countries and should not
be subject to unfair and unjustified restrictions. The
international community should effectively address
proliferation risks, prevent non-State actors from
acquiring WMDs, promote relevant international
cooperation and safeguard the right of all countries,
especially developing countries, to peaceful uses. Last
December, the General Assembly adopted resolution
76/234, on promoting international cooperation on
peaceful uses in the context of international security,
sponsored by China. It is hoped that, through the joint
efforts of all parties, the right to peaceful uses will be
respected and protected and that unjustified restrictions
will be reduced in order to better achieve the common
security and development of all countries.

First, we should adhere to true multilateralism and
consolidate the international non-proliferation regime.
Multilateralism is the best way to prevent division and
confrontation and promote unity and cooperation. All
parties should advocate a common, comprehensive,
cooperative global security concept, accommodate
the legitimate concerns of all countries, eliminate
drivers of proliferation and seek common security. The

Fourthly, we should promote a comprehensive review
process and strengthen the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). China supports the Committee’s efforts
to develop a sound workplan to continue substantive
progress on the comprehensive review, carry out an
objective assessment of the resolution’s implementation
by countries, make practical recommendations on
addressing non-proliferation risks, further promote

The root causes of proliferation are far from having
been eliminated. The risks posed by the proliferation
activities of non-State actors have become more diverse.
Unilateralism and double standards are increasing in the
area of non-proliferation. The unfair and unreasonable
aspects of the international non-proliferation regime
have become more acute. The peaceful use of science
and technology by the majority of developing countries
is subject to many restrictions.

10/12

22-28603

14/03/2022

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

international cooperation on non-proliferation, enhance
the effectiveness of assistance activities and promote
the comprehensive and effective implementation of
the resolution. That process should be led by Member
States, while taking into account their international
obligations and their actual national conditions in an
integrated manner and guaranteeing the participation
and voices of different countries, particularly those of
developing countries.
Finally, China firmly opposes the proliferation
of WMDs and has always strictly fulfilled its own
international obligations and actively participated in
international non-proliferation cooperation, while
respecting the right of all countries, especially
developing countries, to peaceful uses. China will
continue to work with all parties to promote the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), advance
the comprehensive review of the implementation of
the resolution and make a positive contribution to
strengthening global governance on non-proliferation.
Ms. Saha (United States of America): The United
States thanks Mexico for its leadership in achieving the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2622 (2022). This
technical extension of the mandate of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for most
of the remainder of this year will allow the Committee
and its Group of Experts to continue their important
work, while providing sufficient time to complete a
meaningful and inclusive comprehensive review and to
submit that review’s report to the Security Council.
The United States underscores its full support for the
1540 Committee as a powerful multilateral tool to help
to prevent the most dangerous weapons from falling into
the hands of non-State actors. We support the continued
work of the Committee under the chairmanship of
Mexico and look forward to collaborating with our
fellow Committee members to complete the substantive
work before us in the months ahead.
A meaningful comprehensive review that brings
together Member States and civil society, international
and regional organizations, industry and academia is
essential to ensuring that the Committee continues to
meet the challenges of preventing non-State actors,
including terrorists and terrorist groups, from acquiring
or using weapons of mass destruction and related
goods and know-how. In that regard, we welcome the
opportunity to engage those stakeholders through the

S/PV. 8993

review’s open sessions that the Chair has scheduled for
May and June.
As we undertake the work of the comprehensive
review and the mandate renewal, we will prioritize
the full implementation of States’ obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004) by improving the functionality
and the credibility of the Committee, further
empowering its Group of Experts and enhancing
its support for assistance and outreach-related
activities. We support the Chair’s ambitious but
achievable timeline to complete the comprehensive
review. In particular, we appreciate that the timeline
underscores the importance of streamlining the Group
of Experts’ work to strengthen the Committee, while
also recognizing the vitally important roles played
by international organizations, international regional
organizations and civil society in promoting our shared
goal of ensuring effective State-level implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
We remain committed to collaborating closely with
fellow Council members to conduct a successful review
that will inform the most effective and constructive
substantive mandate renewal later this year. The
possibility of weapons of mass destruction being
acquired and used by terrorists or other non-State actors
remains one of the greatest threats to international
peace and security. Resolution 1540 (2004) is one of the
few established, authoritative international instruments
in place to address such threats. The comprehensive
review and mandate renewal give us an opportunity to
ensure that the resolution and its implementation are as
strong and effective as possible. The stakes could not
be higher.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
I want to join others in thanking Ambassador Juan
Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez for his briefing today and
for his able chairmanship of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). I assure him of
the full support of the United Arab Emirates for the
Committee. I also wish to extend the gratitude of the
United Arab Emirates to the Group of Experts, which
has been instrumental in promoting the implementation
of that resolution. We were glad to renew the 1540
Committee’s mandate unanimously last month (see
S/PV.8977).

22-2860311/12

S/PV.8993

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The current global non-proliferation regime is
vulnerable to the emerging threats posed by the illicit
use of modern technologies, such as unmanned aerial
vehicles, synthetic biology and artificial intelligence,
which non-State actors and terrorists could exploit.
The international community should therefore address
such threats by reviewing the existing disarmament
and non-proliferation instruments, including the 1540
Committee. Furthermore, Governments should do
their part by periodically enhancing their national
policies. For its part, the United Arab Emirates recently
initiated a nationwide assessment for public and
private sectors to develop appropriate measures against
proliferation financing.
Resolution 1540 (2004) has long been central in the
efforts to ensure that terrorists and non-State actors do
not acquire, develop, traffic in or use weapons of mass
destruction. The Committee has played a vital role in
supporting the global non-proliferation architecture by
facilitating assistance and matchmaking for Member
States in their respective efforts to implement resolution
1540 (2004).
The United Arab Emirates supports the
continuation of the comprehensive review of the
status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
following postponements due to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We believe that the
review process will strengthen the overall shape of the
Committee and address the existing gaps identified
by Member States and other stakeholders during
consultations. Ultimately, the United Arab Emirates
hopes to see the comprehensive review results reflected
in the further renewal of the 1540 Committee and its

12/12

14/03/2022

Group of Experts in November. In that regard, the
wants to highlight the following aspects of the work of
the Committee.
First, the Committee should urgently facilitate
arrangements for open consultations with Member
States, international, regional and subregional
organizations, civil society and the private sector as part
of the comprehensive review. We support the Chair’s
efforts in that regard. It will be critical for Member
States and other stakeholders to exchange views and
best practices.
Secondly, the Committee should consider
streamlining its work and making it more accessible.
For example, the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted
several Committee activities, and in some instances
the Committee had to carry out some of its activities
virtually. Thus, we can look into expanding virtual
engagement by the Committee with Member States
and others, based on the feedback we get from
relevant stakeholders.
To conclude, we affirm the commitment of the
United Arab Emirates to upholding international peace
and security, and we look forward to supporting the
work of the Chair, the Committee and the broader
United Nations system in combatting the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction among non-State actors.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

22-28603
