S/2015/173

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 March 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2147
(2014), in which the Council requested me to report to it on the implementation by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo of its commitments under the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region. 1 The report covers developments since the issuance of my report of
24 September 2014 (S/2014/697) and provides a description of peace and security
initiatives with regard to the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region before 15 February 2015. It provides an account of progress and challenges
in the implementation of the Framework and recommendations to the Council on
how best to advance the objectives of the Framework.

II. Recent developments
A.

Political and security developments
2.
The continuing activities by armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo notwithstanding, the Great Lakes region as a whole enjoyed relative
stability during the reporting period. Two years after the signing of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, however, the agreement is facing significant
challenges that hinder its full implementation. They are largely related to limited
progress in neutralizing armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to persistent mistrust between the leaders of the region. In particular, the
lack of meaningful progress in the disarmament of the Forces démocratiques de

__________________
1 In this context, the region is defined as covering the 13 signatories to the Peace, Security and

Cooperation Framework, namely, Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan,
Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. In addition, the following four
intergovernmental organizations act as guarantors for the Framework: the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African Development
Community and the United Nations. For further information, see S/2013/119 and S/2013/131,
annex.

15-03418 (E)

130315

*1503418*

S/2015/173

libération du Rwanda (FDLR) continued to dominate discussions at the regional and
international levels during the reporting period.
3.
On 15 September, the Government of South Africa, as Chair of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation and its Troika, hosted a summit in Pretoria that brought together the
SADC Troika, composed of Botswana, Malawi and Zimbabwe, and the Troika of the
SADC Organ, comprising Lesotho, Namibia and South Africa. The participants
endorsed the decisions of the second joint International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR)-SADC ministerial meeting, held in July, namely, that the voluntary
surrender and disarmament of FDLR must be completed within a six-month time
frame. They called upon the United Nations, in cooperation with the African Union, to
play a role in either repatriating those FDLR elements who had voluntarily surrendered
or temporarily resettling them in third countries outside the region.
4.
On 25 September, ICGLR and SADC jointly convened a meeting of
stakeholders on the voluntary disarmament of FDLR, on the margins of the sixtyninth session of the General Assembly. The participants included ministers for
foreign affairs and of defence and other senior officials from all the countries in the
region, with the exception of Rwanda. My Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region, Said Djinnit, and my Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), Martin Kobler, also attended.
During the meeting, a road map defining specific steps leading to the completion of
the disarmament process was adopted. The steps included a joint ICGLR-SADC
mission to the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo to engage with the FDLR
leaders and urge the group to comply with the deadline of 2 January to disarm
voluntarily or face military action, in accordance with previous decisions of the
Heads of State of ICGLR and SADC and Security Council resolutions 2098 (2013)
and 2147 (2014).
5.
The mission was conducted from 3 to 6 October and was jointly led by the
Ambassador of South Africa to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, representing
SADC, the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ICGLR and
the Director of the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation.
Other participants included officials from Angola, Namibia, South Africa and
Zimbabwe. Representatives of the Office of my Special Envoy and MONUSCO also
participated. While a strong message was delivered to the acting leader of FDLR,
Victor Byiringiro, he continued to insist on a political dialogue with Rwanda as a
condition for further progress in the disarmament process, a position that the
Government of Rwanda has consistently rejected.
6.
On 20 October, at the third joint ICGLR-SADC ministerial meeting, held in
Luanda, the participants discussed the midterm review of the voluntary disarmament
of FDLR, in line with the decisions taken by the Heads of State and Government.
They highlighted the lack of meaningful progress and urged FDLR to abide by the
deadline of 2 January.
7.
At the expiration of the deadline, only 339 of an estimated 1,500 FDLR
combatants had surrendered in North Kivu and South Kivu, along with
1,119 dependants. Furthermore, only 17 of those who had surrendered were officers.
With regard to equipment, FDLR handed over only 252 weapons, most of which
were old and unserviceable. The individuals who surrendered are currently cantoned

2/16

15-03418

S/2015/173

at the Lieutenant General Jean-Lucien Bahuma transit camp in Kisangani, Orientale
Province. The Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo — FARDC) are providing security
for the camp, supplemented by MONUSCO.
8.
During the six months granted to the movement to disarm and surrender,
FDLR reportedly continued to commit human rights violations, recruit combatants
and send mixed signals about its willingness to disarm fully. Victor Byiringiro
released several communiqués in which he portrayed FDLR members as Rwandan
refugees and demanded a political dialogue with the Government of Rwanda. He
also wrote several letters to the United Nations, the African Union, ICGLR and
SADC to reiterate the resolve of FDLR to disarm and its desire to engage in a
political dialogue in Rwanda. He also raised alleged challenges relating to the
disarmament process, including the limited capacity of the transit camps established
to receive FDLR combatants.
9.
In view of the lack of progress, the Security Council, the witnesses to the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and the Governments of the region
continued to exert diplomatic pressure on FDLR to lay down its weapons
peacefully. On 2 January, the team of envoys and representatives for the Great
Lakes region, comprising my Special Envoy, my Special Representative for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of MONUSCO, the Special
Representative of the African Union, Boubacar Diarra, the Special Envoy of the
United States of America, Russ Feingold, the Senior Coordinator of the European
Union, Koen Vervaeke, and the Special Envoy of Belgium, Frank De Coninck,
issued a joint statement in which they called for immediate military action against
FDLR by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, supported by
MONUSCO and its Force Intervention Brigade. The same day, the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo issued a statement in which it stressed that
the only option remaining was to use force against FDLR, given that the group had
failed to disarm voluntarily before the deadline. A few days later, the Governments
of South Africa and the United Republic of Tanzania unequivocally reiterated their
readiness to support military operations against FDLR.
10. On 29 January, in Beni, North Kivu, during a joint press briefing attended by
the Force Commander of MONUSCO, Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz, the Chief of the General Staff of FARDC, General Didier Etumba,
announced the launch of an FARDC-led military operation (known as Operation
Sukola II) to forcefully disarm FDLR. New commanders were appointed to lead
both the operation and the thirty-fourth military region, in which the military action
would be conducted. MONUSCO had, however, previously identified two newly
appointed generals as allegedly bearing command responsibility for human rights
violations committed by units under their command. Consequently, in line with the
United Nations human rights due diligence policy, MONUSCO informed the
Government that it would not be in a position to support the units involved in
operations against FDLR as long as they were under the command of the two
generals. On 15 February, at a meeting with the diplomatic corps in Kinshasa, the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila Kabange,
indicated that the decision to appoint or remove the generals was a sovereign
prerogative and that his Government might forego the support of MONUSCO for
the operations against FDLR. As at 15 February, Operation Sukola II had yet to
produce meaningful results on the ground. While skirmishes between FARDC and

15-03418

3/16

S/2015/173

FDLR were reported in February, they have not yet translated into measurable
progress in neutralizing the armed group.
11. With regard to the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations, signed on
12 December 2013 by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23), the Government has continued to process
applications submitted by ex-M23 combatants under the legislation adopted on
11 February 2014. On 3 September, the Government granted amnesty to 191 ex-M23
combatants, 162 of whom were cantoned in Uganda and 29 in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. During a consultative meeting convened in Uganda on
1 October by the Executive Secretary of ICGLR, Alphonse Ntumba Luaba, ex-M23
leaders challenged the figures and contended that some of the persons granted
amnesty were not from the former M23. Meanwhile, the Government of Uganda
urged the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to repatriate all the
ex-M23 elements present in Uganda by the end of December, failing which those
individuals should apply for refugee status in Uganda.
12. To assess progress in the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations and
harmonize views on how to expedite the process, the Congolese National Oversight
Mechanism and the ICGLR secretariat organized a meeting in Kinshasa on
7 November, attended by my Special Envoy and my Special Representative, the
Special Envoy of the United States and representatives of other international envoys
and key partners. The ex-M23 leaders declined to attend on security grounds,
notwithstanding the assurances provided by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO, my Special Envoy and ICGLR. During the
meeting, the Coordinator of the Mechanism announced that the number of ex-M23
members who had already been granted amnesty had increased to 559. Furthermore,
during the most recent meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held in Addis
Ababa on 31 January, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Raymond Tshibanda N’tungamulongo,
indicated that 702 ex-M23 members had been granted amnesty.
13. From 5 to 10 December, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo sent a high-level mission to Kampala to discuss the next steps in the
repatriation of ex-M23 combatants. Discussions between the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Uganda, Henry Okello Oryem, and the Deputy Minister for International
and Regional Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Franck
Mwendi Malila, focused on expediting the repatriation of an estimated 1,300 ex-M23
combatants in Uganda. The ex-M23 leaders did not participate in the bilateral
discussions, but were approached separately by the ICGLR secretariat. Subsequently,
technical teams from both sides met under the supervision of the chiefs of military
intelligence of both countries and agreed on a plan of action, to be carried out from
7 to 25 December. Consequently, 120 ex-M23 elements were repatriated on
16 December and 62 on 30 December. The 182 individuals are currently quartered
in the Kamina camp in Katanga Province, pending demobilization.
14. From 2 to 4 February, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo sent a high-level delegation to Kigali to discuss the repatriation of ex-M23
combatants who had fled to Rwanda and the handover of their military equipment to
the Congolese authorities. The Congolese delegation was led by the Deputy
Minister of Defence, René Nsibu. The Office of my Special Envoy, MONUSCO and
ICGLR also participated in the consultations. The Congolese delegation met the

4/16

15-03418

S/2015/173

ex-M23 leaders in Rwanda and urged them to encourage all eligible ex-combatants
to prepare for voluntary surrender and repatriation. The Deputy Minister gave
assurances that all measures would be taken to provide security, food and
accommodation to the ex-combatants once they returned to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
15. At the end of the visit, the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda issued a joint communiqué in which they reiterated their
determination to implement their commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, expedite the repatriation of ex-M23 elements and hand
over their military equipment to the Congolese authorities. The Rwandan authorities
also shared with their Congolese counterparts a list of the military equipment
confiscated from the ex-M23 elements. Meanwhile, the ex-M23 Coordinator, who
had been deeply involved in the signing and implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations, resigned on 10 January on the grounds that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was not committed to implementing the
Declarations. At the time of writing, ex-M23 leaders were continuing to express
concern about the security of ex-M23 combatants held in cantonments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to question the willingness of the
Government to fully implement other commitments contained in the Declarations.
By contrast, the Government has consistently stated its commitment to fully
implementing the Declarations.
16. On 11 February, the Coordinator of the National Oversight Mechanism
convened a second meeting on the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations,
which was held in Kinshasa. The participants decided, among other things, to
accelerate the processing of applications for amnesty from ex-M23 elements. They
also agreed to dispatch a delegation to Uganda to resolve any issue delaying the
return to the Democratic Republic of the Congo of ex-M23 rebels remaining in that
country. A similar demarche, to be undertaken at a later date, was also proposed in
relation to Rwanda. In addition, the participants welcomed my Special Envoy’s
proposal to partner with MONUSCO to organize a national workshop on the
implementation of the national commitments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
17. As indicated in my most recent report on MONUSCO (S/2015/172), FARDC
and MONUSCO have continued their military operations against armed groups,
notably the Allied Democratic Forces. That group continues to target innocent
civilians in and around Beni, North Kivu. In other developments, on 30 December
the Burundian army reportedly clashed with an unidentified armed group that had
reportedly crossed from the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo into Cibitoke
Province. The spokesperson for the Burundian army reported that 95 armed elements
had been killed and 9 taken into custody. The Burundian authorities indicated that
an investigation would be conducted. In another development, this time in Ruhuha,
near the border between Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
MONUSCO and FARDC launched a joint operation (Kamilisha Usalama II) against
a stronghold of the Forces nationales de libération, a Burundian rebel group, on
5 January. During the operation, 60 heavily armed combatants were forced to
abandon the position.

15-03418

5/16

S/2015/173

B.

Humanitarian situation
18. The humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region remained a cause for concern during the reporting period. The eastern
provinces (North Kivu, South Kivu, Maniema and Orientale) continued to grapple
with a complex emergency in which people, especially children, remained vulnerable
to epidemics, attacks by armed groups, human rights abuses and malnutrition. The
continuing conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, combined with
other conflicts in the region, including in the Central African Republic, continued to
cause significant population displacement throughout the region. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo alone, some 2.7 million people are internally displaced. The
country continues to host some 122,000 refugees from neighbouring countries. The
humanitarian action plan for the Democratic Republic of the Congo for 2015
requires $692 million to meet the prioritized needs of 5.2 million people affected by
conflict, malnutrition, epidemics and natural disasters.
19. Humanitarian agencies in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
strengthened internal preparedness ahead of planned military operations against
FDLR, including by reinforcing coordination with country offices in neighbouring
Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda to tackle their cross-border impact. The humanitarian
country team in the Democratic Republic of the Congo recently updated its
humanitarian contingency plan. Furthermore, the team has continued to advocate the
protection of civilians before, during and after military operations, in addition to
access for the delivery of essential lifesaving humanitarian assistance to those
affected by armed conflict.
20. Recognizing the multifaceted and regional nature of issues relating to refugees
and internally displaced persons in the Great Lakes region, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) appointed a regional coordinator for the
Great Lakes refugee situation on 15 October. He will help to fine-tune the UNHCR
strategy and develop durable solutions for Congolese and Rwandan refugees in the
region, in close collaboration with key partners.
21. Continuing insecurity in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
coupled with unresolved issues relating to land and natural resources, has continued
to prevent some 443,250 Congolese refugees living in neighbouring countries from
returning home. In September, UNHCR issued a position paper relating to
Congolese refugees, in which it noted that persons fleeing the conflict in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo were likely to be in need of international refugee
protection. It urged States not to forcibly return persons from the Kivus, Katanga
and parts of Orientale Province until the security and human rights situation in those
areas had improved considerably.
22. UNHCR has also developed a comprehensive strategy to address the situation
of Rwandan refugees. It examined several alternatives, including creating enabling
conditions for voluntary repatriation, pursuing opportunities for local integration or
alternative legal status in countries of asylum and developing a schedule for the
cessation of refugee status. The number and profile of Rwandan refugees in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have been difficult to estimate since 1996, when
significant numbers of refugees fled attacks on the camps in which they had found
shelter. Nonetheless, a pre-registration process conducted by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has identified 245,298 Rwandan refugees

6/16

15-03418

S/2015/173

currently living in the country. The Congolese National Commission for Refugees
and UNHCR now plan to launch a biometric registration exercise to verify the
number of refugees in order to have a reliable database for tracking individual
protection cases. The biometric registration will help in identifying the characteristics
of the refugee population and providing better needs-based protection and assistance.
It will cost an estimated $2,410,665 and take some six months to complete. An
amount of $1,410,665 is needed to launch the exercise, with the United States
Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration having pledged $1 million.
23. As indicated in my previous report, UNHCR and the World Bank are finalizing
a study on forced displacement to provide Governments and development partners
with information on the development needs of the displaced and to formulate
recommendations on the design of displacement-sensitive policy and operational
activities in border communities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. In September, the Office of my Special
Envoy partnered with the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, UNHCR,
ICGLR, the European Union-United Nations Partnership on Land, Natural
Resources and Conflict Prevention, the Swiss Agency for Development and
Cooperation and the World Bank to convene a group of experts in preparation for a
ministerial conference on land and property rights for returning refugees and
internally displaced persons in the Great Lakes region.

C.

Human rights, child protection and sexual and
gender-based violence
24. Various actors, including the Allied Democratic Forces and FDLR, and State
security and defence forces, continued to commit human rights violations during the
reporting period. Armed groups also continued to recruit children for combat.
Another issue of concern was the disproportionate reaction of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to demonstrations relating to amendments to
the electoral law in January 2015. As noted in my most recent report on MONUSCO
(S/2015/172), at least 20 people were killed and 64 others injured by the police and
the Republican Guard. Some 480 demonstrators, including opposition figures, were
arrested and detained, some of them incommunicado. Furthermore, the Government
blocked access to the Internet, social media and text-messaging services from
20 January to 8 February to discourage the organization of further demonstrations.
Some radio and television stations were also suspended during that period.
25. On 1 December, the Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Court
upheld a term of imprisonment of 14 years for the former Congolese militia leader,
Thomas Lubanga, who had been convicted of conscripting child soldiers and using
them in combat. On 6 January, a top commander of the Lord’s Resistance Army,
Dominic Ongwen, surrendered to United States forces in the Central African
Republic. He was transferred to the Court on 21 January. The surrender of Ongwen,
who was indicted for murdering civilians, enslaving children and stealing property,
provides a strong case for cooperation between national, regional and international
mechanisms to neutralize armed groups and prosecute perpetrators of atrocities.

15-03418

7/16

S/2015/173

D.

Regional economic integration
26. From 3 to 5 November, the eighth ICGLR-Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development-United Nations Group of Experts Forum on
Responsible Mineral Supply Chains was held in Kinshasa to discuss the progress
made in ensuring due diligence with regard to the supply chains for minerals in the
Great Lakes region. My Special Envoy addressed the participants. While in
Kinshasa, he also attended the third meeting of ICGLR ministers in charge of
mining, at which the participants assessed progress concerning the Protocol against
the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources, in particular with regard to conflict
minerals. At both meetings, the participants acknowledged the significant progress
made by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda in relation to
certification mechanisms for minerals and noted that actions by Burundi, Uganda
and the United Republic of Tanzania were encouraging. They called upon States to
address continuing challenges in regulating the informal sector operated by artisanal
miners, the lengthy and costly process of certification and the low international
confidence in minerals originating from the region, which also constrained legal
mineral exports.
27. Preparations for the Great Lakes private sector investment conference
continued throughout the reporting period. In that context, the Government of
Angola, the ICGLR secretariat and the Office of my Special Envoy organized a
regional consultation on the investment opportunities brief for the region in Luanda
on 17 and 18 December. States members of ICGLR actively participated therein and
demonstrated a strong sense of ownership of the process. The participants reviewed
the brief, submitted proposals to improve it and provided input to the preparations
for the conference. They also supported my Special Envoy’s proposal to place
regional cooperation and the promotion of public and private investment at the
forefront of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. They endorsed the
brief and the proposed plan of action for convening the conference.
28. Efforts aimed at harmonizing regional economic integration in the Great Lakes
region have reached an advanced stage. The twenty-first meeting of the Sectoral
Council of Ministers Responsible for East African Community Affairs and Planning
was held in Kigali from 27 to 31 October to consider the status of implementation of
previous decisions for enhancing regional integration and to review progress on the
Tripartite Free Trade Area Agreement between the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa, the East African Community and SADC. The Council of Ministers
of the East African Community held its thirtieth meeting from 20 to 28 November,
during which it considered the preparations for the sixteenth Ordinary Summit of
the East African Community Heads of State, held on 20 February in Nairobi, which
had as its theme “Deepening and accelerating integration: towards political
federation”.

III. Implementation of the commitments under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework
A.

Commitments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
29. During the period under review, limited progress was achieved in the
implementation of the national commitments of the Democratic Republic of the

8/16

15-03418

S/2015/173

Congo. The appointment of the long-awaited Government of national cohesion on
7 December represents a positive step towards implementing the sixth national
commitment relating to national reconciliation. The Government is, however, yet to
accelerate the implementation of the reforms identified in the Framework and by the
National Oversight Mechanism.
30. In October, the Coordinator of the National Oversight Mechanism transmitted
to Parliament the benchmarks derived from the national commitments, with a view
to integrating them into the 2015 budget. Active advocacy by the Coordinator
contributed to the inclusion of the commitments in the 2015 budget law. The
Mechanism also worked with the Ministry of Planning to make the national
benchmarks operational and finalize the identification of activities to be included in
the Government’s priority action plan.
31. To implement the commitment to prevent armed groups from destabilizing
neighbouring countries, an amount of $10 million was allocated in the 2015 budget
to fund the country’s third national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
plan. During his visit to Kinshasa from 10 to 13 February, my Special Envoy
encouraged the Congolese authorities and international partners to mobilize the
resources required to facilitate the implementation of the plan. With regard to
security sector reform, the Government made limited progress during the reporting
period. Importantly, it began to restructure the FARDC command, beginning on
19 September, and instituted an additional command level comprising three defence
zones.
32. My most recent report on MONUSCO (S/2015/172) contains further
information on the status of implementation of the national commitments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

B.

Commitments of other countries in the region
33. In addition to relative progress in regional economic integration and judicial
accountability, as noted in section II, the countries of the region concentrated their
efforts on combating illegal armed groups active in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo during the reporting period.
34. The Government of Angola, as Chair of ICGLR, continued its efforts to bring
together States members of ICGLR and SADC to discuss the FDLR issue. As
indicated herein, the ministers for foreign affairs and of defence of ICGLR and
SADC met in Luanda on 19 and 20 October and reiterated the ultimatum given to
FDLR to disarm and surrender by 2 January. They also tasked the secretariats of
ICGLR and SADC with supporting and monitoring efforts towards the full
disarmament of FDLR. My Special Envoy, who attended the meeting, stressed that
the leaders of the region should continue to create the conditions for a full,
voluntary disarmament of FDLR, while simultaneously pursuing a credible process
to exert military pressure on the armed group when the ultimatum expired. He also
cautioned the ministers that failure to neutralize FDLR swiftly had the potential to
exacerbate tensions within the region.
35. A number of high-level diplomatic activities have been conducted in the
region to foster cooperation and build consensual approach to the neutralization of
all armed groups in the region, with a focus on FDLR and the Allied Democratic

15-03418

9/16

S/2015/173

Forces. On 19 September, the President of the Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso,
visited his counterpart in Kinshasa. They agreed to enhance bilateral cooperation on
issues of common interest, as indicated in my report on MONUSCO dated
30 December (S/2014/957).
36. On 17 December, the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, travelled to Luanda
and met the President of Angola, José Eduardo dos Santos, to discuss FDLR and
other matters relating to cooperation between the countries. On 21 and 22 December,
the President of South Africa, Jacob Zuma, led a high-level delegation to Uganda
and the United Republic of Tanzania to discuss FDLR. He also travelled to Angola
on 14 January to engage with his Angolan counterpart on FDLR and other issues of
interest to the Tripartite Mechanism on Dialogue and Cooperation, which brings
together Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Africa. The
President of Angola paid a four-hour visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on 19 January and met the President, with whom he discussed FDLR and other
bilateral matters. On 28 January, officials from the Rwandan and Ugandan armed
forces signed a memorandum of understanding on the sharing of intelligence on the
activities of rebel groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
37. Meanwhile, the fifth ordinary session of the Plenary Assembly of the Forum of
Parliaments of Member States of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region was held in Nairobi from 20 to 22 January, organized by the ICGLR
secretariat. It was attended by more than 70 parliamentarians from States members
of ICGLR and representatives of the Office of my Special Envoy. It afforded an
opportunity to review recent political and security developments and discuss future
prospects for peace and stability in the region. The participants also discussed the
role of the region’s parliaments in implementing the declaration on the fight against
youth unemployment through infrastructure development and investment promotion,
which had been adopted at the special summit of Heads of State and Government of
ICGLR held in Nairobi in July. In addition, the role of the region’s parliaments in
combating the illegal exploitation of natural resources was highlighted. I am pleased
that the Forum’s action plan for 2015-2016 reflects the readiness of the region’s
parliamentarians to actively participate in the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework and the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in
the Great Lakes Region.

C.

International commitments
38. The Office of my Special Envoy has been collaborating with the African
Union, the European Union, the World Bank Group and the Government of Belgium
to organize a second conference of development partners for the Great Lakes region.
The conference, to be held in 2015, will bring together government officials and
representatives of regional institutions and development partners to review the
progress made since the first conference, held in Addis Ababa in July 2013. The
participants will also discuss additional medium-term priorities and the formulation
of a development action plan.
39. Since my joint visit to the Great Lakes region with the President of the World
Bank Group, Jim Yong Kim, in May 2013, the Group has made progress in
delivering on its commitments to the region. Since September, the Group has
dispatched missions to advance designs for a number of projects. Furthermore, the

10/16

15-03418

S/2015/173

Group is on track to deliver on all its commitments within the 24-month period that
the President announced during our joint visit. At the time of writing, the Board had
already approved $538 million for regional programmes relating to energy
development, sexual and gender-based violence, women’s health, capacity-building
for ICGLR and improvement of information and communications technology
connectivity in the region.
40. The Office of my Special Envoy has also been collaborating with the World
Bank Group to establish a facility intended to help to address the root causes of
conflict in the Great Lakes region and ensure that Group programmes there are
implemented in a conflict-sensitive manner. It is supporting the formulation of
regional indicators of peace and stability for Group programmes falling under the
fourth pillar of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and helping to
identify ways in which cross-border trade can increase the resilience of border
communities. Moreover, it has partnered with the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme and the Office of my Special Envoy to organize two events
on land and property rights for refugees: an expert meeting was held on 1 October
and a ministerial conference is planned from 21 to 24 April in Nairobi.
41. On 3 and 4 November, the Office of my Special Envoy and the United Nations
Development Programme helped to organize a regional technical meeting in Addis
Ababa, with the aim of creating a regional “One United Nations” programme to
support the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. The
United Nations country teams involved have identified the following areas of
intervention that are aligned with the Framework: mobility; gender and sexual and
gender-based violence; youth and children; cross-country trade and food security;
and sustainable energy. At the time of writing, a follow-up meeting was to be held
on 5 and 6 March.

D.

Oversight mechanisms of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework
42. The Regional Oversight Mechanism met twice during the reporting period. Its
fourth meeting was held on 22 September, on the margins of the sixty-ninth session
of the General Assembly, while its fifth was held on 31 January, on the margins of
the twenty-fourth ordinary session of the Assembly of the African Union, in Addis
Ababa. Importantly, at the fourth meeting, the participants endorsed the findings and
recommendations contained in the first progress report on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, which was jointly prepared by the
Office of my Special Envoy and the Office of the Special Representative of the
African Union for the Great Lakes Region. At the fifth meeting, the participants
endorsed the investment opportunities brief for the region, which was prepared by
the Office of my Special Envoy with support from the United Nations Development
Programme, the African Development Bank, the World Bank Group and the
International Finance Corporation. It is designed to provide potential investors with
information on priority investment areas and projects identified through a
consultative process involving all the signatory countries.
43. The Technical Support Committee of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
contributed to the preparation of the regional plan of action and the progress report
on the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. It met

15-03418

11/16

S/2015/173

periodically during the reporting period to assess the situation, tackle any technical
issues relating to the implementation of the Framework and refer issues to the
Mechanism, as necessary. During their ninth meeting, held in Nairobi on 8 and
9 January, the Committee members agreed on a set of recommendations for
consideration by the Mechanism at its fifth meeting. It should be noted that Rwanda
did not participate in that meeting of the Committee or in the most recent meeting of
the Mechanism, most likely owing to its concerns regarding the neutralization of
FDLR.

IV. Activities of my Special Envoy
44. Since assuming office in September, my Special Envoy has focused on the
major challenges hindering the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework by engaging in intensive shuttle diplomacy with all his key
interlocutors. Over the past six months, one of his main objectives has been to help
to forge a consensus on the urgent need to neutralize FDLR.
45. During his extensive and frequent visits to the region, my Special Envoy
encouraged relevant leaders to take on the FDLR issue decisively and coherently. In
that context, he sought to reach a common position with the leadership of the
African Union Commission on the issue. Furthermore, he met several Heads of
State and Government and interacted with senior officials from Angola, Burundi, the
Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, South Africa, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe. Throughout those consultations, he
advocated a two-pronged approach to neutralize FDLR: on the one hand,
coordinated efforts to facilitate the group’s voluntary surrender and, on the other,
preparations for the application of credible military pressure on the armed group,
should it fail to disarm and surrender by the deadline.
46. Together with the African Union Commission, my Special Envoy convened a
first meeting of the witnesses to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. It
was held in Addis Ababa on 1 December to develop a common strategy to deal with
FDLR. The participants, including ministers from Angola, South Africa and
Zimbabwe, urged the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO to take
the necessary action against FDLR if the group failed to comply with the provisions
of Security Council resolutions 2098 (2013) and 2147 (2014) and the decisions of
the leaders of ICGLR and SADC.
47. As the deadline of 2 January loomed, my Special Envoy met the President of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 20 December and stressed the need to
take military action against FDLR if it failed to disarm and surrender by the
deadline. He concurred with the need for military action after the deadline and gave
assurances that operations would begin at a date to be determined by the military
command on the ground. He added that steps should be taken to anticipate the
humanitarian consequences of those operations.
48. After the deadline expired, my Special Envoy reached out to the Governments
of Uganda and South Africa on 6 and 7 and 14 and 15 January, respectively. He
joined officials from the Government of South Africa in issuing a press statement
calling for military action against FDLR. On 22 January, he met the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the United Republic of Tanzania,
Bernard Kamillius Membe, in Dar es Salaam and encouraged the full participation

12/16

15-03418

S/2015/173

of the country, as the largest contributor of troops to the Force Intervention Brigade,
in the military operations against FDLR. While reiterating his Government’s
concern about the likelihood of collateral damage to civilians, the Minister
expressed commitment to neutralizing all armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including FDLR, through its contingent within the Brigade.
My Special Envoy reassured him that due consideration had been given to
protecting civilians in the preparations for military action against FDLR.
49. On 26 January, my Special Envoy travelled to Harare, where he met the
President of Zimbabwe, Robert G. Mugabe, in his capacity as Chair of SADC and
informed him that MONUSCO and the Force Intervention Brigade were ready to
support FARDC operations against FDLR. The President praised the contributions
of Malawi, South Africa and the United Republic of Tanzania to the Brigade as
evidence of SADC commitment to helping to neutralize all armed groups in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
50. My Special Envoy has also been encouraging efforts to improve relations
between the countries of the region. He has been encouraging the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to convene a summit of the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries to boost regional development and
cooperation and provide a forum for confidence-building between the leaders of
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. The summit is
tentatively scheduled for the first half of 2015. He has also reached out to the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community in that regard.
51. During the period under review, my Special Envoy also engaged with regional
and international actors, including from civil society, to identify avenues for
cooperation and explore opportunities to tackle the root causes of instability in the
region. Those avenues and opportunities include implementing durable solutions for
refugees and internally displaced persons, combating impunity, encouraging judicial
cooperation and promoting socioeconomic development and the responsible
exploitation of natural resources.
52. As part of his efforts in support of the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, my Special Envoy has identified the issue of natural
resources as central to his work. In that regard, he has held consultations on the
improvement of natural resource management with representatives of Governments,
civil society and non-governmental organizations working on mining issues. In the
same vein, he has been mobilizing support from the signatories to the Framework
and from partners to create the conditions for holding the Great Lakes private sector
investment conference.
53. In line with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), my Special Envoy has
continued to promote the involvement of civil society organizations and women’s
groups in efforts to bring peace and stability to the region. In that context, he has
engaged with civil society organizations from the region to hear their views on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and rally
support for his mandate. His Office is collaborating with civil society focal points in
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda to establish a
regional coalition of civil society actors.
54. Through the Women’s Platform for the Framework, my Special Envoy has
been promoting the political leadership and empowerment of women, notably by

15-03418

13/16

S/2015/173

helping to fund livelihoods projects in conflict-affected communities at the
grass-roots level. A first round of grants totalling $193,874 was disbursed to
women’s groups from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda in November. In October, to mark the fourteenth anniversary of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), the Office of my Special
Envoy partnered with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, MONUSCO, other United Nations agencies, Governments
and women’s organizations to organize events in Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Uganda. During the events, he called for the increased
involvement of women’s organizations in peace initiatives in the region.
55. My Special Envoy also chaired the first face-to-face meeting of the Advisory
Board of the Women’s Platform on 29 January, on the margins of the twenty-fourth
ordinary session of the Assembly of the African Union. He underscored the need to
strengthen partnership with regional initiatives and institutions, notably the ICGLR
Regional Women’s Forum, the Office of the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security, the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women and the ministers of the region
responsible for gender matters. He also encouraged the expansion of the Board to
include other partners, such as the World Bank Group, and recommended improving
the resource base of the Platform to enhance its impact at the grass-roots level.
56. Throughout the reporting period, my Special Envoy encouraged the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to swiftly implement its
commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, including by
making provision for those commitments in its national budget.

V. Observations and recommendations
57. Two years after it was signed, the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
is at a critical juncture. A year ago, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours had a unique opportunity to stabilize the region and improve the lives
and livelihoods of ordinary people by implementing the commitments made in the
Framework. Today, I am concerned that the region stands at a crossroads between
peace and cyclical instability. The slow implementation of the Nairobi Declarations,
the lack of meaningful progress in disarming FDLR and the persistent mistrust
between signatories have combined to place the Framework under strain and hinder
its implementation. I urge the signatories to and the guarantors of the Framework to
tackle those issues as a matter of priority, with the assistance of the international
community.
58. I welcome the regional and international consensus on the need to neutralize
all armed groups operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Effective military operations against FDLR should begin without delay, in line with
the announcement made by the Chief of the General Staff of FARDC on 29 January.
I urge the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to closely
collaborate with MONUSCO and its Force Intervention Brigade in planning and
conducting the operations with due consideration for the protection of civilians. I
call upon the international community to continue to support humanitarian actors on
the ground.

14/16

15-03418

S/2015/173

59. As part of neutralizing armed groups, efforts to ensure an effective programme
of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and/or repatriation of former
combatants should be redoubled. The door should remain open to ex-combatants
and their dependants who wish to enrol in existing programmes. I urge donors to
continue to support the programmes and request the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure that awareness-raising, repatriation and reinsertion
activities proceed without delay. Ending the proliferation of armed groups also
requires a comprehensive strategy that should include severing their economic
lifelines, creating economic opportunities for young people and bringing perpetrators
of atrocities to justice.
60. It is crucial to institute sustained dialogue and build trust between the
signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. I call upon the
leaders of the region to work together to define mutually acceptable solutions to
neutralize the armed groups operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In the same vein, I encourage the countries concerned to revive joint
mechanisms and to convene a summit of the Economic Community of the Great
Lakes Countries as soon as possible. I stand ready, through my Special Envoy, to
help to build confidence and trust between the leaders of the region.
61. I urge all the signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework to
renew their commitment to the Framework. I am deeply worried by the low turnout
by the Heads of State and Government of the signatory countries at the most recent
meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, as well as by the absence of some
signatories at the most recent meeting of the Technical Support Committee. The
Framework can be an effective tool only as long as its signatories remain committed
to it and collectively oversee its implementation. Its governance structures should
be strengthened, given that they do not currently appear to provide the intended
forums for substantive discussions on the key challenges facing Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. I therefore recommend that the roles and
formats of the Mechanism and the Committee be reviewed and strengthened, so that
they effectively steer and monitor the implementation of the Framework. The Office
of my Special Envoy is developing proposals to strengthen the governance
structures, in close consultation with the African Union and the other witnesses.
They will be submitted to the signatories in due course.
62. I welcome the preparations for the Great Lakes private sector investment
conference and commend the participating Member States for their commitment. I
urge public and private institutions to participate in the Conference, which will
hopefully attract significant new investment to the region.
63. The exploitation of natural resources contributes greatly to instability in the
region. Recent meetings have highlighted progress in enhancing transparency and
strengthening legal exploitation. My Special Envoy has also consistently underlined
the need to transform the exploitation of minerals from drivers of conflict into
agents of inclusive peace, development and transformation. I call upon all
stakeholders to step up their efforts to formalize the informal sector operated by
artisanal miners, streamline the lengthy and costly process of mineral certification
and rebuild confidence in the region’s lawful mineral export mechanisms.
64. I commend current efforts to prosecute international crimes and violations of
human rights at the national, regional and international levels during the reporting
period. I am, however, concerned that individuals associated with violence in the

15-03418

15/16

S/2015/173

Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region, some of whom are under United
Nations or international sanctions, or under international arrest warrants, remain at
large. They include prominent members of FDLR, ex-M23 and FARDC. I remind
the Governments of the region of their commitment to facilitate the administration
of justice through regional judicial cooperation. I also urge them to work together to
bring the perpetrators of serious crimes before the appropriate courts of law, whether
through prosecution, extradition, surrender or transfer. Greater accountability and
better administration of justice will go a long way in rebuilding confidence in the
region’s governance and judicial institutions, breaking recurrent cycles of violence
and promoting durable peace.
65. I am pleased to note that the Women’s Platform plays a significant catalytic
role in supporting the political and economic empowerment of women in the region.
It has the potential to contribute to addressing the root causes of instability, tackling
the economic, social and political exclusion of women, addressing deeply
entrenched sexual and gender-based violence and empowering women to become
agents of transformation. I applaud the unique role that women’s organizations play
in promoting peace and reconciling communities. I call upon donors to support
those organizations strongly and to help to expand the resource base of the Platform.
66. The risk and far-reaching consequences of violence during upcoming elections
in several countries of the region should not be underestimated. We must make
every effort to prevent election-related violence over the coming months and years.
I urge all the Governments to provide ample space for free and open political
participation. In particular, I urge all Governments, opposition parties, civil society
organizations and international partners to contribute to credible, timely, transparent
and peaceful elections throughout the region.
67. Lastly, I thank my Special Envoy, my Special Representative for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of MONUSCO and their teams, as
well as the team of international envoys and representatives, for their tireless efforts
to promote the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. I call upon the Security
Council and the international community to continue to support the people of the
Great Lakes region in their efforts to achieve the objectives of the “framework of
hope”.

16/16

15-03418
