S/PRST/2007/33

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 September 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5740th meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 September 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Timor-Leste”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the formation of the new Government
in Timor-Leste resulting from the 30 June 2007 legislative elections. It also
congratulates the appointment of the new cabinet of Timor-Leste, led by Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmão. The Council further congratulates the people of
Timor-Leste for demonstrating their strong commitment to peace and
democracy. It expresses its readiness to work with the new Government of
Timor-Leste in achieving its goals and tackling critical challenges, including in
its development efforts, facing the country.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation for the role played by
the National Commission on Elections, the Technical Secretariat for Electoral
Administration and the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) during the presidential and parliamentary elections in Timor-Leste.
The Council commends the invaluable support provided for the preparations
and holding of the elections by regional and international partners. It also
expresses its appreciation for the role played by domestic and international
electoral observers.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need for all parties to resolve any
disputes through exclusively peaceful channels and within the framework of
democratic institutions and calls upon the people of Timor-Leste to refrain
from violence and work together in order to ensure security.
“The Security Council calls upon the Government, Parliament, political
parties and the people of Timor-Leste to work together and engage in political
dialogue and consolidate peace, democracy, rule of law, sustainable social and
economic development and national reconciliation in the country. The Security
Council reaffirms the need for justice and accountability, and underlines the
importance of the implementation of the recommendations of the United
Nations Independent Special Commission of Inquiry report of 2006.
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
the work of UNMIT. It also encourages UNMIT to continue to cooperate and
coordinate with the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes as well as

07-50036 (E) 100907

*0750036*

S/PRST/2007/33

all relevant partners to support the Government of Timor-Leste in
implementing a national development plan and addressing challenges facing
the country, in particular security sector reform, strengthening of the justice
sector, the promotion of democratic governance, resolving the issue of
internally displaced persons and the pursuit of sustainable development.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for UNMIT in its work,
and appreciates the continued efforts by the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to ensure the full implementation of the mandate of UNMIT.”

2

07-50036
