United Nations

A/RES/63/58

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 January 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 89 (l)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 December 2008
[on the report of the First Committee (A/63/389)]

63/58. Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 62/25 of 5 December 2007,
Continuing to express its grave concern at the danger to humanity posed by
the possibility that nuclear weapons could be used,
Reaffirming that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing processes requiring urgent irreversible progress on both fronts,
Recognizing the continued vital importance of the early entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 1 to the advancement of nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation objectives, and welcoming the recent
ratifications of the Treaty by Barbados, Burundi, Colombia and Malaysia,
0F

Recalling the decisions entitled “Strengthening the review process for the
Treaty”, “Principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament”
and “Extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons” and the
resolution on the Middle East, adopted at the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons 2 and the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 3
1F

2F

Recalling also the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to
accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear
disarmament, in accordance with commitments made under article VI of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 4
3F

_______________
1

See resolution 50/245.
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
3
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final
Document, vols. I-III (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I-IV)).
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
2

08-47427

A/RES/63/58

Mindful of the approaching 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and in this regard urging
States parties to intensify their constructive engagement in the work of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2010 Review Conference at its third session, in 2009,
Continues to emphasize the central role of the Treaty on the
1.
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons4 and its universality in achieving nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, and calls upon all States parties to
respect their obligations;
Calls upon all States to comply fully with all commitments made
2.
regarding nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation and not to act in any
way that may compromise either cause or that may lead to a new nuclear arms race;
Reaffirms that the outcome of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties
3.
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons3 sets out the agreed
process for systematic and progressive efforts towards nuclear disarmament, and in
this regard renews its call upon the nuclear-weapon States to accelerate the
implementation of the practical steps towards nuclear disarmament that were agreed
upon at the 2000 Review Conference, thereby contributing to a safer world for all;
Reiterates its call upon all States parties to spare no effort to achieve the
4.
universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and in this
regard urges India, Israel and Pakistan to accede to the Treaty as non-nuclearweapon States promptly and without conditions;
Urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to rescind its
5.
announced withdrawal from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, while recognizing the efforts undertaken during 2008 within the
framework of the Six-Party Talks to achieve the denuclearization of the Korean
Peninsula in a peaceful manner;
Stresses the need for a constructive and successful preparatory process
6.
leading to the 2010 Review Conference, which should contribute to strengthening
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in all its aspects and
achieving its full implementation and universality;
Welcomes the second session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010
7.
Review Conference, held in Geneva from 28 April to 9 May 2008, and calls upon
the Preparatory Committee at its third session, in 2009, to identify and address
specific aspects where urgent progress is required in order to advance the objective
of a nuclear-weapon-free world, building on the outcomes of the 1995 and 2000
Conferences;
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session
8.
the item entitled “Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments” and to review the
implementation of the present resolution at that session.
61st plenary meeting
2 December 2008

2
