S/PV.7194

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7194th meeting

Monday, 9 June 2014, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. White
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Llanos
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Kalindra
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Libya

14-42410 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1442410*

S/PV.7194

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tarek Mitri,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. At this meeting,
the Security Council will hear briefings by Mr. Tarek
Mitri and Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana, Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. Mitri.
Mr. Mitri: There is a continuing sense of concern
among the Libyan people regarding the prospect of a
protracted conflict. The crisis that has dominated the
political scene for the past few months poses a threat to the
country’s political transition. Following a decision by the
General National Congress to endorse the new Cabinet
of Mr. Ahmed Maiteeq on 26 May, the Government
of Abdallah al-Thani, acting as caretaker, refused to
hand over power, citing procedural irregularities. This
morning, Libya’s Supreme Court ruled that the election
of Mr. Maiteeq was unconstitutional, opening a way out
of the institutional crisis. The need to respect that ruling
should be affirmed. The initial reaction in Tripoli, half
an hour ago, to the court ruling is positive. The second
deputy president of the Congress, Salah Makhzoum,
and Maiteeq himself both announced separately that
they will comply with the decision.
Also, there were significant security developments
in the past few weeks. Foremost among those have
been the move by retired general Khalifa Haftar in
mid-May to mobilize some units of the Libyan national
army and other tribally affiliated armed groups against
groups that he has labelled as terrorists and blamed
for much of the violence and targeted assassinations

2/7

09/06/2014

in Benghazi and other areas of eastern Libya. The
military operation, dubbed Operation Libya Dignity,
elicited some expressions of support. But there are also
those who accuse General Haftar of seeking to unseat
the legitimately elected institutions of the State and
using the threat of terrorism as a pretext to stage what
they call a coup d’état.
In previous briefings to the Council, I could not
understate the risks of the growing and dangerous
security void in Libya. Hundreds of Libyan
citizens — mainly security personnel, but also judges,
journalists and other civilians — have been the victims
of a systematic and unrelenting campaign of targeted
assassinations and other acts of aggression. However,
any viable long-term strategy aimed at addressing that
phenomenon and rooting out terrorism cannot be born
out of unilateral and external initiatives, nor can it be
limited to military solutions. There should be an end
to the violence inflicted on the civilian population of
Benghazi. There is no doubt about that. That is why the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
reiterates its condemnation of attacks against civilians,
whoever their perpetrators.
In Tripoli, the crisis over the appointment of a new
Prime Minister has accentuated since February the
strong political polarization in the country. Tensions
have given way to intermittent clashes on the streets
of the capital between rival brigades and other armed
groups under the nominal control of the Libyan
authorities. On 18 May, armed groups forcibly entered
the grounds of the General National Congress in order
to prevent the Congress from pressing ahead with the
election of a new Prime Minister.
Strong political disagreement over the functioning
of institutions and their legitimacy has revealed mutual
distrust among the main political protagonists. The
radicalization of positions on both sides of the political
divide was further exacerbated by accusations of
seeking power by all means and suspicions of growing
external interference in favour of the adverse party.
Notwithstanding the political and security crisis
that has engulfed Libya, the constitutional process
has made considerable progress since my briefing to
the Council in March (see S/PV.7130). On 21 April, the
General National Congress convened the first session
of the Constitutional Drafting Assembly in Al-Bayda.
Following an opening ceremony, the members elected
their chair, deputy chair and rapporteur and adopted

14-42410

09/06/2014

The situation in Libya

rules of procedure. The Assembly is currently
developing its committee structure, work plans and
public outreach plans. UNSMIL stands ready to provide
technical assistance at the request of the Assembly and
continues its efforts to coordinate international support
for the constitutional process.
In my most recent briefing, I described how
boycotts and security problems disrupted the election
of the Constitutional Drafting Assembly in February
and left 13 seats unfilled. In the intervening period,
eight of those seats have been filled through additional
rounds of polling. Efforts by the Assembly itself are
under way to ensure that all areas of Libya and all
components — as they call them in Libya — of Libyan
society are represented in the work of the Assembly.
In joint partnership with a range of women’s
organizations, UNMSIL has launched a women’s
dialogue initiative to engage with the media and
religious, political and societal actors in a public debate
on constitutional issues of particular significance to
women.
The High National Election Commission of Libya
is now preparing, with United Nations technical
support, the election of the 200-member council
of representatives that will succeed the General
National Congress. The total number of registered
voters reached 1.5 million. A total of 1,714 candidates
have registered, including 152 women, contesting 32
reserved seats. Polling is expected on 25 June. We have
called on all parties to ensure that elections are held in
a peaceful atmosphere and not delayed. It is hoped that
the elections will augur, with confidence and popular
interest, a third phase of the transition process before a
new constitution is approved.
The security situation continues to impede the
proper functioning of the justice system. Courts have
stopped working for prolonged periods in Derna,
Benghazi and Sirte in protest at the continuing attacks
on prosecutors and judges, among other State officials.
Although the General National Congress extended
to 2 April the deadline for completing the judicial
screening of detainees in compliance with the law
on transitional justice, that task remains outstanding.
Figures collected by the Ministry of Justice, with
United Nations assistance, indicate that in early March
around 6,200 inmates remained held in facilities under
the authority of the judicial police, of whom only about
10 per cent had been tried.

S/PV.7194

The trial of 37 former regime officials, including
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi,
has begun at the Tripoli Court of Appeals. That trial
is a crucial test for Libya’s willingness and ability to
conduct fair trials. UNSMIL has voiced concerns about
difficulties in ensuring full legal representation for all
defendants and proper access by lawyers to the case
files and to their clients. Recently, the Court appears to
be in the process of addressing such matters.
UNSMIL has visited all defendants, with various
levels of supervision, in Tripoli, as well as in Misrata and
Zintan. UNSMIL, however, has been denied access to
other detainees held in the Al-Hadba prison on grounds
that they have not been charged. I have strongly protested
the brief detention in Al-Hadba of an UNSMIL senior
staff member attending, as an observer, the trial session
of 11 May and the false accusations levelled against
him. UNSMIL received oral apologies and assurances
from the Libyan authorities of their commitments to
respecting the status-of-mission agreement between
Libya and the United Nations. However, the personal
effects of our staff have not been returned. Therefore, I
decided to suspend the attendance of our staff at other
trials in Al-Hadba until the case of our colleague is
fully resolved.
More recently, on 4 June four UNSMIL staff
members, upon their return from Al-Bayda, were
detained by the airport security authorities and illtreated. During their detention, which lasted more than
an hour, false accusations against them once again were
cited. Their release occurred after the intervention of
the Ministry of the Interior, at my request. I protested
and reminded the Libyan authorities, once again, of
their obligation to respect the mission agreement signed
with UNSMIL.
The current situation in Libya has inevitably slowed
the process of security sector rebuilding and reform.
Nonetheless, there has been some progress in developing
the operationalization of the Rome conference security
compact. Assistance is given to the Ministry of Defence
committee in preparing a defence policy and strategy
and in ensuring proper management and security of
arms and ammunition. However, the Rome security
compact also included measures to establish proper
governance of the security sector, a recommendation
we have made time and again, including the difficult
issues of disarmament and reintegration of the armed
groups. So far there has not been any sustainable
progress in that regard.

14-424103/7

S/PV.7194

The situation in Libya

Today the United Nations is called on to continue
facilitating a political dialogue among all parties. That
is more crucial than ever before. To that end, I have
redoubled my efforts to urge all parties in Libya to
resolve the present political impasse through peaceful
means, and to impress upon them that resorting to the
use of force will have disastrous consequences for the
country.
Following consultations with all concerned parties,
I will be convening, within the next 10 days, a meeting
that will bring together some 50 representatives of the
major actors — political leaders, revolutionaries, tribal
figures, civil society, personalities and women. The
aim of that political dialogue conference is to forge an
agreement on the principles of political interaction, on
national priorities during the remainder of the transition
and on ways of addressing immediate security and
otherwise divisive issues. The stakes are high, and we
will spare no effort in helping prevent Libya’s descent
into greater instability and violence.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Mitri
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Gasana.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by that
resolution. The report covers the period from 10 March
to 9 June 2014, during which time the members of the
Committee met twice in informal consultations.
In my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7130),
I reported on the final reports of the Panel of Experts
and that the Committee had agreed to take follow-up
actions on 9 of the 15 recommendations of the Panel.
I would now like to recall that, during the informal
consultations of 2 June, the Committee further agreed
to establish a procedure to address incomplete arms
embargo exemption notifications, which was also the
subject of an additional recommendation of the Panel,
bringing the number of recommendations to which the
Committee agreed to follow up on to 10.
That follow-up action has thus far consisted of the
following. Three recommendations relating to arms
procurement by Libya were addressed by a bilateral
meeting I held with the Permanent Representative
of Libya to the United Nations on 12 March and by
informal consultations of the Committee on 2 June,

4/7

09/06/2014

with the participation of the Permanent Representative
of Libya, on which I will elaborate later on.
One recommendation aimed at requesting the
Permanent Representative of Libya to update the names
of authorized officials in the Libyan focal point for arms
procurement required no follow-up, as the Permanent
Representative of Libya provided that information on
20 March before the Committee wrote to him.
Therefore, follow-up action on six recommendations
is currently pending before the Committee. On 18 and
27 March, as well as on 12, 16 and 20 May, respectively,
a Member State informed the Committee about the
dates and locations of the delivery of parts of previously
notified transfers to Libya.
On 18 March, the Committee received a letter from
the Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), relating
to an initiative to implement the travel ban measure
more effectively through cooperation with the World
Customs Organization.
On 3 April, the Committee received a letter from
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
proposing six members to serve on the Panel of Experts
on Libya.
On 11 April, the Committee received a second letter
from the Chair of the aforementioned Committee and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), concerning procedures for requesting relevant
Member States to submit biometric data on individuals
on the Committee’s list.
On 16 April, the Committee received a report from
a Member State about the loss in Libya of part of a
shipment of arms and related materiel, an exemption for
which had previously been approved by the Committee.
By letter dated 6 May, the Committee invited
the Permanent Representative of Libya to attend
a meeting of the Committee to discuss the Panel’s
recommendations relating to arms procurement by
Libya, as well as two pending incomplete notifications
under paragraph 13 (a) of resolution 2009 (2011).
On 9 May, the Committee received a report from the
Secretariat on the inter-panel coordination workshop
that took place from 17 to 19 December 2013.

14-42410

09/06/2014

The situation in Libya

On 20 May, the Committee received a letter from
the Permanent Representative of Libya to the United
Nations, informing the Committee of the creation of
two focal points for arms procurement for the Ministry
of the Interior and the Ministry of Justice, in addition
to the Military Procurement Department, which,
according to the letter, continued to serve as focal point
for the Ministry of Defence.
In informal consultations on 29 May, the
Committee received an update from the reappointed
Panel of Experts. The Panel updated the Committee on
its activities since the presentation of its final report
(see S/2014/106, annex). The Panel presented its travel
plans for the present mandate, expressed concern about
the tense security situation in Libya and informed
the Committee about a fraudulent company currently
reaching out to Member States, claiming to be
authorized to recover frozen funds on behalf of Libya
and transmitting a forged Libyan Government decree
no. 378 to that end. Also in informal consultations on
29 May, the Committee discussed the new composition
of the Panel of Experts.
On 30 May, the Committee received an inspection
report from a Member State, in line with paragraph 13
of resolution 1970 (2011) and paragraph 15 of resolution
1973 (2011).
The Committee’s informal consultations on
2 June involved the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Libya to discuss issues relating to
the arms embargo. While some Committee members
appreciated Libya’s strong efforts to implement the
arms embargo in challenging circumstances and pointed
to the need for practical and implementable solutions,
others raised concern about the implications of a lack of
a single, unified procurement mechanism in the current
security situation and called for a single focal point
superseding individual ministries. The Permanent
Representative of Libya recognized the difficulties in
having multiple focal points, but also noted that this
was the best option for the current situation, as Libya
lacked the capacity at this point to implement a single
superseding structure.
The Panel of Experts saw a high risk of the diversion
and misuse of weapons in the current situation and
reported that ongoing transfers of weapons to Libya
were likely to have a detrimental effect on the security
situation in the country, with some uncertainty about
exact end-users of notified materiel and about the
control of territory, including air and sea ports. The

S/PV.7194

Committee will continue its engagement with Libya
on the setting-up of arms procurement procedures and
responsibilities, with a view to providing any assistance
that it can.
Lastly, I should like to provide some updated
statistics on the issues dealt with by the Committee
since the last periodic report to the Council. In relation
to the arms embargo, the Committee approved three
exemption requests and received two notifications, on
which no negative decision was taken. Also in relation
to the arms embargo, the Committee responded in one
case that did not require notification, citing paragraph
10 of resolution 2095 (2013), and replied in three cases
that the notifications were incomplete. The Committee
further received two addenda to an implementation
report previously submitted by a Member State.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Gasana for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
presiding over the Council for the month and to wish
you and your delegation every success in carrying out
the Council’s affairs.
I also thank Mr. Tarek Mitri, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Libya, for his comprehensive
briefing, as well as Ambassador Gasana, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, for his report.
For over 42 years, Libya suffered under a dictatorship
based on chaos, non-functioning institutions and
an entrenched one-man authority that demanded
unchallenged obedience. The situation led to complete
political apathy on the part of the Libyan people and
fostered a lack of interest among the majority in the
affairs of decision-making institutions, even after the
revolution. Unfortunately, some politicians and leaders
of armed groups have taken advantage of the situation
to appoint to high positions certain individuals who
lack the necessary credentials and experience. They
have also engaged in governmental procedures that
contravene good governance, thereby exacerbating
the problems inherited from the former regime and
deviating the 17 February revolution from its primary
purpose.
The Libyan people have lost all patience in the
past month, nearly three years after the revolution and

14-424105/7

S/PV.7194

The situation in Libya

the end of the dictatorship. Despite available assets
and human resources, the Libyan people’s aspirations
remain unfulfilled, except for the freedom of expression,
which has been heavily compromised in the past month
due to a campaign of threats, intimidation, blackmail,
abduction and assassination. Journalists and political
and legal activists have been subjected to that campaign
in the absence of security and military forces, and due
to the reluctance of judges to undertake their duties
because they fear for their lives.
The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) has made great efforts over the past two
years to help the Libyan people overcome difficulties
and achieve the transition in an easy, seamless manner.
However, despite its tremendous role in organizing
and conducting elections, the support it has provided
to civil society organizations, and its demining and
elimination of war remnants, Libya has not achieved its
political aspirations. That is not due to any malfunction
of the Mission or its leaders, for whom we have much
respect and appreciation. Instead, it is due to the Libyan
political leaders’ lack of will to seek assistance from the
Mission, as well as to the absence of Libyan institutions
that could receive and implement support in different
sectors.
The Libyan people are grateful for the support
they have received from the Security Council over the
past three years. They now seek more practical support
from Council members and from all friendly countries
to overcome the remaining months of the transitional
period in order to establish an elected Government in
accord with the permanent constitution that we hope
to adopt before the end of this year. Notwithstanding
the work done by UNSMIL pursuant to its mandate and
the excellent assistance it has provided and continues
to provide, especially in the fields I have mentioned,
we hope to achieve certain pressing priorities with the
practical assistance of the Security Council UNSMIL
to the Libyan authorities. Our priorities are as follows.
First, we encourage all Libyan institutions to create
an environment conducive to conducting parliamentary
elections on 25 June in an atmosphere of peace and
security.
Secondly, we wish to assist the new Parliament in
assuming and exercising its duties in an appropriate
manner that is in keeping with democratic practices
by adopting clear rules of procedures, ensuring the
separation of the legislative and executive powers, and

6/7

09/06/2014

organizing workshops for the new parliamentarians on
parliaments and how they run.
Thirdly, we must help the new Parliament and
resulting Government to immediately reorganize the
Libyan army in accordance with international standards,
provide it with the proper arms, assume control over
all military camps and bases, disarm and dismantle
all armed groups, find work for the unemployed in the
various State institutions, according to their merits, and
criminalize the unauthorized carrying of weapons.
Fourthly, we must help local governance bodies
to establish local administrations that are efficient,
effective, transparent and accountable, and we must
urge the central Government to delegate broad local
powers to those bodies.
That is all that the Libyan people need from the
Security Council and their friends at this critical
juncture. All other difficulties can be readily
overcome, because there are no divisions or differences
among the masses of the Libyan people. They remain
as united today as they were during the 17 February
revolution. However, the grave division and ideological
polarization at the top of the hierarchical authority, the
lack of respect for the role of democracy and the rule of
law, the lack of experience and expertise in running the
State, and the absence of controls over the media paint
a portrait of Libya as a divided country governed by
tribes with different and diverging interests. That is a
false portrayal that does not reflect the reality. It gives
the wrong impression to those who follow the situation
in Libya, and that impression has been entrenched
because of the absence of leadership capable of gaining
widespread respect by rejecting biases in favour of
particular parties, the appropriate use of political
discourse, and transparency substantiated by facts and
figures.
Libyan army officers and soldiers, who number
more than 50,000, have not been receiving their salaries.
However, they are eager to reorganize themselves to
protect the gains of the 17 February revolution and to
achieve peace and security throughout Libya, despite
the attempts of some politicians and leaders of armed
groups to demonize all officers and personnel of the
Libyan army with the sole aim of preventing them from
returning to their work, and to ensure that the State has
no central armed power that can stop the Government
from being blackmailed and forced to squander public
funds in the form of remunerations for the armed

14-42410

09/06/2014

The situation in Libya

groups, the value of which exceeds what is spent on
the army and the police combined. Those who wish to
support Libya today should help it rebuild its army and
arm it as soon as possible. Those who wish to support
Libya must help it to re-establish the police presence in
its population centres. Those who wish to help Libya
should prevent any attempt to undermine the democratic

S/PV.7194

transition and take punitive measures against anyone
who would seek to obstruct that process.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to formal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

14-424107/7
