General Assembly-Sixth Session

60

565 (VI). Work of the Special Committee on
information transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter 2 0
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Information transmitted under Article 73 e of
the Charter covering its 1951 sessions ;21
2. Approves the arrangements proposed by the Special Committee for its work in 1952. 22
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.

*

* *
In accordance u>ith the terms of resolution 332 (IV) of the
General Assembly, the Fourth Committee, at its 227th meeting
on 14 EJecember 19;1, elected, on behalf of the General Assembly, two members to the Special Committee to fill the vacancies created by the expiration vf the terms of office of Mexico
an,d the Philippines.
The Staf<'s elected were: EcuADOR an.d INDONESIA.

566 (VI). Participation of Non-Self-Governing
Territories in the work of the Committee on
Information Jrom Non-Self-Governing Terri•
tories 23
The General Assembly,
Considering that point 9 of the Secretary-General's
"Memorandum of points for consideration in the development of a twenty-year programme for achieving
peace through the United Nations" 24 advocates the use
of the United Nations to promote by peaceful means
the progress of dependent, colonial or semi-colonial
peoples to a position of equality with Member States
of the United Nations,
Considering that resolution 494 (V) adopted by the
General Assembly on 20 November 1950 requests the
appropriate organs of the United Nations to consider
those portions of the Secretary-General's memorandum
with which they are particularly concerned,
Considering that the report of the Special Committee
on Information transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter 25 recommends the use of technical assistance
from the United Nations as a means of promoting the
economic advancement of the peoples of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories,
Considering that the direct association of the NonSelf-Goveming Territories in the work of the United
Nations and of the specialized agencies is an effective

'° The General Assembly decided, by resolution 569 (VI) p.
63, that the Special Committee on Information transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter should henceforth be known
as the "Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories".
11
See Official Re cards of th.: GenPral Assembly, Sixth Session,
Supplement No. 14.
" Ibid., pp. 8-9.
"The General As,embly decided, by resolution 569 (VI),
p. 63, that the Spcetal Committee on lnformation transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter d1ould henceforth he known
as the "Committee on lnformatiun from Non-Self-Governing
Territories".
"See Official Records o.f the General Assembly Fifth Session
Annexes, agenda item 60.
'
'
X~ Ibid., Sixth Session, Sul'f'lement No. 14, part one, chapter
1

means of promoting the progress of the peoples of
those Territories towards a position of equality with
Member States of the United Nations,
1. N ates that special provisions exist in the constitutions of some of the specialized agencies and of the
regional commissions of the United Nations permitting,
on the proposal of the Administering Member concerned, the admission to those agencies and commissions of Non-Self-Governing Territories as "associate
members";
2. Commends the practice referred to in the preceding paragraph ;
3. Invites the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to examine the possibility
of associating the Non-Self-Governing Territories more
closely in its work and to report the results of its examination of this problem to the General Assembly at
its seventh regular session in connexion with the Assembly's consideration of the Committee's future.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.

567 (VI). Future procedure for the continuation
of the study of factors which should be taken
into account in deciding whether a territory
is or is not a territory whose people have not
yet attained a full measure of self-govemment

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in resolution 334 (IV) adopted on 2
December 1949, the General Assembly invited any special committee which might be appointed on information transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter to
examine the factors which should be taken into account
in deciding whether any territory is or is not a territory whose people have not yet attained a full measure
of self-government,
H avi.ng examined the report on the matter prepared
by the Special Committee on Information transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter, 26
Having undertaken a revision of the above-mentioned factors,
Considering that the production of a more definitive
list of factors involves protracted and complex studies
on the basis of more complete information than was
available in 1951,
1. Decides to take as a basis the list of factors
· drawn up at the sixth session of the General Assemblv,
which list is annexed to the present resolution;
2. Invites the Members of the United Nations to
transmit in writing to the Secretary-General, by 1 May
1952, a statement of the views of their governments on
the factors which should be taken into account in deciding whether a territory is or is not a territory whose
people have not yet attained a full measure of selfgovernment;
3. Appoints an Ad Hoe Committee of ten members
comprising Australia, Belgium, Burma, Cuba, Denmark, France, Cuatc:mala, Iraq, the United States of
America and Venezuela, in order to carry out a further
study of the factors which should he taken into account
"Ibid., Suf'/'lcmcnl Nn. 14, part four.
