S/PV.7864

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7864th meeting

Wednesday, 18 January 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2016/1137)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-01247 (E)
*1701247*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.7864

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in connection with the
terrorist attack in Gao, Mali
The President: I want to begin by acknowledging
the heinous attack on the Operational Coordination
Mechanism in Gao, Mali. I express the Council’s
deepest condolences and sympathy to the families of
the victims, the Government of Mali and the signatory
parties of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali, and wish a rapid and full recovery to the injured.
In view of the agenda for today’s meeting, I am certain
that the Council will revert to the issue.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2016/1137)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
African Integration and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali.
Also in accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, and considering
Algeria’s role as Chair of the Comité de suivi de l’accord,
I invite the representative of Algeria to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Sabri
Boukadoum, Permanent Representative of Algeria.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/1137, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
2/11

18/01/2017

Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I am grateful
for this opportunity to present the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2016/1137)
to the members of the Security Council, and to review
with them the most recent developments in the country.
I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
African Integration and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, and thank
him for the Government of Mali’s ongoing support
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I also
welcome the representative of Algeria, a leader in
international mediation, for his tireless commitment to
the promotion of the peace process in Mali.
Before beginning my briefing, I would like to pay
tribute to the victims of the dreadful suicide attack on
the Operational Coordination Mechanism camp in Gao.
We offer our condolences to the families of the victims,
to the Government of Mali and to the parties to the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report, the perpetrators
of the heinous attack must be identified and brought to
justice as soon as possible.
We are trying to better understand the situation.
What we do know is that a car bomb exploded at around
9 a.m. inside the Operational Coordination Mechanism
camp, where close to 600 troops of the Platform coalition
of armed groups, the Mechanism and the Malian armed
forces had been stationed for the past three weeks in
preparation for joint patrols. The explosion caused
heavy casualties. An initial assessment puts the death
toll at over 60, with several dozen wounded — some
critically so. MINUSMA, Operation Barkhane and the
Malian armed forces are currently working as hard
as possible to assist the victims and secure the town
of Gao.
We condemn with the utmost firmness this
cowardly and ignoble attack, which constitutes a direct
attack on the peace process. It was clearly aimed at
derailing the peace process by undermining trust
between the signatory parties and the people, as well as
at countering the recent progress in the implementation
of the security arrangements of the peace Agreement.
This incident highlights once again the fact that an
acceleration in the implementation of the Agreement is
the only possible way to stabilize Mali and to bring the
peace process to fruition. I reiterate that time is against
us, and the United Nations remains more than ever
17-01247

18/01/2017

The situation in Mali

deeply committed to supporting the Government of
Mali and the signatory parties in the speediest possible
implementation of the Agreement.
We have reached a pivotal moment. I recall that the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali was
signed more than 18 months ago, while the interim
period was intended to last 24 months. In other words,
more than 18 months have passed yet, despite some
advances, too little progress has been recorded. It must
be said that since the last Council meeting on Mali (see
S/PV.7801), the implementation of interim institutional
and security arrangements has basically stagnated and
remains undermined by persistent disagreements and
a lack of trust among the signatory parties. We note
the recent heightened fragmentation of armed groups,
particularly within the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad, and the repeated attempts of dissident
groups to disrupt the peace process, all of hampers the
implementation of the Agreement. I must stress that only
five months remain until the end of the interim period.
The absence of tangible results is of major concern and
leads me to question the real will and commitment of
the signatories of the peace process.
As I have said, there has been some progress.
For instance, following the ministerial meeting on
the peace Agreement held in the margins of the
General Assembly in New York in September, armed
groups finally submitted, after a year’s delay, the
lists containing their candidates for the Operational
Coordination Mechanism, the interim authorities, the
Commission on Integration and the Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission. Since
then, however, every attempt to implement joint
patrols has failed, mainly because of disputes among
the signatory parties on logistical and financial issues.
As a result, we have made insufficient progress. It was
only after intense negotiations and thanks to the good
offices of MINUSMA, international mediation and the
High Representative of the President of the Republic of
Mali for the implementation of the peace Agreement
that the armed forces of Mali and the armed groups
are now regrouped at Gao for the launch of the longawaited mixed patrols. Clearly, we must wait and see
what consequences this morning’s tragedy may have.
Similarly, the rivalry among armed groups over the
presidency of the interim authorities in Kidal has so far
prevented their establishment. I was in Kidal in May
last year, where I met with the Governor-designate,
who told me that he would assume his functions within

S/PV.7864

a week. That was in May, while it is now January of
the following year. All this endless delay is deeply
regrettable and hinders the cantonment, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. All eight
cantonment sites that have been built and equipped with
the support of MINUSMA have been fully operational
but remained essential empty since October. Some
institutional and political reforms are required but have
yet to be transformed into action. The definition of
criteria for the integration of ex-combatants, security
sector reform and the redeployment strategy of the
Malian defence and security forces has yet to be
finalized by the Government. Similarly, an inclusive
and long-term dialogue on the restoration of State
authority and institutional reforms is necessary if these
reforms are to bring real change.
One of the pillars of the MINUSMA mandate, a
cornerstone of resolution 2295 (2016), is the restoration
and extension of State authority across all Mali. In
this regard, the Mission supported the Government in
the preparation of the local elections of 20 November.
These were the first elections held since 2009, and
unfolded in 92 per cent of the municipalities of Mali.
Unfortunately, they did not take place in the Kidal,
Ménaka and Taoudenni regions, or in certain localities
of Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu, due to security incidents
and impediments to voting. On the eve of the elections,
armed groups and opposition parties repeatedly
expressed their objections to the organization of
elections, which they believed should take place only
after the establishment of the interim authorities.
Let us not forget, however, that 2017 is to be an
important year for regional elections and a constitutional
referendum in Mali. All stakeholders must therefore
strive to find common ground, and we count on the
Government to ensure that these elections are held in
an open and inclusive environment that will contribute
to reconciliation. One key point that must be stressed
is the election of many women, who now represent
nearly 30 per cent of elected municipal councilors in
Timbuktu, Gao and Bamako.
The announcement by President Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita in September 2016 of the convening of a national
reconciliation conference — now scheduled for
March under the auspices of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs — could offer a genuinely inclusive forum to
address all the root causes of the crisis and involve
all components of Malian society in order to map a
path towards national reconciliation. I welcome the

17-012473/11

S/PV.7864

The situation in Mali

appointment of the Ombudsman of Mali, Mr. Baba
Hakim Haïdara, to lead the preparatory committee, and
hope that this important conference can be held by the
deadline that has been set.
However, this morning’s tragedy demonstrates the
extent to which the terrorist phenomenon is becoming
more and more disturbing in northern and central
Mali, as well as in the subregion. While the number of
attacks on the Malian armed forces, MINUSMA and
international forces has declined over the past three
months, their level of sophistication remains a cause for
growing concern. Complex attacks on our air capacities
have grounded some of our helicopters and impeded
their operational capability. We need to consider this
situation in depth, because if the security situation
continues to deteriorate at the current pace there
will soon be no peace to maintain in Mali. We must
condemn such attacks and be aware of their regional
dimensions, including recent lethal attacks on security
forces in the Niger and Burkina Faso close to the
Malian border. All of this highlights the imperative role
of the regional partners in the peace process and in the
work of MINUSMA. As called for in the resolution, we
continue to work to strengthen links with the member
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
The Council also called on us to adopt a more robust
and proactive stance to protect civilians suffering from
the deteriorating security situation. However, the only
viable solution to that problem is the redeployment of
the Malian defence and security forces to the north
and the centre of the country. A frank and constructive
dialogue must then begin on the impact of drug
trafficking and other transnational crimes on security
and the peace process.
In spite of the sustained efforts, we still face
significant capacity gaps — including helicopters and
other aircraft, armoured vehicles, logistical support and
protective gear — that hinder our ability to implement
our mandate. We are in constant contact with troopand police-contributing countries, which we thank
for the capacities they provide. I think that, more than
evert, a determined, additional effort is needed to close
the gaps.
It is of paramount importance to restore the
confidence of the Malian population. The window of
opportunity to generate tangible peace dividends on
the ground is closing. We continue to receive reports
of serious violations of human rights by armed groups,
4/11

18/01/2017

and sometimes by State actors. The Government has in
the past done little to combat impunity. Above all for
people in the north of Mali, things are slow to change. A
lack of basic social services along with food insecurity
and chronic poverty all contribute to hindering trust
from taking hold and becoming entrenched. The
implementation of the development strategy for the
north has not yet begun, more than a year after the
international conference for the economic recovery and
development of Mali. It is imperative that armed groups
put an end to their obstruction of humanitarian access,
while the Government and its partners must work more
closely together to create the conditions for sustainable
prosperity and growth in order remedy a situation in
which millions of young Malians are still living under
very precarious conditions.
The Government of Mali, with the support of
MINUSMA, has developed indicators of progress that
have been annexed to the Secretary-General’s report.
They will serve as a working and dialogue tool for a
more systematic assessment of the progress made by
the parties in Mali in the implementation of the peace
Agreement. However, the indicators must be met, that
is, they must help to address all the shortcomings
I mentioned. I would call on the members of the
international mediation to redouble their efforts to
re-energize the Agreement’s follow-up mechanisms.
On the margins of the fourth high-level seminar on
peace and security, held in Oran in December with the
African Union and Algerian Foreign Minister Ramtane
Lamamra, we discussed the need for a high-level
meeting of the international mediation, which I think
should be held as soon as possible. We must also continue
to focus on establishing a common vision of how to deal
with dissident groups. I believe that the members of the
Security Council must not forget that they have the
option of imposing targeted measures against all those
who violate the ceasefire and deliberately hamper the
peace process.
Please forgive me for going on at such length.
I regret that, unfortunately, the circumstances have
impacted the tone and tenor of my briefing. I really
wanted to convey to the Council a sense of urgency
about the worrying state of the peace process in Mali.
But it nevertheless remains the only possible avenue
for achieving peace and reconciliation. Everyone must
be fully committed to the implementation of the peace
Agreement. There is not much time left.
17-01247

18/01/2017

The situation in Mali

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
(spoke in English)
The representative of Uruguay has asked for the
floor to make a statement.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay believes that, as an elected member of the
Security Council, it is part of its duty to share with
the overall membership its views on the various items
considered by the Council.
I thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
comprehensive briefing today, which was generally in
line with various views of my delegation.
We regret to note that the situation in Mali
continues to deteriorate more and more. We resolutely
condemn the cowardly suicide attack today that left a
toll of dozens of killed or injured.
I find it pertinent to focus on setting out our
positions on some practical aspects as to what we
should do.
First of all, Uruguay wishes to reiterate the crucial
importance of implementing the peace Agreement
in order to arrive at a lasting political solution to the
conflict and achieve peace and stability in Mali,
for ultimately political primacy falls to the national
authorities. The United Nations and other international
bodies can only support and facilitate the national
commitment to peace. The main task in any undertaking
for peace is to provide support to national stakeholders
in order to restore peace. However, in no circumstance
can that support take on the responsibilities that fall on
countries as sovereign States.
It is imperative that the parties to the Agreement
for peace and reconciliation in Mali be urged to honour
their political commitments. It is necessary that there
be willingness among the signatory parties to abide by
the Agreement’ provisions and meet the timelines that
have been established. Until what was agreed between
the Government, the Coordination des mouvements de
l’Azawad and the Platform is fully implemented, it will
be impossible to move forward in any other area that
could yield peace dividends for Mali’s population.
Uruguay joins the Secretary-General in congratulating
the Government of Mali on having held the first local
elections since 2009, while also not overlooking the

S/PV.7864

difficulties encountered in some regions where the
process could not be completed. We are aware that
there are challenges and that regional elections and the
constitutional referendum are approaching. It will be
important that the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the international community provide the necessary
support to the Government of Mali so that those polls
can take place successfully.
Secondly, also in line with the previous point, the
security situation will improve only when progress is
made with regard to the extension of State authority
throughout the country’s territory. All of us here have
seen how the terrorism threat spreads and thrives in
places where State authority is lax or non-existent.
As long as the parties continue to face off and do not
meet their commitments, terrorist groups will find a
conducive space to continue to expand — at the cost
of suffering for peacekeepers and Mali’s armed forces,
as well, even worse, at the cost of the lives of a large
number of civilians.
Thirdly, we would like to refer to the possibility
of taking coercive measures in the face of this reality.
In resolution 2295 (2016) the Council expressed its
readiness to consider imposing targeted sanctions
against those who take steps to hinder or jeopardize
the implementation of the Agreement, renew hostilities
or violate the ceasefire, attack or make efforts to
undermine MINUSMA and other international
presences or support such attacks and actions. The
Secretary-General himself has asked the Security
Council to consider adopting such measures. In that
regard, it will be up to the Council to evaluate the real
impact of such measures on the ground as their eventual
contribution to achieve the effective implementation of
the peace Agreement.
In conclusion, Uruguay reiterates once again that
the current mandate of MINUSMA exceeds what was
envisaged for the running of a peacekeeping operation
to include the carrying out of activities to fight
terrorism. Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2295
(2016) because it believed that Mali’s security situation
was extraordinary, but that this type of activity should
not be replicated in future peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and
African Integration of the Republic of Mali.

17-012475/11

S/PV.7864

The situation in Mali

Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like to
begin, Mr. President, by offering you my congratulations
and those of the Malian delegation on the accession of
your country, Sweden, to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January 2017. The people
and the Government of Mali greatly appreciate the
contribution of Sweden to the stabilization efforts of
my country. At the same time, I would like to express
our great appreciation to the delegation of the Kingdom
of Spain for the outstanding work it did during its
presidency of the Council last month. Allow me also
to thank the Secretary-General of our Organization,
Mr. António Guterres, for his vision of the United
Nations and for his renewed commitment to support the
ongoing peace process in Mali, which is a guarantee
of lasting stability in our region. I extend once again
the best wishes of the President of the Republic of
Mali, His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, to
Mr. Guterres for success in his new role.
Before going further, I would also like to wish the
new members of the Security Council every success
and to assure them of the full cooperation of the Mali
delegation here in New York. I would also like to
welcome the presence here today of the Ambassador
of Algeria, whose country, headed by His Excellency
Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, played an extremely
important role in restoring peace and stability in Mali,
and I want to thank Algeria also for all the sacrifices
it has made for peace in Mali and for stability in
our region.
The peace process in Mali is difficult, complex and
marked by many obstacles. This morning, the Malian
people were once again torn apart by a suicide attack,
as was mentioned earlier, against the cantonment site
of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in Gao,
which is one of the mechanisms provided for in the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, an
outcome of the Algiers process. Unfortunately, the
attack caused dozens of deaths, more than 60 wounded
and significant material damage. As we wait to know
the exact circumstances of this criminal, cowardly and
barbaric attack on elements of the Malian armed forces,
elements of the Platform coalition of armed groups as
well as elements of the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad, grouped together for the launch of mixed
patrols, the Government of Mali immediately and
firmly condemned the attack and expressed its deep
condolences to the bereaved families and wished a
quick recovery to all the wounded. The Government
6/11

18/01/2017

also delared three days of national mourning. The
perpetrators and accomplices of this criminal attack
will be prosecuted and brought to justice. This point
was made earlier by Under-Secretary-General Hervé
Ladsous. It is very clearly an attack whose sole
objective is to undermine peace, focusing as it did on
stakeholders in this same peace.
I believe that it is in these most difficult of times that
Malians, be they from the north, the south, the east or
the west of the country, come together in their mourning
and renew their determination to continue defending and
promoting peace wherever it is necessary. This attack
must therefore not distract us from our desire to move
forward, promote peace and refute the will of those
who only want to sabotage the peace process. I wish to
repeat it once again: the Government of Mali remains
committed to implementing the peace Agreement and to
fulfilling all its commitments, because this Agreement,
as it was again brought to our attention this morning, is
the only framework today that allows us to bring peace
and stability back to our country.
The delegation of Mali takes note of the
report (S/2016/1137) of the Secretary-General
under consideration and congratulates the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, on the contribution of his Office
in preparing it. We would more particularly like to
congratulate and thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous for the excellent introduction he has just
made of the contents of the report. I am pleased that
the report acknowledges the progress made by Mali
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation, highlighting the efforts made by the
Government of Mali under the leadership of President
Keita, whose commitment and determination in the
implementation of the Agreement cannot be questioned,
and this I repeat once more before you and the Council,
Mr. President.
The Government of Mali is also of the view that
restoring State authority throughout the country
remains an important challenge to be addressed in order
to put an end to the security vacuum and the absence of
administration, which is an essential condition for the
provision of basic social services to Malian populations
in need. Furthermore, the Government of Mali shares
the Secretary-General’s view that the situation in the
centre and north of the country remains worrisome
owing to the persistence of asymmetric attacks by
terrorist and extremist groups against the civilian
17-01247

18/01/2017

The situation in Mali

population, the Malian security and defence forces and
international forces. These factors constitute the main
obstacles to the implementation of the Agreement, as
called for on all the parties involved in the process, both
the Malian parties and the international community
symbolized by this body.
The security situation in the centre of the country is
of concern to the Government of Mali, which is carrying
out several initiatives to contain the terrorist threat,
promote coexistence and national reconciliation between
the nomadic and settled populations, but also to take into
account the aspirations of young people in the centre of
the country within the framework of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process.
The Government of Mali, under the authority of
President Keita, is aware of the impatience of Mali’s
partners with regard to the delay in the implementation
of certain provisions of the Agreement. However,
cognizant of its commitments under the Agreement, the
Government side has spared no effort in intensifying
its actions over the past three months to advance the
peace process. That determination has yielded excellent
results despite the very difficult context. Accordingly,
under the rubric of institutional policy reform and in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the peace
Agreement, the process of constitutional reform is well
under way. A draft revised constitution, which is now
ready, has been submitted to a series of consultations
with political parties, signatory armed groups, civil
society organizations and traditional leaders. After its
adoption by the national representatives, the revised
constitution will be submitted for the approval of the
Malian people by referendum, which is scheduled for
later this year.
Similarly, the Government has appointed the
members of the interim authorities and transitional
electoral colleges, as well as special advisers to State
representatives in the northern regions. In that regard,
as Mr. Ladsous reminded us, the Government is
working to facilitate discussions among the parties to
the Agreement to appoint the officials of the interim
authorities and the transitional electoral colleges.
On 20 November 2016, the Government organized
peaceful local elections, which were held in 644 of the
country’s 703 communes. The participation rate for
those elections stood at 52.51 per cent, in comparison
with 51.39 per cent in 2009 and 48.67 per cent in 2004,
which proves that citizens have become more interested
in local elections. I commend the assistance provided

S/PV.7864

by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
Operation Bharkane forces to the Malian defence and
security forces in the run-up to elections.
The Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission
is already operational and it has opened regional offices
in all regions of Mali, with the exception of Kidal.
In addition, working alongside MINUSMA, the
Government has development criteria and deadlines in
order to facilitate an assessment of the progress made by
the signatories in the implementation of the Agreement,
in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 12 of
resolution 2295 (2016), of 29 June 2016. I would like
to assure the Council that Malian authorities will fully
shoulder their responsibility in implementing those
benchmarks, which will provide new momentum to the
peace process in Mali.
With regard to the issue of defence and security,
during the election period, the Chairs and members
of the National Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission, the Commission on
Integration and the National Council for Security Sector
Reform were nominated. The national strategy for the
security sector was also developed during that period.
I would like to underscore that the Government
of Mali is determined to launch mixed patrols, as we
mentioned earlier. Regrettably, that process has not yet
started because of the many demands put forward by the
other parties to the Agreement, such as, in particular,
the request for the adoption of a decree that recognizes
the various ranks of those to be included in the mixed
patrols prior to their deploymnet. The response to such
demands lies in the implementation of the integration
programme provided for in the Agreement.
The fragmentation of armed groups is an additional
challenge. Mr. Ladsous addressed the rivalry between
armed groups, which increases the number of
interlocutors and complicates the implementation of
the Agreement. That, in turn, has a negative impact on
deadlines, which must then be postponed.
In addition to those political and institutional
defence and security measures, I would like to emphasize
that the Government has continued its development
activities on the ground, when security conditions
allow, through project and programmes already under
way, such as the emergency development programme in
the north of the country and the economic recovery and

17-012477/11

S/PV.7864

The situation in Mali

reconstruction programme. The Government has also
developed a specific strategy to develop regions in the
north of Mali, which is yet to be approved, and proposed
a draft law to create a sustainable development fund
aimed at financing that strategy. Once again, we call
upon friendly countries and partner organizations that
pledged contributions during successive conferences
on the development Mali to honour their commitments
and assist us in implementing the Agreement.
Efforts to implement the Agreement are ongoing.
To build on the progress that I have just mentioned,
President Keita, who is fully committed to the process,
has decided to make 2017 the year to implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali from
the Algiers process. In his address to the nation on
31 December 2016, the Head of State announced key
measures to restore peace and security and achieve
national reconciliation. The President also informed the
country that interim authorities would be operational
during the first quarter of 2017 in all areas in which
it was not possible to hold communal elections. Once
concluded, that operation will make it possible to speed
up the redeployment of the administration and facilitate
the restoration of basic social services. It will also allow
for a more efficient return and reintegration of refugees
and displaced Malians.
The Head of State also announced the holding of
the National Accord Conference to be held in March
2017, in accordance with the provisions of article 5 of
the Agreement to create an environment for in-depth
discussion among all Malian stakeholders on the root
causes of the conflict. The goal of the discussion is
to develop a charter for peace, unity and national
reconciliation. In that regard, an organizing committee,
chaired by a high-ranking Malian official, Mr. Baba
Akhib Haidara, as mediator, has been established.
As the Council can see, the actions undertaken
and measures announced illustrate the Government’s
determination, under the leadership of the President, to
achieve the effective and comprehensive implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. We call upon all Malian parties to show greater
commitment and good faith now that we are at a decisive
juncture in achieving peace. Our population, having
suffered enough, continues to hope for peace dividends.
I invite the international community and the Agreement
Monitoring Committee to play their role as guarantors
of the commitments made by all the parties, while
8/11

18/01/2017

clearly shouldering their responsibilities, in accordance
with the provisions article 54 of the Agreement.
With regard to the implementation of resolution
2295 (2016), I would like to point out that new elements
have not yet been implemented on the ground. Once
again, therefore, I ask the Security Council once again
to provide MINUSMA with the adequate resources
to enable to fully discharge its stabilization mandate
and assist the Government of Mali in gradually
regaining control of the country. That is our desire.
We will remain committed as a State and will make
every human and material effort necessary to assume
our responsibility. The Malian defence and security
forces will make the necessary sacrifice. Regrettably,
we cannot face the challenges alone; we will need the
support and assistance of our partners. But meeting
those challenges are ultimately still our responsibility.
We recognize that.
I draw the Council’s attention to the urgent need
to strengthen cooperation on the ground between
MINUSMA and the Malian defence and security forces.
Efforts are under way but must be enhanced. Today’s
events recall the need to move even faster because our
enemies are also determined to do the same.
The process of cantonment and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, which remains a
prerequisite for stabilization in Mali, should be sped up.
This is an ideal opportunity for us to thank all partners
that took part in the donors DDR round table held
on 8 December 2016. I call upon them to honour the
agreements they made in order to move this important
process forward.
Let me make a few comments on the report of the
Secretary-General with regard to the human rights
and humanitarian situation. With regard to the human
rights situation, the report mentions 104 documented
cases of human rights abuses and violations between
September and December 2016. That reveals a decline
in human rights violations and abuses for the period in
question compared to the previous report (S/2016/819),
thereby showing a considerable improvement of the
human the rights situation in Mali. It is to be noted that
the great majority of documented cases are the work of
armed or terrorist groups and were committed in areas
in which legal or investigative services are essentially
lacking because of insecurity. During this period,
the Human Rights Division of MINUSMA attributed
approximately 10 cases of human rights violations to
17-01247

18/01/2017

The situation in Mali

Malian authorities because of a lack of prosecution
or illegal detention. I can assure the Council that all
documented cases were processed in the legal system
either through opening an investigation or judicial
actions. No one will be allowed to enjoy impunity
in Mali.
Concerned with further improving the human rights
situation, in November 2016 the Government adopted an
ambitious national policy on human rights accompanied
by an action plan as well as a law protecting defenders
of human rights. In the same vein, the Minister for
Justice and Human Rights organized together with the
Human Rights Division of MINUSMA, which I would
like to thank, a training workshop for Malian judges in
Bamako. That kind of training will be extended to other
actors within the legal system.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, it should
be noted that the Government of Mali carried out
several actions in areas affected by the crisis during the
period covered by the report. Those actions took the
form of distributing food assistance to the populations
of the Mopti, Timbuktu, Gao and Kidal regions, as well
as to Malian refugees in Burkina Faso, the Niger and
Mauritania. The Government also rehabilitated, built
and equipped administrative services, health centres,
schools and water infrastructure in the Timbuktu, Kidal,
Gao, Ménaka and Mopti regions. Similary, within the
framework of economic renewal, income-generating
actions were financed for the benefit of the displaced
and repatriated populations in the Timbuktu, Gao,
Kidal, Mopti and Ségou regions. Furthermore, schools
were opened in Kidal for the 2016-2017 school year, and
the State effectively returned to all regional capitals of
the North and the district administrative seats with the
exception of Kidal.
The situation in Kidal is of particular concern
to the Government of Mali because terrorist groups
are trying to establish a safe haven there while they
continue their abuse of the civilian population and
illicit activities facilitated by the criminal economy.
The presence of armed and terrorist groups in the area
are an obstacle to providing humanitarian assistance
and basic social services. I take this opportunity to
call on the international community through you, Sir,
to exercise the necessary pressure on all parties in
Mali, in particular the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad, to honour their commitments under the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, known
as the Algiers Agreement.

S/PV.7864

In conclusion, I reiterate the thanks of the
Government and the people of Mali to the United
Nations; the countries and institutions that are
members of the Agreement Monitoring Committee;
the troop-contributing countries; and the international
community, in general, for the sacrifices that they have
made in order to permanently and sustainably settle
the crisis in Mali. I also pay tribute to all the victims
of the crisis: the civilian, military, foreign and Malian
victims who have fallen for the cause of Mali, and, with
whom I wish to include the victims of this morning’s
attack in Gao. I also commend the outstanding work
of the women and men of MINUSMA and the French
Operation Barkhane in the stabilization process of Mali.
Today, thanks to their support to Mali’s defence and
security forces and the enormous sacrifices made by
the Government and the people of Mali, our country is
progressively returning to stability as was shown by the
holding of the twenty-seventh Africa-France summit
in Bamako only a few days ago that was unanimously
hailed as a success.
Lastly, I wish all the members of the Council a
Happy New Year.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Let me begin by saying
that we are deeply shocked by the cowardly, horrendous
attack that targeted a site of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism. It is no coincidence that the terrorist
attack occurred at this time and against Malian forces
and elements of the Coordination des mouvements de
l’Azawad (CMA) and the Platform coalition of armed
groups, which are all signatories of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. They are being
regrouped to train for the long-awaited deployment of
the joint patrols. We extend our sincerest condolences
to the families of the victims, the Malian authorities
represented here by His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation
and African Integration. This attack should be seen as a
cruel reminder that our resolve must not waver. On the
contrary, our resolve and the support of the Security
Council for the implementation of the peace Agreement
should further grow.
Let me also add that Sweden has brilliantly begun
its mandate in the Security Council with a presidency
replete with inspired initiatives. I congratulate the
Swedish presidency for everything that it has done in

17-012479/11

S/PV.7864

The situation in Mali

the Security Council since the beginning of the year and
thank it for inviting Algeria to share with members our
thoughts concerning the mediation efforts and notably
the follow-up of the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, known as the
Algiers Agreement, signed more than 18 months ago.
This meeting is a timely opportunity to take stock of
all that has been done and all that is being done at this very
moment — continuously and intensively — and inform
one another on how to impact our common endeavour
in the most positive spirit and way. And in that regard,
I thank Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous. The
ultimate goal is the sustainable establishment of peace
and reconciliation in our brotherly country of Mali.
I will begin by underlying several elements
that should not to be set aside in difficult times.
Everyone, including the Malian authorities and all
other parties to the Algiers Agreement, have regularly
and constantly — no matter the trying times that we
have faced and are facing — stated their complete
and unequivocal support and commitment to the full
implementation of the Algiers Agreement. It is of the
utmost importance that all stakeholders, including the
Security Council and the Secretariat, which took full
part in the mediation process and are part of the followup mechanism, continue to show their vital support and
confidence in every circumstance, and, more precisely,
to the follow-up mechanism of the Agreement. That
particular aspect of the process shows that we are all on
board and that we must remain together.
The following are questions that should be asked at
this juncture: How can we help parties and stake holders
fulfil their obligations under the Algiers Agreement?
What kind of positive input can we add for the sake of
fulfilling our goals? How can we improve the general
atmosphere to be conducive to those goals. Lastly, how
can we help the Malian authorities while knowing that
delays or power vacuums will be exploited by outcasts
and outlaws — as happened earlier this morning — for
which not only Malian citizens but also the Blue Helmets
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) are paying
too high a price?
I should emphasize once again that the strategic
goal — and our very raison d’être — is peace and
reconciliation, and that the means to it is mediation.
It is true that we have not yet reached that destination,
but we cannot and must not give up in the face of the
10/11

18/01/2017

adversities we encounter on the way. We all knew that
the task would not be easy and that as time went on and
expectations continued unfulfilled, that would fuel the
challenges, frustrations and doubts. Clearly, that means
that we must work hard to try to achieve our shared
goals faster, but at the same time we should be very
cautious about any move that could derail a process that
has been so difficult to build.
For all those reasons, we believe it is important to
be frank about the fact that in the context, it is vital
that the Security Council reaffirm its encouragement
and support to the Algiers Agreement and the follow-up
mechanism. As leader of the mechanism, Algeria will
reliably and faithfully relay to the Council whatever
action may be considered necessary, including between
scheduled meetings. Obviously, we assume that
the sustained collaboration and exchanges with the
Secretariat and MINUSMA — everyone is on board, as
we know — will hold up.
There are clearly obstacles and difficulties to the
speedy implementation of what has been agreed to
and defined in the Algiers Agreement, and which we
and all of the stakeholders have called for. I should
note — and Mr. Diop confirmed just now — that
the Malian authorities have repeatedly assured us of
their willingness to work to achieve it. I should add
that so far our impression is that the other Malian
parties to the Algiers Agreement are not contesting its
implementation. It is therefore crucial that we continue
with the persuasion needed to convince and encourage
them to stand by their commitment and ensure that
they understand that there will be only positive gains
if they stick to the wisdom of positive engagement
and reconciliation. It is also crucial to ensure that no
gaps or misunderstandings that might emerge in the
implementation of the Agreement — and such things
do naturally occur in complex situations — are used
as a pretext either for backing out of or unnecessarily
threatening the whole process. No one has the right to
put the process at risk through unjustified action or
constant questioning of things that have already been
fully agreed on.
In that regard, we find it highly commendable
that the Malian authorities have agreed that the High
Representative of Mali’s President Keita should
be designated to foster the implementation of the
Agreement by chairing an ad hoc committee created by
the Comité de suivi de l’accord in order to smooth out
the problems raised recently by one of the signatories
17-01247

18/01/2017

The situation in Mali

to the Agreement. We have high hopes that this
recent initiative will help to clear the way for all the
other measures to be taken, including disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, joint patrols and, of
course, interim administration. We note that the issues
that have been raised are about the modalities of the
implementation rather than its substance, so we should
continue to encourage everyone to act on this in a spirit
of good will.
We are also very pleased that the top-level Malian
authorities have committed to holding a national
reconciliation conference in the near future that would
definitely pave the way for full reconciliation. I should
point out that reconciliation is Mali’s business and it is
Malians, using the appropriate mechanisms, who should
decide it by and for themselves. Our responsibility and
that of the Mechanism, the United Nations and all other
stakeholders is solely to stand by them.
Through the way it was conceived — with
inclusiveness, international support, commitment on
the part of Mali’s neighbours and the backing of the
African Union and the United Nations — the mediation
process has proved its uniqueness and will stand as a
role model for other crisis situations. If it is to succeed,
is vital to ensure that it is fully supported. Mr. António
Guterres, our new Secretary-General, said in his first
address to the General Assembly (see A/71/PV.60)
that he envisions his efforts to promote prevention and
resolve crises as relying on the parties involved and on
the help and commitment of neighbouring States and
regional mechanisms and organizations.
The peace and reconciliation process in Mali fits
that vision exactly. If Mali is to be a success story, it

S/PV.7864

must first be a success story for Malians; then for all
Mali’s neighbours, including Algeria, because of our
naturally interlinked relations; and ultimately for the
international community as a whole with, at its heart,
the United Nations, which has also invested so much
in terms of sacrifices as well as deployment. Needless
to say, in a region — the whole of the Sahel and
beyond — where terrorism and transnational crime go
hand in hand and are growing in size and impact in their
pursuit of their evil objectives, failure cannot be an
option. It is vital that we restore the legitimate Malian
authorities’ command over their entire territory, which
also requires strengthening Mali’s security forces, as
well as ensuring reconciliation between all Malians
through bold mechanisms that they will freely choose
for themselves.
Those are the issues that we wanted to share with
the Security Council. As I ask for the Council’s renewed
support, I would like to assure members that as leader
of the follow-up mechanism, Algeria has committed
huge human and material resources in the cause of
peace and reconciliation in our brotherly neighbour
Mali and will not back away from its responsibilities
towards all Malians and their leaders. We will always
be on their side, because it is the side of righteousness,
justice and peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Boukadoum for
his briefing.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

17-0124711/11
