United Nations

A/RES/63/122

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 February 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 74

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 11 December 2008
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/438)]

63/122. United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Carriage of Goods Wholly or Partly
by Sea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Concerned that the current legal regime governing the international carriage of
goods by sea lacks uniformity and fails to adequately take into account modern
transport practices, including containerization, door-to-door transport contracts and
the use of electronic transport documents,
Noting that the development of international trade on the basis of equality and
mutual benefit is an important element in promoting friendly relations among States,
Convinced that the adoption of uniform rules to modernize and harmonize the
rules that govern the international carriage of goods involving a sea leg would
enhance legal certainty, improve efficiency and commercial predictability in the
international carriage of goods and reduce legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade among all States,
Believing that the adoption of uniform rules to govern international contracts
of carriage wholly or partly by sea will promote legal certainty, improve the
efficiency of international carriage of goods and facilitate new access opportunities
for previously remote parties and markets, thus playing a fundamental role in
promoting trade and economic development, both domestically and internationally,
Noting that shippers and carriers do not have the benefit of a binding and
balanced universal regime to support the operation of contracts of carriage involving
various modes of transport,

08-47811

A/RES/63/122

Recalling that, at its thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth sessions, in 2001 and 2002,
the Commission decided to prepare an international legislative instrument governing
door-to-door transport operations that involve a sea leg, 1
0F

Recognizing that all States and interested international organizations were
invited to participate in the preparation of the draft Convention on Contracts for the
International Carriage of Goods Wholly or Partly by Sea and in the forty-first
session of the Commission, either as members or as observers, with a full
opportunity to speak and make proposals,
Noting with satisfaction that the text of the draft Convention was circulated for
comment to all States Members of the United Nations and intergovernmental
organizations invited to attend the meetings of the Commission as observers, and
that the comments received were before the Commission at its forty-first session, 2
1F

Taking note with satisfaction of the decision of the Commission at its fortyfirst session to submit the draft Convention to the General Assembly for its
consideration, 3
2F

Taking note of the draft Convention approved by the Commission, 4
3F

Expressing its appreciation to the Government of the Netherlands for its offer
to host a signing ceremony for the Convention in Rotterdam,
Commends the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
1.
for preparing the draft Convention on Contracts for the International Carriage of
Goods Wholly or Partly by Sea;
Adopts the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International
2.
Carriage of Goods Wholly or Partly by Sea, contained in the annex to the present
resolution;
Authorizes a ceremony for the opening for signature to be held on
3.
23 September 2009 in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, and recommends that the rules
embodied in the Convention be known as the “Rotterdam Rules”;
4.

Calls upon all Governments to consider becoming party to the Convention.
67th plenary meeting
11 December 2008

Annex
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International
Carriage of Goods Wholly or Partly by Sea
The States Parties to this Convention,
Reaffirming their belief that international trade on the basis of equality and
mutual benefit is an important element in promoting friendly relations among States,
_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum
(A/56/17 and Corr.3), paras. 319–345; and ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/57/17),
paras. 210–224.
2
A/CN.9/658 and Add.1–14 and Add.14/Corr.1.
3
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum
(A/63/17 and Corr.1), para. 298.
4
Ibid., annex I.

2

A/RES/63/122

Convinced that the progressive harmonization and unification of international
trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade,
significantly contributes to universal economic cooperation among all States on a
basis of equality, equity and common interest, and to the well-being of all peoples,
Recognizing the significant contribution of the International Convention for
the Unification of Certain Rules of Law relating to Bills of Lading, signed in
Brussels on 25 August 1924, and its Protocols, and of the United Nations
Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea, signed in Hamburg on 31 March 1978,
to the harmonization of the law governing the carriage of goods by sea,
Mindful of the technological and commercial developments that have taken
place since the adoption of those conventions and of the need to consolidate and
modernize them,
Noting that shippers and carriers do not have the benefit of a binding universal
regime to support the operation of contracts of maritime carriage involving other
modes of transport,
Believing that the adoption of uniform rules to govern international contracts
of carriage wholly or partly by sea will promote legal certainty, improve the
efficiency of international carriage of goods and facilitate new access opportunities
for previously remote parties and markets, thus playing a fundamental role in
promoting trade and economic development, both domestically and internationally,
Have agreed as follows:
Chapter 1
General provisions
Article 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Convention:
1.
“Contract of carriage” means a contract in which a carrier, against the payment
of freight, undertakes to carry goods from one place to another. The contract shall
provide for carriage by sea and may provide for carriage by other modes of transport
in addition to the sea carriage.
2.
“Volume contract” means a contract of carriage that provides for the carriage
of a specified quantity of goods in a series of shipments during an agreed period of
time. The specification of the quantity may include a minimum, a maximum or a
certain range.
3.
“Liner transportation” means a transportation service that is offered to the
public through publication or similar means and includes transportation by ships
operating on a regular schedule between specified ports in accordance with publicly
available timetables of sailing dates.
4.
“Non-liner transportation” means any transportation that is not liner
transportation.
5.

“Carrier” means a person that enters into a contract of carriage with a shipper.

6.
(a) “Performing party” means a person other than the carrier that performs or
undertakes to perform any of the carrier’s obligations under a contract of carriage
with respect to the receipt, loading, handling, stowage, carriage, care, unloading or

3

A/RES/63/122

delivery of the goods, to the extent that such person acts, either directly or
indirectly, at the carrier’s request or under the carrier’s supervision or control.
(b) “Performing party” does not include any person that is retained, directly
or indirectly, by a shipper, by a documentary shipper, by the controlling party or by
the consignee instead of by the carrier.
7.
“Maritime performing party” means a performing party to the extent that it
performs or undertakes to perform any of the carrier’s obligations during the period
between the arrival of the goods at the port of loading of a ship and their departure
from the port of discharge of a ship. An inland carrier is a maritime performing
party only if it performs or undertakes to perform its services exclusively within a
port area.
8.

“Shipper” means a person that enters into a contract of carriage with a carrier.

9.
“Documentary shipper” means a person, other than the shipper, that accepts to
be named as “shipper” in the transport document or electronic transport record.
10.

“Holder” means:

(a) A person that is in possession of a negotiable transport document; and
(i) if the document is an order document, is identified in it as the shipper or the
consignee, or is the person to which the document is duly endorsed; or (ii) if the
document is a blank endorsed order document or bearer document, is the bearer
thereof; or
(b) The person to which a negotiable electronic transport record has been
issued or transferred in accordance with the procedures referred to in article 9,
paragraph 1.
11. “Consignee” means a person entitled to delivery of the goods under a contract
of carriage or a transport document or electronic transport record.
12. “Right of control” of the goods means the right under the contract of carriage
to give the carrier instructions in respect of the goods in accordance with chapter 10.
13. “Controlling party” means the person that pursuant to article 51 is entitled to
exercise the right of control.
14. “Transport document” means a document issued under a contract of carriage
by the carrier that:
(a) Evidences the carrier’s or a performing party’s receipt of goods under a
contract of carriage; and
(b)

Evidences or contains a contract of carriage.

15. “Negotiable transport document” means a transport document that indicates,
by wording such as “to order” or “negotiable” or other appropriate wording
recognized as having the same effect by the law applicable to the document, that the
goods have been consigned to the order of the shipper, to the order of the consignee,
or to bearer, and is not explicitly stated as being “non-negotiable” or “not
negotiable”.
16. “Non-negotiable transport document” means a transport document that is not a
negotiable transport document.
17. “Electronic communication” means information generated, sent, received or
stored by electronic, optical, digital or similar means with the result that the
information communicated is accessible so as to be usable for subsequent reference.
4

A/RES/63/122

18. “Electronic transport record” means information in one or more messages
issued by electronic communication under a contract of carriage by a carrier,
including information logically associated with the electronic transport record by
attachments or otherwise linked to the electronic transport record contemporaneously
with or subsequent to its issue by the carrier, so as to become part of the electronic
transport record, that:
(a) Evidences the carrier’s or a performing party’s receipt of goods under a
contract of carriage; and
(b)
19.

Evidences or contains a contract of carriage.

“Negotiable electronic transport record” means an electronic transport record:

(a) That indicates, by wording such as “to order”, or “negotiable”, or other
appropriate wording recognized as having the same effect by the law applicable to
the record, that the goods have been consigned to the order of the shipper or to the
order of the consignee, and is not explicitly stated as being “non-negotiable” or “not
negotiable”; and
(b)

The use of which meets the requirements of article 9, paragraph 1.

20. “Non-negotiable electronic transport record” means an electronic transport
record that is not a negotiable electronic transport record.
21. The “issuance” of a negotiable electronic transport record means the issuance
of the record in accordance with procedures that ensure that the record is subject to
exclusive control from its creation until it ceases to have any effect or validity.
22. The “transfer” of a negotiable electronic transport record means the transfer of
exclusive control over the record.
23. “Contract particulars” means any information relating to the contract of
carriage or to the goods (including terms, notations, signatures and endorsements)
that is in a transport document or an electronic transport record.
24. “Goods” means the wares, merchandise, and articles of every kind whatsoever
that a carrier undertakes to carry under a contract of carriage and includes the
packing and any equipment and container not supplied by or on behalf of the carrier.
25.

“Ship” means any vessel used to carry goods by sea.

26. “Container” means any type of container, transportable tank or flat, swapbody,
or any similar unit load used to consolidate goods, and any equipment ancillary to
such unit load.
27.

“Vehicle” means a road or railroad cargo vehicle.

28. “Freight” means the remuneration payable to the carrier for the carriage of
goods under a contract of carriage.
29. “Domicile” means (a) a place where a company or other legal person or
association of natural or legal persons has its (i) statutory seat or place of
incorporation or central registered office, whichever is applicable, (ii) central
administration or (iii) principal place of business, and (b) the habitual residence of a
natural person.
30. “Competent court” means a court in a Contracting State that, according to the
rules on the internal allocation of jurisdiction among the courts of that State, may
exercise jurisdiction over the dispute.
5

A/RES/63/122

Article 2
Interpretation of this Convention
In the interpretation of this Convention, regard is to be had to its international
character and to the need to promote uniformity in its application and the
observance of good faith in international trade.
Article 3
Form requirements
The notices, confirmation, consent, agreement, declaration and other
communications referred to in articles 19, paragraph 2; 23, paragraphs 1 to 4; 36,
subparagraphs 1 (b), (c) and (d); 40, subparagraph 4 (b); 44; 48, paragraph 3; 51,
subparagraph 1 (b); 59, paragraph 1; 63; 66; 67, paragraph 2; 75, paragraph 4; and
80, paragraphs 2 and 5, shall be in writing. Electronic communications may be used
for these purposes, provided that the use of such means is with the consent of the
person by which it is communicated and of the person to which it is communicated.
Article 4
Applicability of defences and limits of liability
1.
Any provision of this Convention that may provide a defence for, or limit the
liability of, the carrier applies in any judicial or arbitral proceeding, whether
founded in contract, in tort, or otherwise, that is instituted in respect of loss of,
damage to, or delay in delivery of goods covered by a contract of carriage or for the
breach of any other obligation under this Convention against:
(a)
(b)
ship; or
(c)

The carrier or a maritime performing party;
The master, crew or any other person that performs services on board the
Employees of the carrier or a maritime performing party.

2.
Any provision of this Convention that may provide a defence for the shipper or
the documentary shipper applies in any judicial or arbitral proceeding, whether
founded in contract, in tort, or otherwise, that is instituted against the shipper, the
documentary shipper, or their subcontractors, agents or employees.
Chapter 2
Scope of application
Article 5
General scope of application
1.
Subject to article 6, this Convention applies to contracts of carriage in which
the place of receipt and the place of delivery are in different States, and the port of
loading of a sea carriage and the port of discharge of the same sea carriage are in
different States, if, according to the contract of carriage, any one of the following
places is located in a Contracting State:

6

(a)

The place of receipt;

(b)

The port of loading;

(c)

The place of delivery; or

(d)

The port of discharge.

A/RES/63/122

2.
This Convention applies without regard to the nationality of the vessel, the
carrier, the performing parties, the shipper, the consignee, or any other interested
parties.
Article 6
Specific exclusions
1.
This Convention does not apply to the following contracts in liner
transportation:
(a)

Charter parties; and

(b)

Other contracts for the use of a ship or of any space thereon.

2.
This Convention does not apply to contracts of carriage in non-liner
transportation except when:
(a) There is no charter party or other contract between the parties for the use
of a ship or of any space thereon; and
(b)

A transport document or an electronic transport record is issued.

Article 7
Application to certain parties
Notwithstanding article 6, this Convention applies as between the carrier and
the consignee, controlling party or holder that is not an original party to the charter
party or other contract of carriage excluded from the application of this Convention.
However, this Convention does not apply as between the original parties to a
contract of carriage excluded pursuant to article 6.
Chapter 3
Electronic transport records
Article 8
Use and effect of electronic transport records
Subject to the requirements set out in this Convention:
(a) Anything that is to be in or on a transport document under this
Convention may be recorded in an electronic transport record, provided the issuance
and subsequent use of an electronic transport record is with the consent of the
carrier and the shipper; and
(b) The issuance, exclusive control, or transfer of an electronic transport
record has the same effect as the issuance, possession, or transfer of a transport
document.
Article 9
Procedures for use of negotiable electronic transport records
1.
The use of a negotiable electronic transport record shall be subject to
procedures that provide for:
(a)
holder;

The method for the issuance and the transfer of that record to an intended

(b) An assurance that the negotiable electronic transport record retains its
integrity;

7

A/RES/63/122

(c) The manner in which the holder is able to demonstrate that it is the
holder; and
(d) The manner of providing confirmation that delivery to the holder has been
effected, or that, pursuant to articles 10, paragraph 2, or 47, subparagraphs 1 (a) (ii)
and (c), the electronic transport record has ceased to have any effect or validity.
2.
The procedures in paragraph 1 of this article shall be referred to in the contract
particulars and be readily ascertainable.
Article 10
Replacement of negotiable transport document or negotiable electronic transport
record
1.
If a negotiable transport document has been issued and the carrier and the
holder agree to replace that document by a negotiable electronic transport record:
(a) The holder shall surrender the negotiable transport document, or all of
them if more than one has been issued, to the carrier;
(b) The carrier shall issue to the holder a negotiable electronic transport
record that includes a statement that it replaces the negotiable transport document;
and
(c)
validity.

The negotiable transport document ceases thereafter to have any effect or

2.
If a negotiable electronic transport record has been issued and the carrier and
the holder agree to replace that electronic transport record by a negotiable transport
document:
(a) The carrier shall issue to the holder, in place of the electronic transport
record, a negotiable transport document that includes a statement that it replaces the
negotiable electronic transport record; and
(b)
validity.

The electronic transport record ceases thereafter to have any effect or

Chapter 4
Obligations of the carrier
Article 11
Carriage and delivery of the goods
The carrier shall, subject to this Convention and in accordance with the terms
of the contract of carriage, carry the goods to the place of destination and deliver
them to the consignee.
Article 12
Period of responsibility of the carrier
1.
The period of responsibility of the carrier for the goods under this Convention
begins when the carrier or a performing party receives the goods for carriage and
ends when the goods are delivered.
2.
(a) If the law or regulations of the place of receipt require the goods to be
handed over to an authority or other third party from which the carrier may collect
them, the period of responsibility of the carrier begins when the carrier collects the
goods from the authority or other third party.
8

A/RES/63/122

(b) If the law or regulations of the place of delivery require the carrier to
hand over the goods to an authority or other third party from which the consignee
may collect them, the period of responsibility of the carrier ends when the carrier
hands the goods over to the authority or other third party.
3.
For the purpose of determining the carrier’s period of responsibility, the
parties may agree on the time and location of receipt and delivery of the goods, but
a provision in a contract of carriage is void to the extent that it provides that:
(a) The time of receipt of the goods is subsequent to the beginning of their
initial loading under the contract of carriage; or
(b) The time of delivery of the goods is prior to the completion of their final
unloading under the contract of carriage.
Article 13
Specific obligations
1.
The carrier shall during the period of its responsibility as defined in article 12,
and subject to article 26, properly and carefully receive, load, handle, stow, carry,
keep, care for, unload and deliver the goods.
2.
Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this article, and without prejudice to the other
provisions in chapter 4 and to chapters 5 to 7, the carrier and the shipper may agree
that the loading, handling, stowing or unloading of the goods is to be performed by
the shipper, the documentary shipper or the consignee. Such an agreement shall be
referred to in the contract particulars.
Article 14
Specific obligations applicable to the voyage by sea
The carrier is bound before, at the beginning of, and during the voyage by sea
to exercise due diligence to:
(a)

Make and keep the ship seaworthy;

(b) Properly crew, equip and supply the ship and keep the ship so crewed,
equipped and supplied throughout the voyage; and
(c) Make and keep the holds and all other parts of the ship in which the
goods are carried, and any containers supplied by the carrier in or upon which the
goods are carried, fit and safe for their reception, carriage and preservation.
Article 15
Goods that may become a danger
Notwithstanding articles 11 and 13, the carrier or a performing party may
decline to receive or to load, and may take such other measures as are reasonable,
including unloading, destroying, or rendering goods harmless, if the goods are, or
reasonably appear likely to become during the carrier’s period of responsibility, an
actual danger to persons, property or the environment.
Article 16
Sacrifice of the goods during the voyage by sea
Notwithstanding articles 11, 13, and 14, the carrier or a performing party may
sacrifice goods at sea when the sacrifice is reasonably made for the common safety

9

A/RES/63/122

or for the purpose of preserving from peril human life or other property involved in
the common adventure.
Chapter 5
Liability of the carrier for loss, damage or delay
Article 17
Basis of liability
1.
The carrier is liable for loss of or damage to the goods, as well as for delay in
delivery, if the claimant proves that the loss, damage, or delay, or the event or
circumstance that caused or contributed to it took place during the period of the
carrier’s responsibility as defined in chapter 4.
2.
The carrier is relieved of all or part of its liability pursuant to paragraph 1 of
this article if it proves that the cause or one of the causes of the loss, damage, or
delay is not attributable to its fault or to the fault of any person referred to in
article 18.
3.
The carrier is also relieved of all or part of its liability pursuant to paragraph 1
of this article if, alternatively to proving the absence of fault as provided in
paragraph 2 of this article, it proves that one or more of the following events or
circumstances caused or contributed to the loss, damage, or delay:
(a)

Act of God;

(b)

Perils, dangers, and accidents of the sea or other navigable waters;

(c) War, hostilities, armed conflict, piracy, terrorism, riots, and civil
commotions;
(d) Quarantine restrictions; interference by or impediments created by
governments, public authorities, rulers, or people including detention, arrest, or
seizure not attributable to the carrier or any person referred to in article 18;
(e)

Strikes, lockouts, stoppages, or restraints of labour;

(f)

Fire on the ship;

(g)

Latent defects not discoverable by due diligence;

(h) Act or omission of the shipper, the documentary shipper, the controlling
party, or any other person for whose acts the shipper or the documentary shipper is
liable pursuant to article 33 or 34;
(i) Loading, handling, stowing, or unloading of the goods performed
pursuant to an agreement in accordance with article 13, paragraph 2, unless the
carrier or a performing party performs such activity on behalf of the shipper, the
documentary shipper or the consignee;
(j) Wastage in bulk or weight or any other loss or damage arising from
inherent defect, quality, or vice of the goods;
(k) Insufficiency or defective condition of packing or marking not performed
by or on behalf of the carrier;
(l)

Saving or attempting to save life at sea;

(m) Reasonable measures to save or attempt to save property at sea;
(n) Reasonable measures to avoid or attempt to avoid damage to the
environment; or
10

A/RES/63/122

(o)
and 16.

Acts of the carrier in pursuance of the powers conferred by articles 15

4.
Notwithstanding paragraph 3 of this article, the carrier is liable for all or part
of the loss, damage, or delay:
(a) If the claimant proves that the fault of the carrier or of a person referred
to in article 18 caused or contributed to the event or circumstance on which the
carrier relies; or
(b) If the claimant proves that an event or circumstance not listed in
paragraph 3 of this article contributed to the loss, damage, or delay, and the carrier
cannot prove that this event or circumstance is not attributable to its fault or to the
fault of any person referred to in article 18.
5.
The carrier is also liable, notwithstanding paragraph 3 of this article, for all or
part of the loss, damage, or delay if:
(a) The claimant proves that the loss, damage, or delay was or was probably
caused by or contributed to by (i) the unseaworthiness of the ship; (ii) the improper
crewing, equipping, and supplying of the ship; or (iii) the fact that the holds or other
parts of the ship in which the goods are carried, or any containers supplied by the
carrier in or upon which the goods are carried, were not fit and safe for reception,
carriage, and preservation of the goods; and
(b) The carrier is unable to prove either that: (i) none of the events or
circumstances referred to in subparagraph 5 (a) of this article caused the loss,
damage, or delay; or (ii) it complied with its obligation to exercise due diligence
pursuant to article 14.
6.
When the carrier is relieved of part of its liability pursuant to this article,
the carrier is liable only for that part of the loss, damage or delay that is attributable
to the event or circumstance for which it is liable pursuant to this article.
Article 18
Liability of the carrier for other persons
The carrier is liable for the breach of its obligations under this Convention
caused by the acts or omissions of:
(a)

Any performing party;

(b)

The master or crew of the ship;

(c)

Employees of the carrier or a performing party; or

(d) Any other person that performs or undertakes to perform any of the
carrier’s obligations under the contract of carriage, to the extent that the person acts,
either directly or indirectly, at the carrier’s request or under the carrier’s supervision
or control.
Article 19
Liability of maritime performing parties
1.
A maritime performing party is subject to the obligations and liabilities
imposed on the carrier under this Convention and is entitled to the carrier’s defences
and limits of liability as provided for in this Convention if:
(a) The maritime performing party received the goods for carriage in a
Contracting State, or delivered them in a Contracting State, or performed its
activities with respect to the goods in a port in a Contracting State; and
11

A/RES/63/122

(b) The occurrence that caused the loss, damage or delay took place:
(i) during the period between the arrival of the goods at the port of loading of the
ship and their departure from the port of discharge from the ship; (ii) while the
maritime performing party had custody of the goods; or (iii) at any other time to the
extent that it was participating in the performance of any of the activities
contemplated by the contract of carriage.
2.
If the carrier agrees to assume obligations other than those imposed on the
carrier under this Convention, or agrees that the limits of its liability are higher than
the limits specified under this Convention, a maritime performing party is not bound
by this agreement unless it expressly agrees to accept such obligations or such
higher limits.
3.
A maritime performing party is liable for the breach of its obligations under
this Convention caused by the acts or omissions of any person to which it has
entrusted the performance of any of the carrier’s obligations under the contract of
carriage under the conditions set out in paragraph 1 of this article.
4.
Nothing in this Convention imposes liability on the master or crew of the ship
or on an employee of the carrier or of a maritime performing party.
Article 20
Joint and several liability
1.
If the carrier and one or more maritime performing parties are liable for the
loss of, damage to, or delay in delivery of the goods, their liability is joint and
several but only up to the limits provided for under this Convention.
2.
Without prejudice to article 61, the aggregate liability of all such persons shall
not exceed the overall limits of liability under this Convention.
Article 21
Delay
Delay in delivery occurs when the goods are not delivered at the place of
destination provided for in the contract of carriage within the time agreed.
Article 22
Calculation of compensation
1.
Subject to article 59, the compensation payable by the carrier for loss of or
damage to the goods is calculated by reference to the value of such goods at the
place and time of delivery established in accordance with article 43.
2.
The value of the goods is fixed according to the commodity exchange price or,
if there is no such price, according to their market price or, if there is no commodity
exchange price or market price, by reference to the normal value of the goods of the
same kind and quality at the place of delivery.
3.
In case of loss of or damage to the goods, the carrier is not liable for payment
of any compensation beyond what is provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this
article except when the carrier and the shipper have agreed to calculate
compensation in a different manner within the limits of chapter 16.
Article 23
Notice in case of loss, damage or delay
1.
The carrier is presumed, in absence of proof to the contrary, to have delivered
the goods according to their description in the contract particulars unless notice of
12

A/RES/63/122

loss of or damage to the goods, indicating the general nature of such loss or damage,
was given to the carrier or the performing party that delivered the goods before or at
the time of the delivery, or, if the loss or damage is not apparent, within seven
working days at the place of delivery after the delivery of the goods.
2.
Failure to provide the notice referred to in this article to the carrier or the
performing party shall not affect the right to claim compensation for loss of or
damage to the goods under this Convention, nor shall it affect the allocation of the
burden of proof set out in article 17.
3.
The notice referred to in this article is not required in respect of loss or
damage that is ascertained in a joint inspection of the goods by the person to which
they have been delivered and the carrier or the maritime performing party against
which liability is being asserted.
4.
No compensation in respect of delay is payable unless notice of loss due to
delay was given to the carrier within twenty-one consecutive days of delivery of the
goods.
5.
When the notice referred to in this article is given to the performing party that
delivered the goods, it has the same effect as if that notice was given to the carrier,
and notice given to the carrier has the same effect as a notice given to a maritime
performing party.
6.
In the case of any actual or apprehended loss or damage, the parties to the
dispute shall give all reasonable facilities to each other for inspecting and tallying
the goods and shall provide access to records and documents relevant to the carriage
of the goods.
Chapter 6
Additional provisions relating to particular stages of carriage
Article 24
Deviation
When pursuant to applicable law a deviation constitutes a breach of the
carrier’s obligations, such deviation of itself shall not deprive the carrier or a
maritime performing party of any defence or limitation of this Convention, except to
the extent provided in article 61.
Article 25
Deck cargo on ships
1.

Goods may be carried on the deck of a ship only if:
(a)

Such carriage is required by law;

(b) They are carried in or on containers or vehicles that are fit for deck
carriage, and the decks are specially fitted to carry such containers or vehicles; or
(c) The carriage on deck is in accordance with the contract of carriage, or the
customs, usages or practices of the trade in question.
2.
The provisions of this Convention relating to the liability of the carrier apply
to the loss of, damage to or delay in the delivery of goods carried on deck pursuant
to paragraph 1 of this article, but the carrier is not liable for loss of or damage to
such goods, or delay in their delivery, caused by the special risks involved in their
carriage on deck when the goods are carried in accordance with subparagraphs 1 (a)
or (c) of this article.
13

A/RES/63/122

3.
If the goods have been carried on deck in cases other than those permitted
pursuant to paragraph 1 of this article, the carrier is liable for loss of or damage to
the goods or delay in their delivery that is exclusively caused by their carriage on
deck, and is not entitled to the defences provided for in article 17.
4.
The carrier is not entitled to invoke subparagraph 1 (c) of this article against a
third party that has acquired a negotiable transport document or a negotiable
electronic transport record in good faith, unless the contract particulars state that the
goods may be carried on deck.
5.
If the carrier and shipper expressly agreed that the goods would be carried
under deck, the carrier is not entitled to the benefit of the limitation of liability for
any loss of, damage to or delay in the delivery of the goods to the extent that such
loss, damage, or delay resulted from their carriage on deck.
Article 26
Carriage preceding or subsequent to sea carriage
When loss of or damage to goods, or an event or circumstance causing a delay
in their delivery, occurs during the carrier’s period of responsibility but solely
before their loading onto the ship or solely after their discharge from the ship, the
provisions of this Convention do not prevail over those provisions of another
international instrument that, at the time of such loss, damage or event or
circumstance causing delay:
(a) Pursuant to the provisions of such international instrument would have
applied to all or any of the carrier’s activities if the shipper had made a separate and
direct contract with the carrier in respect of the particular stage of carriage where
the loss of, or damage to goods, or an event or circumstance causing delay in their
delivery occurred;
(b) Specifically provide for the carrier’s liability, limitation of liability, or
time for suit; and
(c) Cannot be departed from by contract either at all or to the detriment of
the shipper under that instrument.
Chapter 7
Obligations of the shipper to the carrier
Article 27
Delivery for carriage
1.
Unless otherwise agreed in the contract of carriage, the shipper shall deliver
the goods ready for carriage. In any event, the shipper shall deliver the goods in
such condition that they will withstand the intended carriage, including their
loading, handling, stowing, lashing and securing, and unloading, and that they will
not cause harm to persons or property.
2.
The shipper shall properly and carefully perform any obligation assumed under
an agreement made pursuant to article 13, paragraph 2.
3.
When a container is packed or a vehicle is loaded by the shipper, the shipper shall
properly and carefully stow, lash and secure the contents in or on the container or
vehicle, and in such a way that they will not cause harm to persons or property.

14

A/RES/63/122

Article 28
Cooperation of the shipper and the carrier in providing information and
instructions
The carrier and the shipper shall respond to requests from each other to
provide information and instructions required for the proper handling and carriage
of the goods if the information is in the requested party’s possession or the
instructions are within the requested party’s reasonable ability to provide and they
are not otherwise reasonably available to the requesting party.
Article 29
Shipper’s obligation to provide information, instructions and documents
1.
The shipper shall provide to the carrier in a timely manner such information,
instructions and documents relating to the goods that are not otherwise reasonably
available to the carrier, and that are reasonably necessary:
(a) For the proper handling and carriage of the goods, including precautions
to be taken by the carrier or a performing party; and
(b) For the carrier to comply with law, regulations or other requirements of
public authorities in connection with the intended carriage, provided that the carrier
notifies the shipper in a timely manner of the information, instructions and
documents it requires.
2.
Nothing in this article affects any specific obligation to provide certain
information, instructions and documents related to the goods pursuant to law,
regulations or other requirements of public authorities in connection with the
intended carriage.
Article 30
Basis of shipper’s liability to the carrier
1.
The shipper is liable for loss or damage sustained by the carrier if the carrier
proves that such loss or damage was caused by a breach of the shipper’s obligations
under this Convention.
2.
Except in respect of loss or damage caused by a breach by the shipper of its
obligations pursuant to articles 31, paragraph 2, and 32, the shipper is relieved of all
or part of its liability if the cause or one of the causes of the loss or damage is not
attributable to its fault or to the fault of any person referred to in article 34.
3.
When the shipper is relieved of part of its liability pursuant to this article, the
shipper is liable only for that part of the loss or damage that is attributable to its
fault or to the fault of any person referred to in article 34.
Article 31
Information for compilation of contract particulars
1.
The shipper shall provide to the carrier, in a timely manner, accurate
information required for the compilation of the contract particulars and the issuance
of the transport documents or electronic transport records, including the particulars
referred to in article 36, paragraph 1; the name of the party to be identified as the
shipper in the contract particulars; the name of the consignee, if any; and the name
of the person to whose order the transport document or electronic transport record is
to be issued, if any.
2.
The shipper is deemed to have guaranteed the accuracy at the time of receipt
by the carrier of the information that is provided according to paragraph 1 of this
15

A/RES/63/122

article. The shipper shall indemnify the carrier against loss or damage resulting from
the inaccuracy of such information.
Article 32
Special rules on dangerous goods
When goods by their nature or character are, or reasonably appear likely to
become, a danger to persons, property or the environment:
(a) The shipper shall inform the carrier of the dangerous nature or character
of the goods in a timely manner before they are delivered to the carrier or a
performing party. If the shipper fails to do so and the carrier or performing party
does not otherwise have knowledge of their dangerous nature or character, the
shipper is liable to the carrier for loss or damage resulting from such failure to
inform; and
(b) The shipper shall mark or label dangerous goods in accordance with any
law, regulations or other requirements of public authorities that apply during any
stage of the intended carriage of the goods. If the shipper fails to do so, it is liable to
the carrier for loss or damage resulting from such failure.
Article 33
Assumption of shipper’s rights and obligations by the documentary shipper
1.
A documentary shipper is subject to the obligations and liabilities imposed on
the shipper pursuant to this chapter and pursuant to article 55, and is entitled to the
shipper’s rights and defences provided by this chapter and by chapter 13.
2.
Paragraph 1 of this article does not affect the obligations, liabilities, rights or
defences of the shipper.
Article 34
Liability of the shipper for other persons
The shipper is liable for the breach of its obligations under this Convention
caused by the acts or omissions of any person, including employees, agents and
subcontractors, to which it has entrusted the performance of any of its obligations,
but the shipper is not liable for acts or omissions of the carrier or a performing party
acting on behalf of the carrier, to which the shipper has entrusted the performance of
its obligations.
Chapter 8
Transport documents and electronic transport records
Article 35
Issuance of the transport document or the electronic transport record
Unless the shipper and the carrier have agreed not to use a transport document
or an electronic transport record, or it is the custom, usage or practice of the trade
not to use one, upon delivery of the goods for carriage to the carrier or performing
party, the shipper or, if the shipper consents, the documentary shipper, is entitled to
obtain from the carrier, at the shipper’s option:
(a) A non-negotiable transport document or, subject
subparagraph (a), a non-negotiable electronic transport record; or

to

article 8,

(b) An appropriate negotiable transport document or, subject to article 8,
subparagraph (a), a negotiable electronic transport record, unless the shipper and the
16

A/RES/63/122

carrier have agreed not to use a negotiable transport document or negotiable electronic
transport record, or it is the custom, usage or practice of the trade not to use one.
Article 36
Contract particulars
1.
The contract particulars in the transport document or electronic transport
record referred to in article 35 shall include the following information, as furnished
by the shipper:
(a)

A description of the goods as appropriate for the transport;

(b)

The leading marks necessary for identification of the goods;

(c)

The number of packages or pieces, or the quantity of goods; and

(d)

The weight of the goods, if furnished by the shipper.

2.
The contract particulars in the transport document or electronic transport
record referred to in article 35 shall also include:
(a) A statement of the apparent order and condition of the goods at the time
the carrier or a performing party receives them for carriage;
(b)

The name and address of the carrier;

(c) The date on which the carrier or a performing party received the goods,
or on which the goods were loaded on board the ship, or on which the transport
document or electronic transport record was issued; and
(d) If the transport document is negotiable, the number of originals of the
negotiable transport document, when more than one original is issued.
3.
The contract particulars in the transport document or electronic transport
record referred to in article 35 shall further include:
(a)

The name and address of the consignee, if named by the shipper;

(b)

The name of a ship, if specified in the contract of carriage;

(c)

The place of receipt and, if known to the carrier, the place of delivery; and

(d) The port of loading and the port of discharge, if specified in the contract
of carriage.
4.
For the purposes of this article, the phrase “apparent order and condition of the
goods” in subparagraph 2 (a) of this article refers to the order and condition of the
goods based on:
(a) A reasonable external inspection of the goods as packaged at the time the
shipper delivers them to the carrier or a performing party; and
(b) Any additional inspection that the carrier or a performing party actually
performs before issuing the transport document or electronic transport record.
Article 37
Identity of the carrier
1.
If a carrier is identified by name in the contract particulars, any other
information in the transport document or electronic transport record relating to the
identity of the carrier shall have no effect to the extent that it is inconsistent with
that identification.

17

A/RES/63/122

2.
If no person is identified in the contract particulars as the carrier as required
pursuant to article 36, subparagraph 2 (b), but the contract particulars indicate that
the goods have been loaded on board a named ship, the registered owner of that ship
is presumed to be the carrier, unless it proves that the ship was under a bareboat
charter at the time of the carriage and it identifies this bareboat charterer and
indicates its address, in which case this bareboat charterer is presumed to be the
carrier. Alternatively, the registered owner may rebut the presumption of being the
carrier by identifying the carrier and indicating its address. The bareboat charterer
may rebut any presumption of being the carrier in the same manner.
3.
Nothing in this article prevents the claimant from proving that any person
other than a person identified in the contract particulars or pursuant to paragraph 2
of this article is the carrier.
Article 38
Signature
1.
A transport document shall be signed by the carrier or a person acting on its
behalf.
2.
An electronic transport record shall include the electronic signature of the
carrier or a person acting on its behalf. Such electronic signature shall identify the
signatory in relation to the electronic transport record and indicate the carrier’s
authorization of the electronic transport record.
Article 39
Deficiencies in the contract particulars
1.
The absence or inaccuracy of one or more of the contract particulars referred
to in article 36, paragraphs 1, 2 or 3, does not of itself affect the legal character or
validity of the transport document or of the electronic transport record.
2.
If the contract particulars include the date but fail to indicate its significance,
the date is deemed to be:
(a) The date on which all of the goods indicated in the transport document or
electronic transport record were loaded on board the ship, if the contract particulars
indicate that the goods have been loaded on board a ship; or
(b) The date on which the carrier or a performing party received the goods, if
the contract particulars do not indicate that the goods have been loaded on board a
ship.
3.
If the contract particulars fail to state the apparent order and condition of the
goods at the time the carrier or a performing party receives them, the contract
particulars are deemed to have stated that the goods were in apparent good order and
condition at the time the carrier or a performing party received them.
Article 40
Qualifying the information relating to the goods in the contract particulars
1.
The carrier shall qualify the information referred to in article 36, paragraph 1,
to indicate that the carrier does not assume responsibility for the accuracy of the
information furnished by the shipper if:
(a) The carrier has actual knowledge that any material statement in the
transport document or electronic transport record is false or misleading; or

18

A/RES/63/122

(b) The carrier has reasonable grounds to believe that a material statement in
the transport document or electronic transport record is false or misleading.
2.
Without prejudice to paragraph 1 of this article, the carrier may qualify the
information referred to in article 36, paragraph 1, in the circumstances and in the
manner set out in paragraphs 3 and 4 of this article to indicate that the carrier does
not assume responsibility for the accuracy of the information furnished by the
shipper.
3.
When the goods are not delivered for carriage to the carrier or a performing
party in a closed container or vehicle, or when they are delivered in a closed
container or vehicle and the carrier or a performing party actually inspects them, the
carrier may qualify the information referred to in article 36, paragraph 1, if:
(a) The carrier had no physically practicable or commercially reasonable
means of checking the information furnished by the shipper, in which case it may
indicate which information it was unable to check; or
(b) The carrier has reasonable grounds to believe the information furnished
by the shipper to be inaccurate, in which case it may include a clause providing
what it reasonably considers accurate information.
4.
When the goods are delivered for carriage to the carrier or a performing party
in a closed container or vehicle, the carrier may qualify the information referred to
in:
(a)

Article 36, subparagraphs 1 (a), (b), or (c), if:

(i) The goods inside the container or vehicle have not actually been
inspected by the carrier or a performing party; and
(ii) Neither the carrier nor a performing party otherwise has actual
knowledge of its contents before issuing the transport document or the
electronic transport record; and
(b)

Article 36, subparagraph 1 (d), if:

(i) Neither the carrier nor a performing party weighed the container or
vehicle, and the shipper and the carrier had not agreed prior to the shipment
that the container or vehicle would be weighed and the weight would be
included in the contract particulars; or
(ii) There was no physically practicable or commercially reasonable means
of checking the weight of the container or vehicle.
Article 41
Evidentiary effect of the contract particulars
Except to the extent that the contract particulars have been qualified in the
circumstances and in the manner set out in article 40:
(a) A transport document or an electronic transport record is prima facie
evidence of the carrier’s receipt of the goods as stated in the contract particulars;
(b) Proof to the contrary by the carrier in respect of any contract particulars
shall not be admissible, when such contract particulars are included in:
(i) A negotiable transport document or a negotiable electronic transport
record that is transferred to a third party acting in good faith; or

19

A/RES/63/122

(ii) A non-negotiable transport document that indicates that it must be
surrendered in order to obtain delivery of the goods and is transferred to the
consignee acting in good faith;
(c) Proof to the contrary by the carrier shall not be admissible against a
consignee that in good faith has acted in reliance on any of the following contract
particulars included in a non-negotiable transport document or a non-negotiable
electronic transport record:
(i) The contract particulars referred to in article 36, paragraph 1, when such
contract particulars are furnished by the carrier;
(ii) The number, type and identifying numbers of the containers, but not the
identifying numbers of the container seals; and
(iii) The contract particulars referred to in article 36, paragraph 2.
Article 42
“Freight prepaid”
If the contract particulars contain the statement “freight prepaid” or a
statement of a similar nature, the carrier cannot assert against the holder or the
consignee the fact that the freight has not been paid. This article does not apply if
the holder or the consignee is also the shipper.
Chapter 9
Delivery of the goods
Article 43
Obligation to accept delivery
When the goods have arrived at their destination, the consignee that demands
delivery of the goods under the contract of carriage shall accept delivery of the
goods at the time or within the time period and at the location agreed in the contract
of carriage or, failing such agreement, at the time and location at which, having
regard to the terms of the contract, the customs, usages or practices of the trade and
the circumstances of the carriage, delivery could reasonably be expected.
Article 44
Obligation to acknowledge receipt
On request of the carrier or the performing party that delivers the goods, the
consignee shall acknowledge receipt of the goods from the carrier or the performing
party in the manner that is customary at the place of delivery. The carrier may refuse
delivery if the consignee refuses to acknowledge such receipt.
Article 45
Delivery when no negotiable transport document or negotiable electronic transport
record is issued
When neither a negotiable transport document nor a negotiable electronic
transport record has been issued:
(a) The carrier shall deliver the goods to the consignee at the time and
location referred to in article 43. The carrier may refuse delivery if the person
claiming to be the consignee does not properly identify itself as the consignee on the
request of the carrier;

20

A/RES/63/122

(b) If the name and address of the consignee are not referred to in the
contract particulars, the controlling party shall prior to or upon the arrival of the
goods at the place of destination advise the carrier of such name and address;
(c) Without prejudice to article 48, paragraph 1, if the goods are not
deliverable because (i) the consignee, after having received a notice of arrival, does
not, at the time or within the time period referred to in article 43, claim delivery of
the goods from the carrier after their arrival at the place of destination, (ii) the
carrier refuses delivery because the person claiming to be the consignee does not
properly identify itself as the consignee, or (iii) the carrier is, after reasonable effort,
unable to locate the consignee in order to request delivery instructions, the carrier
may so advise the controlling party and request instructions in respect of the
delivery of the goods. If, after reasonable effort, the carrier is unable to locate the
controlling party, the carrier may so advise the shipper and request instructions in
respect of the delivery of the goods. If, after reasonable effort, the carrier is unable
to locate the shipper, the carrier may so advise the documentary shipper and request
instructions in respect of the delivery of the goods;
(d) The carrier that delivers the goods upon instruction of the controlling
party, the shipper or the documentary shipper pursuant to subparagraph (c) of this
article is discharged from its obligations to deliver the goods under the contract of
carriage.
Article 46
Delivery when a non-negotiable transport document that requires surrender
is issued
When a non-negotiable transport document has been issued that indicates that
it shall be surrendered in order to obtain delivery of the goods:
(a) The carrier shall deliver the goods at the time and location referred to in
article 43 to the consignee upon the consignee properly identifying itself on the
request of the carrier and surrender of the non-negotiable document. The carrier may
refuse delivery if the person claiming to be the consignee fails to properly identify
itself on the request of the carrier, and shall refuse delivery if the non-negotiable
document is not surrendered. If more than one original of the non-negotiable
document has been issued, the surrender of one original will suffice and the other
originals cease to have any effect or validity;
(b) Without prejudice to article 48, paragraph 1, if the goods are not
deliverable because (i) the consignee, after having received a notice of arrival, does
not, at the time or within the time period referred to in article 43, claim delivery of
the goods from the carrier after their arrival at the place of destination, (ii) the
carrier refuses delivery because the person claiming to be the consignee does not
properly identify itself as the consignee or does not surrender the document, or
(iii) the carrier is, after reasonable effort, unable to locate the consignee in order to
request delivery instructions, the carrier may so advise the shipper and request
instructions in respect of the delivery of the goods. If, after reasonable effort, the
carrier is unable to locate the shipper, the carrier may so advise the documentary
shipper and request instructions in respect of the delivery of the goods;

21

A/RES/63/122

(c) The carrier that delivers the goods upon instruction of the shipper or the
documentary shipper pursuant to subparagraph (b) of this article is discharged from
its obligation to deliver the goods under the contract of carriage, irrespective of
whether the non-negotiable transport document has been surrendered to it.
Article 47
Delivery when a negotiable transport document or negotiable electronic transport
record is issued
1.
When a negotiable transport document or a negotiable electronic transport
record has been issued:
(a) The holder of the negotiable transport document or negotiable electronic
transport record is entitled to claim delivery of the goods from the carrier after they
have arrived at the place of destination, in which event the carrier shall deliver the
goods at the time and location referred to in article 43 to the holder:
(i) Upon surrender of the negotiable transport document and, if the holder is
one of the persons referred to in article 1, subparagraph 10 (a) (i), upon the
holder properly identifying itself; or
(ii) Upon demonstration by the holder, in accordance with the procedures
referred to in article 9, paragraph 1, that it is the holder of the negotiable
electronic transport record;
(b) The carrier shall refuse delivery if the
subparagraph (a) (i) or (a) (ii) of this paragraph are not met;

requirements

of

(c) If more than one original of the negotiable transport document has been
issued, and the number of originals is stated in that document, the surrender of one
original will suffice and the other originals cease to have any effect or validity.
When a negotiable electronic transport record has been used, such electronic
transport record ceases to have any effect or validity upon delivery to the holder in
accordance with the procedures required by article 9, paragraph 1.
2.
Without prejudice to article 48, paragraph 1, if the negotiable transport
document or the negotiable electronic transport record expressly states that the
goods may be delivered without the surrender of the transport document or the
electronic transport record, the following rules apply:
(a) If the goods are not deliverable because (i) the holder, after having
received a notice of arrival, does not, at the time or within the time period referred
to in article 43, claim delivery of the goods from the carrier after their arrival at the
place of destination, (ii) the carrier refuses delivery because the person claiming to
be a holder does not properly identify itself as one of the persons referred to in
article 1, subparagraph 10 (a) (i), or (iii) the carrier is, after reasonable effort,
unable to locate the holder in order to request delivery instructions, the carrier may
so advise the shipper and request instructions in respect of the delivery of the goods.
If, after reasonable effort, the carrier is unable to locate the shipper, the carrier may
so advise the documentary shipper and request instructions in respect of the delivery
of the goods;
(b) The carrier that delivers the goods upon instruction of the shipper or the
documentary shipper in accordance with subparagraph 2 (a) of this article is
discharged from its obligation to deliver the goods under the contract of carriage to
the holder, irrespective of whether the negotiable transport document has been
surrendered to it, or the person claiming delivery under a negotiable electronic
22

A/RES/63/122

transport record has demonstrated, in accordance with the procedures referred to in
article 9, paragraph 1, that it is the holder;
(c) The person giving instructions under subparagraph 2 (a) of this article
shall indemnify the carrier against loss arising from its being held liable to the
holder under subparagraph 2 (e) of this article. The carrier may refuse to follow
those instructions if the person fails to provide adequate security as the carrier may
reasonably request;
(d) A person that becomes a holder of the negotiable transport document or
the negotiable electronic transport record after the carrier has delivered the goods
pursuant to subparagraph 2 (b) of this article, but pursuant to contractual or other
arrangements made before such delivery acquires rights against the carrier under the
contract of carriage, other than the right to claim delivery of the goods;
(e) Notwithstanding subparagraphs 2 (b) and 2 (d) of this article, a holder
that becomes a holder after such delivery, and that did not have and could not
reasonably have had knowledge of such delivery at the time it became a holder,
acquires the rights incorporated in the negotiable transport document or negotiable
electronic transport record. When the contract particulars state the expected time of
arrival of the goods, or indicate how to obtain information as to whether the goods
have been delivered, it is presumed that the holder at the time that it became a
holder had or could reasonably have had knowledge of the delivery of the goods.
Article 48
Goods remaining undelivered
1.
For the purposes of this article, goods shall be deemed to have remained
undelivered only if, after their arrival at the place of destination:
(a) The consignee does not accept delivery of the goods pursuant to this
chapter at the time and location referred to in article 43;
(b) The controlling party, the holder, the shipper or the documentary shipper
cannot be found or does not give the carrier adequate instructions pursuant to
articles 45, 46 and 47;
(c) The carrier is entitled or required to refuse delivery pursuant to
articles 44, 45, 46 and 47;
(d) The carrier is not allowed to deliver the goods to the consignee pursuant
to the law or regulations of the place at which delivery is requested; or
(e)

The goods are otherwise undeliverable by the carrier.

2.
Without prejudice to any other rights that the carrier may have against the
shipper, controlling party or consignee, if the goods have remained undelivered, the
carrier may, at the risk and expense of the person entitled to the goods, take such
action in respect of the goods as circumstances may reasonably require, including:
(a)

To store the goods at any suitable place;

(b) To unpack the goods if they are packed in containers or vehicles, or to
act otherwise in respect of the goods, including by moving them; and
(c) To cause the goods to be sold or destroyed in accordance with the
practices or pursuant to the law or regulations of the place where the goods are
located at the time.

23

A/RES/63/122

3.
The carrier may exercise the rights under paragraph 2 of this article only after
it has given reasonable notice of the intended action under paragraph 2 of this article
to the person stated in the contract particulars as the person, if any, to be notified of
the arrival of the goods at the place of destination, and to one of the following
persons in the order indicated, if known to the carrier: the consignee, the controlling
party or the shipper.
4.
If the goods are sold pursuant to subparagraph 2 (c) of this article, the carrier
shall hold the proceeds of the sale for the benefit of the person entitled to the goods,
subject to the deduction of any costs incurred by the carrier and any other amounts
that are due to the carrier in connection with the carriage of those goods.
5.
The carrier shall not be liable for loss of or damage to goods that occurs during
the time that they remain undelivered pursuant to this article unless the claimant
proves that such loss or damage resulted from the failure by the carrier to take steps
that would have been reasonable in the circumstances to preserve the goods and that
the carrier knew or ought to have known that the loss or damage to the goods would
result from its failure to take such steps.
Article 49
Retention of goods
Nothing in this Convention affects a right of the carrier or a performing party
that may exist pursuant to the contract of carriage or the applicable law to retain the
goods to secure the payment of sums due.
Chapter 10
Rights of the controlling party
Article 50
Exercise and extent of right of control
1.
The right of control may be exercised only by the controlling party and is
limited to:
(a) The right to give or modify instructions in respect of the goods that do
not constitute a variation of the contract of carriage;
(b) The right to obtain delivery of the goods at a scheduled port of call or, in
respect of inland carriage, any place en route; and
(c) The right to replace the consignee by any other person including the
controlling party.
2.
The right of control exists during the entire period of responsibility of the
carrier, as provided in article 12, and ceases when that period expires.
Article 51
Identity of the controlling party and transfer of the right of control
1.

Except in the cases referred to in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this article:

(a) The shipper is the controlling party unless the shipper, when the contract
of carriage is concluded, designates the consignee, the documentary shipper or
another person as the controlling party;
(b) The controlling party is entitled to transfer the right of control to another
person. The transfer becomes effective with respect to the carrier upon its

24

A/RES/63/122

notification of the transfer by the transferor, and the transferee becomes the
controlling party; and
(c) The controlling party shall properly identify itself when it exercises the
right of control.
2.
When a non-negotiable transport document has been issued that indicates that
it shall be surrendered in order to obtain delivery of the goods:
(a) The shipper is the controlling party and may transfer the right of control
to the consignee named in the transport document by transferring the document to
that person without endorsement. If more than one original of the document was
issued, all originals shall be transferred in order to effect a transfer of the right of
control; and
(b) In order to exercise its right of control, the controlling party shall
produce the document and properly identify itself. If more than one original of the
document was issued, all originals shall be produced, failing which the right of
control cannot be exercised.
3.

When a negotiable transport document is issued:

(a) The holder or, if more than one original of the negotiable transport
document is issued, the holder of all originals is the controlling party;
(b) The holder may transfer the right of control by transferring the
negotiable transport document to another person in accordance with article 57. If
more than one original of that document was issued, all originals shall be transferred
to that person in order to effect a transfer of the right of control; and
(c) In order to exercise the right of control, the holder shall produce the
negotiable transport document to the carrier, and if the holder is one of the persons
referred to in article 1, subparagraph 10 (a) (i), the holder shall properly identify
itself. If more than one original of the document was issued, all originals shall be
produced, failing which the right of control cannot be exercised.
4.

When a negotiable electronic transport record is issued:
(a)

The holder is the controlling party;

(b) The holder may transfer the right of control to another person by
transferring the negotiable electronic transport record in accordance with the
procedures referred to in article 9, paragraph 1; and
(c) In order to exercise the right of control, the holder shall demonstrate, in
accordance with the procedures referred to in article 9, paragraph 1, that it is the
holder.
Article 52
Carrier’s execution of instructions
1.
Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3 of this article, the carrier shall execute the
instructions referred to in article 50 if:
(a)
control;

The person giving such instructions is entitled to exercise the right of

(b) The instructions can reasonably be executed according to their terms at
the moment that they reach the carrier; and

25

A/RES/63/122

(c) The instructions will not interfere with the normal operations of the
carrier, including its delivery practices.
2.
In any event, the controlling party shall reimburse the carrier for any
reasonable additional expense that the carrier may incur and shall indemnify the
carrier against loss or damage that the carrier may suffer as a result of diligently
executing any instruction pursuant to this article, including compensation that the
carrier may become liable to pay for loss of or damage to other goods being carried.
3.
The carrier is entitled to obtain security from the controlling party for the
amount of additional expense, loss or damage that the carrier reasonably expects
will arise in connection with the execution of an instruction pursuant to this article.
The carrier may refuse to carry out the instructions if no such security is provided.
4.
The carrier’s liability for loss of or damage to the goods or for delay in
delivery resulting from its failure to comply with the instructions of the controlling
party in breach of its obligation pursuant to paragraph 1 of this article shall be
subject to articles 17 to 23, and the amount of the compensation payable by the
carrier shall be subject to articles 59 to 61.
Article 53
Deemed delivery
Goods that are delivered pursuant to an instruction in accordance with
article 52, paragraph 1, are deemed to be delivered at the place of destination, and
the provisions of chapter 9 relating to such delivery apply to such goods.
Article 54
Variations to the contract of carriage
1.
The controlling party is the only person that may agree with the carrier to
variations to the contract of carriage other than those referred to in article 50,
subparagraphs 1 (b) and (c).
2.
Variations to the contract of carriage, including those referred to in article 50,
subparagraphs 1 (b) and (c), shall be stated in a negotiable transport document or in
a non-negotiable transport document that requires surrender, or incorporated in a
negotiable electronic transport record, or, upon the request of the controlling party,
shall be stated in a non-negotiable transport document or incorporated in a nonnegotiable electronic transport record. If so stated or incorporated, such variations
shall be signed in accordance with article 38.
Article 55
Providing additional information, instructions or documents to carrier
1.
The controlling party, on request of the carrier or a performing party, shall
provide in a timely manner information, instructions or documents relating to the
goods not yet provided by the shipper and not otherwise reasonably available to the
carrier that the carrier may reasonably need to perform its obligations under the
contract of carriage.
2.
If the carrier, after reasonable effort, is unable to locate the controlling party or
the controlling party is unable to provide adequate information, instructions or
documents to the carrier, the shipper shall provide them. If the carrier, after
reasonable effort, is unable to locate the shipper, the documentary shipper shall
provide such information, instructions or documents.

26

A/RES/63/122

Article 56
Variation by agreement
The parties to the contract of carriage may vary the effect of articles 50,
subparagraphs 1 (b) and (c), 50, paragraph 2, and 52. The parties may also restrict or
exclude the transferability of the right of control referred to in article 51,
subparagraph 1 (b).
Chapter 11
Transfer of rights
Article 57
When a negotiable transport document or negotiable electronic transport record is
issued
1.
When a negotiable transport document is issued, the holder may transfer the
rights incorporated in the document by transferring it to another person:
(a) Duly endorsed either to such other person or in blank, if an order
document; or
(b) Without endorsement, if: (i) a bearer document or a blank endorsed
document; or (ii) a document made out to the order of a named person and the
transfer is between the first holder and the named person.
2.
When a negotiable electronic transport record is issued, its holder may transfer
the rights incorporated in it, whether it be made out to order or to the order of a
named person, by transferring the electronic transport record in accordance with the
procedures referred to in article 9, paragraph 1.
Article 58
Liability of holder
1.
Without prejudice to article 55, a holder that is not the shipper and that does
not exercise any right under the contract of carriage does not assume any liability
under the contract of carriage solely by reason of being a holder.
2.
A holder that is not the shipper and that exercises any right under the contract
of carriage assumes any liabilities imposed on it under the contract of carriage to the
extent that such liabilities are incorporated in or ascertainable from the negotiable
transport document or the negotiable electronic transport record.
3.
For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article, a holder that is not the
shipper does not exercise any right under the contract of carriage solely because:
(a) It agrees with the carrier, pursuant to article 10, to replace a negotiable
transport document by a negotiable electronic transport record or to replace a
negotiable electronic transport record by a negotiable transport document; or
(b)

It transfers its rights pursuant to article 57.

Chapter 12
Limits of liability
Article 59
Limits of liability
1.
Subject to articles 60 and 61, paragraph 1, the carrier’s liability for breaches of
its obligations under this Convention is limited to 875 units of account per package
or other shipping unit, or 3 units of account per kilogram of the gross weight of the
27

A/RES/63/122

goods that are the subject of the claim or dispute, whichever amount is the higher,
except when the value of the goods has been declared by the shipper and included in
the contract particulars, or when a higher amount than the amount of limitation of
liability set out in this article has been agreed upon between the carrier and the
shipper.
2.
When goods are carried in or on a container, pallet or similar article of
transport used to consolidate goods, or in or on a vehicle, the packages or shipping
units enumerated in the contract particulars as packed in or on such article of
transport or vehicle are deemed packages or shipping units. If not so enumerated,
the goods in or on such article of transport or vehicle are deemed one shipping unit.
3.
The unit of account referred to in this article is the Special Drawing Right as
defined by the International Monetary Fund. The amounts referred to in this article
are to be converted into the national currency of a State according to the value of
such currency at the date of judgement or award or the date agreed upon by the
parties. The value of a national currency, in terms of the Special Drawing Right, of a
Contracting State that is a member of the International Monetary Fund is to be
calculated in accordance with the method of valuation applied by the International
Monetary Fund in effect at the date in question for its operations and transactions.
The value of a national currency, in terms of the Special Drawing Right, of a
Contracting State that is not a member of the International Monetary Fund is to be
calculated in a manner to be determined by that State.
Article 60
Limits of liability for loss caused by delay
Subject to article 61, paragraph 2, compensation for loss of or damage to the
goods due to delay shall be calculated in accordance with article 22 and liability for
economic loss due to delay is limited to an amount equivalent to two and one-half
times the freight payable on the goods delayed. The total amount payable pursuant
to this article and article 59, paragraph 1, may not exceed the limit that would be
established pursuant to article 59, paragraph 1, in respect of the total loss of the
goods concerned.
Article 61
Loss of the benefit of limitation of liability
1.
Neither the carrier nor any of the persons referred to in article 18 is entitled to
the benefit of the limitation of liability as provided in article 59, or as provided in
the contract of carriage, if the claimant proves that the loss resulting from the breach
of the carrier’s obligation under this Convention was attributable to a personal act or
omission of the person claiming a right to limit done with the intent to cause such
loss or recklessly and with knowledge that such loss would probably result.
2.
Neither the carrier nor any of the persons mentioned in article 18 is entitled to
the benefit of the limitation of liability as provided in article 60 if the claimant
proves that the delay in delivery resulted from a personal act or omission of the
person claiming a right to limit done with the intent to cause the loss due to delay or
recklessly and with knowledge that such loss would probably result.

28

A/RES/63/122

Chapter 13
Time for suit
Article 62
Period of time for suit
1.
No judicial or arbitral proceedings in respect of claims or disputes arising from
a breach of an obligation under this Convention may be instituted after the
expiration of a period of two years.
2.
The period referred to in paragraph 1 of this article commences on the day on
which the carrier has delivered the goods or, in cases in which no goods have been
delivered or only part of the goods have been delivered, on the last day on which the
goods should have been delivered. The day on which the period commences is not
included in the period.
3.
Notwithstanding the expiration of the period set out in paragraph 1 of this
article, one party may rely on its claim as a defence or for the purpose of set-off
against a claim asserted by the other party.
Article 63
Extension of time for suit
The period provided in article 62 shall not be subject to suspension or
interruption, but the person against which a claim is made may at any time during
the running of the period extend that period by a declaration to the claimant. This
period may be further extended by another declaration or declarations.
Article 64
Action for indemnity
An action for indemnity by a person held liable may be instituted after the
expiration of the period provided in article 62 if the indemnity action is instituted
within the later of:
(a) The time allowed by the applicable law in the jurisdiction where
proceedings are instituted; or
(b) Ninety days commencing from the day when the person instituting the
action for indemnity has either settled the claim or been served with process in the
action against itself, whichever is earlier.
Article 65
Actions against the person identified as the carrier
An action against the bareboat charterer or the person identified as the carrier
pursuant to article 37, paragraph 2, may be instituted after the expiration of the
period provided in article 62 if the action is instituted within the later of:
(a) The time allowed by the applicable law in the jurisdiction where
proceedings are instituted; or
(b) Ninety days commencing from the day when the carrier has been
identified, or the registered owner or bareboat charterer has rebutted the
presumption that it is the carrier, pursuant to article 37, paragraph 2.
Chapter 14
Jurisdiction
29

A/RES/63/122

Article 66
Actions against the carrier
Unless the contract of carriage contains an exclusive choice of court
agreement that complies with article 67 or 72, the plaintiff has the right to institute
judicial proceedings under this Convention against the carrier:
(a) In a competent court within the jurisdiction of which is situated one of
the following places:
(i)

The domicile of the carrier;

(ii)

The place of receipt agreed in the contract of carriage;

(iii) The place of delivery agreed in the contract of carriage; or
(iv) The port where the goods are initially loaded on a ship or the port where
the goods are finally discharged from a ship; or
(b) In a competent court or courts designated by an agreement between the
shipper and the carrier for the purpose of deciding claims against the carrier that
may arise under this Convention.
Article 67
Choice of court agreements
1.
The jurisdiction of a court chosen in accordance with article 66,
subparagraph b), is exclusive for disputes between the parties to the contract only if
the parties so agree and the agreement conferring jurisdiction:
(a) Is contained in a volume contract that clearly states the names and
addresses of the parties and either (i) is individually negotiated or (ii) contains a
prominent statement that there is an exclusive choice of court agreement and
specifies the sections of the volume contract containing that agreement; and
(b) Clearly designates the courts of one Contracting State or one or more
specific courts of one Contracting State.
2.
A person that is not a party to the volume contract is bound by an exclusive
choice of court agreement concluded in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article
only if:
(a) The court
subparagraph (a);

is

in

one

of

the

places

designated

in

article 66,

(b) That agreement is contained in the transport document or electronic
transport record;
(c) That person is given timely and adequate notice of the court where the
action shall be brought and that the jurisdiction of that court is exclusive; and
(d) The law of the court seized recognizes that that person may be bound by
the exclusive choice of court agreement.
Article 68
Actions against the maritime performing party
The plaintiff has the right to institute judicial proceedings under this Convention
against the maritime performing party in a competent court within the jurisdiction of
which is situated one of the following places:

30

A/RES/63/122

(a)

The domicile of the maritime performing party; or

(b) The port where the goods are received by the maritime performing party,
the port where the goods are delivered by the maritime performing party or the port
in which the maritime performing party performs its activities with respect to the
goods.
Article 69
No additional bases of jurisdiction
Subject to articles 71 and 72, no judicial proceedings under this Convention
against the carrier or a maritime performing party may be instituted in a court not
designated pursuant to article 66 or 68.
Article 70
Arrest and provisional or protective measures
Nothing in this Convention affects jurisdiction with regard to provisional or
protective measures, including arrest. A court in a State in which a provisional or
protective measure was taken does not have jurisdiction to determine the case upon
its merits unless:
(a)

The requirements of this chapter are fulfilled; or

(b)

An international convention that applies in that State so provides.

Article 71
Consolidation and removal of actions
1.
Except when there is an exclusive choice of court agreement that is binding
pursuant to article 67 or 72, if a single action is brought against both the carrier and
the maritime performing party arising out of a single occurrence, the action may be
instituted only in a court designated pursuant to both article 66 and article 68. If
there is no such court, such action may be instituted in a court designated pursuant
to article 68, subparagraph (b), if there is such a court.
2.
Except when there is an exclusive choice of court agreement that is binding
pursuant to article 67 or 72, a carrier or a maritime performing party that institutes
an action seeking a declaration of non-liability or any other action that would
deprive a person of its right to select the forum pursuant to article 66 or 68 shall, at
the request of the defendant, withdraw that action once the defendant has chosen a
court designated pursuant to article 66 or 68, whichever is applicable, where the
action may be recommenced.
Article 72
Agreement after a dispute has arisen and jurisdiction when the defendant has
entered an appearance
1.
After a dispute has arisen, the parties to the dispute may agree to resolve it in
any competent court.
2.
A competent court before which a defendant appears, without contesting
jurisdiction in accordance with the rules of that court, has jurisdiction.

31

A/RES/63/122

Article 73
Recognition and enforcement
1.
A decision made in one Contracting State by a court having jurisdiction under
this Convention shall be recognized and enforced in another Contracting State in
accordance with the law of such latter Contracting State when both States have
made a declaration in accordance with article 74.
2.
A court may refuse recognition and enforcement based on the grounds for the
refusal of recognition and enforcement available pursuant to its law.
3.
This chapter shall not affect the application of the rules of a regional economic
integration organization that is a party to this Convention, as concerns the
recognition or enforcement of judgements as between member States of the regional
economic integration organization, whether adopted before or after this Convention.
Article 74
Application of chapter 14
The provisions of this chapter shall bind only Contracting States that declare
in accordance with article 91 that they will be bound by them.
Chapter 15
Arbitration
Article 75
Arbitration agreements
1.
Subject to this chapter, parties may agree that any dispute that may arise
relating to the carriage of goods under this Convention shall be referred to
arbitration.
2.
The arbitration proceedings shall, at the option of the person asserting a claim
against the carrier, take place at:
(a)
(b)
located:

Any place designated for that purpose in the arbitration agreement; or
Any other place situated in a State where any of the following places is

(i)

The domicile of the carrier;

(ii)

The place of receipt agreed in the contract of carriage;

(iii) The place of delivery agreed in the contract of carriage; or
(iv) The port where the goods are initially loaded on a ship or the port where
the goods are finally discharged from a ship.
3.
The designation of the place of arbitration in the agreement is binding for
disputes between the parties to the agreement if the agreement is contained in a
volume contract that clearly states the names and addresses of the parties and either:
(a)

Is individually negotiated; or

(b) Contains a prominent statement that there is an arbitration agreement and
specifies the sections of the volume contract containing the arbitration agreement.

32

A/RES/63/122

4.
When an arbitration agreement has been concluded in accordance with
paragraph 3 of this article, a person that is not a party to the volume contract is
bound by the designation of the place of arbitration in that agreement only if:
(a) The place of arbitration designated in the agreement is situated in one of
the places referred to in subparagraph 2 (b) of this article;
(b) The agreement is contained in the transport document or electronic
transport record;
(c) The person to be bound is given timely and adequate notice of the place
of arbitration; and
(d) Applicable law permits that person to be bound by the arbitration
agreement.
5.
The provisions of paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this article are deemed to be part
of every arbitration clause or agreement, and any term of such clause or agreement
to the extent that it is inconsistent therewith is void.
Article 76
Arbitration agreement in non-liner transportation
1.
Nothing in this Convention affects the enforceability of an arbitration
agreement in a contract of carriage in non-liner transportation to which this
Convention or the provisions of this Convention apply by reason of:
(a)

The application of article 7; or

(b) The parties’ voluntary incorporation of this Convention in a contract of
carriage that would not otherwise be subject to this Convention.
2.
Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this article, an arbitration agreement in a
transport document or electronic transport record to which this Convention applies
by reason of the application of article 7 is subject to this chapter unless such a
transport document or electronic transport record:
(a) Identifies the parties to and the date of the charter party or other contract
excluded from the application of this Convention by reason of the application of
article 6; and
(b) Incorporates by specific reference the clause in the charter party or other
contract that contains the terms of the arbitration agreement.
Article 77
Agreement to arbitrate after a dispute has arisen
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and chapter 14, after a dispute
has arisen the parties to the dispute may agree to resolve it by arbitration in any
place.
Article 78
Application of chapter 15
The provisions of this chapter shall bind only Contracting States that declare
in accordance with article 91 that they will be bound by them.
Chapter 16
Validity of contractual terms

33

A/RES/63/122

Article 79
General provisions
1.
Unless otherwise provided in this Convention, any term in a contract of
carriage is void to the extent that it:
(a) Directly or indirectly excludes or limits the obligations of the carrier or a
maritime performing party under this Convention;
(b) Directly or indirectly excludes or limits the liability of the carrier or a
maritime performing party for breach of an obligation under this Convention; or
(c) Assigns a benefit of insurance of the goods in favour of the carrier or a
person referred to in article 18.
2.
Unless otherwise provided in this Convention, any term in a contract of
carriage is void to the extent that it:
(a) Directly or indirectly excludes, limits or increases the obligations under
this Convention of the shipper, consignee, controlling party, holder or documentary
shipper; or
(b) Directly or indirectly excludes, limits or increases the liability of the
shipper, consignee, controlling party, holder or documentary shipper for breach of
any of its obligations under this Convention.
Article 80
Special rules for volume contracts
1.
Notwithstanding article 79, as between the carrier and the shipper, a volume
contract to which this Convention applies may provide for greater or lesser rights,
obligations and liabilities than those imposed by this Convention.
2.

A derogation pursuant to paragraph 1 of this article is binding only when:

(a) The volume contract contains a prominent statement that it derogates
from this Convention;
(b) The volume contract is (i) individually negotiated or (ii) prominently
specifies the sections of the volume contract containing the derogations;
(c) The shipper is given an opportunity and notice of the opportunity to
conclude a contract of carriage on terms and conditions that comply with this
Convention without any derogation under this article; and
(d) The derogation is neither (i) incorporated by reference from another
document nor (ii) included in a contract of adhesion that is not subject to
negotiation.
3.
A carrier’s public schedule of prices and services, transport document,
electronic transport record or similar document is not a volume contract pursuant to
paragraph 1 of this article, but a volume contract may incorporate such documents
by reference as terms of the contract.
4.
Paragraph 1 of this article does not apply to rights and obligations provided in
articles 14, subparagraphs (a) and (b), 29 and 32 or to liability arising from the
breach thereof, nor does it apply to any liability arising from an act or omission
referred to in article 61.

34

A/RES/63/122

5.
The terms of the volume contract that derogate from this Convention, if the
volume contract satisfies the requirements of paragraph 2 of this article, apply
between the carrier and any person other than the shipper provided that:
(a) Such person received information that prominently states that the volume
contract derogates from this Convention and gave its express consent to be bound
by such derogations; and
(b) Such consent is not solely set forth in a carrier’s public schedule of
prices and services, transport document or electronic transport record.
6.
The party claiming the benefit of the derogation bears the burden of proof that
the conditions for derogation have been fulfilled.
Article 81
Special rules for live animals and certain other goods
Notwithstanding article 79 and without prejudice to article 80, the contract of
carriage may exclude or limit the obligations or the liability of both the carrier and a
maritime performing party if:
(a) The goods are live animals, but any such exclusion or limitation will not
be effective if the claimant proves that the loss of or damage to the goods, or delay
in delivery, resulted from an act or omission of the carrier or of a person referred to
in article 18, done with the intent to cause such loss of or damage to the goods or
such loss due to delay or done recklessly and with knowledge that such loss or
damage or such loss due to delay would probably result; or
(b) The character or condition of the goods or the circumstances and terms
and conditions under which the carriage is to be performed are such as reasonably to
justify a special agreement, provided that such contract of carriage is not related to
ordinary commercial shipments made in the ordinary course of trade and that no
negotiable transport document or negotiable electronic transport record is issued for
the carriage of the goods.
Chapter 17
Matters not governed by this convention
Article 82
International conventions governing the carriage of goods by other modes of
transport
Nothing in this Convention affects the application of any of the following
international conventions in force at the time this Convention enters into force,
including any future amendment to such conventions, that regulate the liability of
the carrier for loss of or damage to the goods:
(a) Any convention governing the carriage of goods by air to the extent that
such convention according to its provisions applies to any part of the contract of
carriage;
(b) Any convention governing the carriage of goods by road to the extent
that such convention according to its provisions applies to the carriage of goods that
remain loaded on a road cargo vehicle carried on board a ship;
(c) Any convention governing the carriage of goods by rail to the extent that
such convention according to its provisions applies to carriage of goods by sea as a
supplement to the carriage by rail; or

35

A/RES/63/122

(d) Any convention governing the carriage of goods by inland waterways to
the extent that such convention according to its provisions applies to a carriage of
goods without trans-shipment both by inland waterways and sea.
Article 83
Global limitation of liability
Nothing in this Convention affects the application of any international
convention or national law regulating the global limitation of liability of vessel
owners.
Article 84
General average
Nothing in this Convention affects the application of terms in the contract of
carriage or provisions of national law regarding the adjustment of general average.
Article 85
Passengers and luggage
This Convention does not apply to a contract of carriage for passengers and
their luggage.
Article 86
Damage caused by nuclear incident
No liability arises under this Convention for damage caused by a nuclear
incident if the operator of a nuclear installation is liable for such damage:
(a) Under the Paris Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of
Nuclear Energy of 29 July 1960 as amended by the Additional Protocol of
28 January 1964 and by the Protocols of 16 November 1982 and 12 February 2004,
the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage of 21 May 1963 as
amended by the Joint Protocol Relating to the Application of the Vienna Convention
and the Paris Convention of 21 September 1988 and as amended by the Protocol to
Amend the 1963 Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage of
12 September 1997, or the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear
Damage of 12 September 1997, including any amendment to these conventions and
any future convention in respect of the liability of the operator of a nuclear
installation for damage caused by a nuclear incident; or
(b) Under national law applicable to the liability for such damage, provided
that such law is in all respects as favourable to persons that may suffer damage as
either the Paris or Vienna Conventions or the Convention on Supplementary
Compensation for Nuclear Damage.
Chapter 18
Final clauses
Article 87
Depositary
The Secretary-General of the United Nations is hereby designated as the
depositary of this Convention.

36

A/RES/63/122

Article 88
Signature, ratification, acceptance, approval or accession
1.
This Convention is open for signature by all States at Rotterdam, the
Netherlands, on 23 September 2009, and thereafter at the Headquarters of the
United Nations in New York.
2.
This Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by the
signatory States.
3.
This Convention is open for accession by all States that are not signatory
States as from the date it is open for signature.
4.
Instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval and accession are to be
deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 89
Denunciation of other conventions
1.
A State that ratifies, accepts, approves or accedes to this Convention and is a
party to the International Convention for the Unification of certain Rules of Law
relating to Bills of Lading signed at Brussels on 25 August 1924, to the Protocol to
amend the International Convention for the Unification of certain Rules of Law
relating to Bills of Lading, signed at Brussels on 23 February 1968, or to the
Protocol to amend the International Convention for the Unification of certain Rules
of Law relating to Bills of Lading as Modified by the Amending Protocol of
23 February 1968, signed at Brussels on 21 December 1979, shall at the same time
denounce that Convention and the protocol or protocols thereto to which it is a party
by notifying the Government of Belgium to that effect, with a declaration that the
denunciation is to take effect as from the date when this Convention enters into
force in respect of that State.
2.
A State that ratifies, accepts, approves or accedes to this Convention and is a
party to the United Nations Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea concluded
at Hamburg on 31 March 1978 shall at the same time denounce that Convention by
notifying the Secretary-General of the United Nations to that effect, with a
declaration that the denunciation is to take effect as from the date when this
Convention enters into force in respect of that State.
3.
For the purposes of this article, ratifications, acceptances, approvals and
accessions in respect of this Convention by States parties to the instruments listed in
paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article that are notified to the depositary after this
Convention has entered into force are not effective until such denunciations as may
be required on the part of those States in respect of these instruments have become
effective. The depositary of this Convention shall consult with the Government of
Belgium, as the depositary of the instruments referred to in paragraph 1 of this
article, so as to ensure necessary coordination in this respect.
Article 90
Reservations
No reservation is permitted to this Convention.
Article 91
Procedure and effect of declarations
1.
The declarations permitted by articles 74 and 78 may be made at any time. The
initial declarations permitted by article 92, paragraph 1, and article 93, paragraph 2,
37

A/RES/63/122

shall be made at the time of signature, ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession. No other declaration is permitted under this Convention.
2.
Declarations made at the time of signature are subject to confirmation upon
ratification, acceptance or approval.
3.
Declarations and their confirmations are to be in writing and to be formally
notified to the depositary.
4.
A declaration takes effect simultaneously with the entry into force of this
Convention in respect of the State concerned. However, a declaration of which the
depositary receives formal notification after such entry into force takes effect on the
first day of the month following the expiration of six months after the date of its
receipt by the depositary.
5.
Any State that makes a declaration under this Convention may withdraw it at
any time by a formal notification in writing addressed to the depositary. The
withdrawal of a declaration, or its modification where permitted by this Convention,
takes effect on the first day of the month following the expiration of six months
after the date of the receipt of the notification by the depositary.
Article 92
Effect in domestic territorial units
1.
If a Contracting State has two or more territorial units in which different
systems of law are applicable in relation to the matters dealt with in this
Convention, it may, at the time of signature, ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession, declare that this Convention is to extend to all its territorial units or only
to one or more of them, and may amend its declaration by submitting another
declaration at any time.
2.
These declarations are to be notified to the depositary and are to state
expressly the territorial units to which the Convention extends.
3.
When a Contracting State has declared pursuant to this article that this
Convention extends to one or more but not all of its territorial units, a place located
in a territorial unit to which this Convention does not extend is not considered to be
in a Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention.
4.
If a Contracting State makes no declaration pursuant to paragraph 1 of
this article, the Convention is to extend to all territorial units of that State.
Article 93
Participation by regional economic integration organizations
1.
A regional economic integration organization that is constituted by sovereign
States and has competence over certain matters governed by this Convention may
similarly sign, ratify, accept, approve or accede to this Convention. The regional
economic integration organization shall in that case have the rights and obligations
of a Contracting State, to the extent that that organization has competence over
matters governed by this Convention. When the number of Contracting States is
relevant in this Convention, the regional economic integration organization does not
count as a Contracting State in addition to its member States which are Contracting
States.
2.
The regional economic integration organization shall, at the time of signature,
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, make a declaration to the depositary
specifying the matters governed by this Convention in respect of which competence
38

A/RES/63/122

has been transferred to that organization by its member States. The regional
economic integration organization shall promptly notify the depositary of any
changes to the distribution of competence, including new transfers of competence,
specified in the declaration pursuant to this paragraph.
3.
Any reference to a “Contracting State” or “Contracting States” in this
Convention applies equally to a regional economic integration organization when
the context so requires.
Article 94
Entry into force
1.
This Convention enters into force on the first day of the month following the
expiration of one year after the date of deposit of the twentieth instrument of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
2.
For each State that becomes a Contracting State to this Convention after the
date of the deposit of the twentieth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval
or accession, this Convention enters into force on the first day of the month
following the expiration of one year after the deposit of the appropriate instrument
on behalf of that State.
3.
Each Contracting State shall apply this Convention to contracts of carriage
concluded on or after the date of the entry into force of this Convention in respect of
that State.
Article 95
Revision and amendment
1.
At the request of not less than one third of the Contracting States to this
Convention, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall convene a conference
of the Contracting States for revising or amending it.
2.
Any instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession
deposited after the entry into force of an amendment to this Convention is deemed
to apply to the Convention as amended.
Article 96
Denunciation of this Convention
1.
A Contracting State may denounce this Convention at any time by means of a
notification in writing addressed to the depositary.
2.
The denunciation takes effect on the first day of the month following the
expiration of one year after the notification is received by the depositary. If a longer
period is specified in the notification, the denunciation takes effect upon the
expiration of such longer period after the notification is received by the depositary.
DONE at New York, this eleventh day of December two thousand and eight, in a
single original, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish
texts are equally authentic.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorized by
their respective Governments, have signed this Convention.

39
