United Nations

A/RES/68/208

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 January 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 19

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2013
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/68/438)]

68/208. Cooperative measures to assess and increase awareness
of environmental effects related to waste originating from
chemical munitions dumped at sea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 65/149 of 20 December 2010,
Recalling also the relevant recommendations of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment, held in Stockholm in June 1972, 1
Noting the relevant provisions of Agenda 21, adopted at the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June
1992 2 and reaffirmed in the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation), adopted in
Johannesburg, South Africa, in September 2002, 3 and the outcome document of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we
want”, adopted in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 2012, 4
Reaffirming the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 5 which
provides the legal framework for ocean activities, and emphasizing its fundamental
character, conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and
need to be considered as a whole through an integrated, interdisciplinary and
intersectoral approach,

_______________
1
See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, 5–16 June 1972
(A/CONF.48/14/Rev.1), part one.
2
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
3
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
4
Resolution 66/288, annex.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.

13-45193

*1345193*

Please recycle

Cooperative measures to assess and increase awareness of environmental effects
related to waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea

A/RES/68/208

Recalling relevant international and regional instruments such as the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, 6 the Convention on the Prevention
of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 7 the Convention for
the Protection and Development of the Marine Environment of the Wider Caribbean
Region, 8 the Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment and the
Coastal Region of the Mediterranean, 9 the Agreement on the Protection of the
Marine Environment and the Coastal Area of the South-East Pacific, 10 the
Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area 11
and the Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East
Atlantic, 12
Taking note of the ministerial declaration of the Baltic Marine Environment
Protection Commission (Helsinki Commission) adopted in Copenhagen on
3 October 2013, in which the signatories recognized the need for forward-looking
options for solutions and an assessment of the environmental risks posed by, inter
alia, munitions dumped at sea, welcomed the 2013 report of the ad hoc expert group
to update and review the existing information on dumped chemical munitions in the
Baltic Sea and agreed to produce, by 2015, a one-off thematic assessment of the
environmental risks of hazardous submerged objects, also utilizing the 2013 report
on dumped chemical munitions,
Noting the national, regional and international activities, including scientific
research, 13 data collection and sharing, awareness-raising, reporting on encounters
and technical advice, related to munitions dumped at sea, inter alia, in the
frameworks of the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping
of Wastes and Other Matter, the Convention for the Protection of the Marine
Environment of the North-East Atlantic and the Convention for the Protection of the
Marine Environment and the Coastal Region of the Mediterranean,
Emphasizing that, in the report on the Third Special Session of the Conference
of the States Parties to Review the Operation of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(the Third Review Conference), adopted at The Hague on 19 April 2013, the States
parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction were invited to
support voluntary sharing of information, raising awareness and cooperation on this
issue,
Noting that Member States, international and regional organizations and civil
society have undertaken activities to discuss and promote the issues related to waste
originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea, including international
cooperation and the exchange of experiences and practical knowledge, in particular
at the International Workshop on Environmental Effects Related to Waste
_______________
6

Ibid., vol. 1974, No. 33757.
Ibid., vol. 1046, No. 15749.
8
Ibid., vol. 1506, No. 25974.
9
Ibid., vol. 1102, No. 16908.
10
Ibid., vol. 1648, No. 28325.
11
Ibid., vol. 2099, No. 36495.
12
Ibid., vol. 2354, No. 42279.
13
See, for example, the Baltic Sea research project entitled “Chemical Munitions, Search and Assessment
(CHEMSEA)”, which is conducting research on environmental effects related to chemical munitions
dumped at sea.
7

2/4

Cooperative measures to assess and increase awareness of environmental effects
related to waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea

A/RES/68/208

Originating from Chemical Munitions Dumped at Sea, held on 5 November 2012 in
Gdynia, Poland,
Noting also the concerns about the potential long-term environmental effects
related to waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea, including their
potential impact on human health and safety and on the marine environment and
resources,
Recognizing the mandates and capacities of competent United Nations system
entities in the fields of marine environment monitoring, research and information
sharing, as well as pollution preparedness and response, 14
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 15 including the views
submitted and contained therein;
2.
Notes the importance of raising awareness of the environmental effects
related to waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea;
3.
Invites Member States and relevant international and regional
organizations to keep under observation the issue of the waste originating from
chemical munitions dumped at sea, to continue outreach efforts to assess and
increase awareness of environmental effects related to that issue and to cooperate,
including by strengthening existing efforts within regional seas conventions and
other international, regional and subregional activities related to risk assessment,
monitoring, information gathering, risk prevention and response to incidents;
4.
Encourages voluntary sharing of information on waste originating from
chemical munitions dumped at sea through conferences, seminars, workshops,
training courses and publications aimed at the general public and industry in order
to reduce related risks;
5.
Also encourages partnerships between Governments, industry and civil
society for raising awareness, reporting and monitoring of waste originating from
chemical munitions dumped at sea;
6.
Invites Member States in a position to do so to consider providing
assistance and sharing expertise aimed at building capacities related to risk
assessment, monitoring, information gathering, risk prevention and response to
incidents resulting from waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea;
7.
Invites the Secretary-General to continue to seek the views of Member
States and relevant regional and international organizations on cooperative measures
to assess and increase awareness of the environmental effects related to waste
originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea, also with a view to exploring
the possibility of establishing a database 16 and options for the most appropriate
institutional framework for such a database, as well as identifying the appropriate
intergovernmental bodies within the United Nations system for further consideration

_______________
14
Competent United Nations system entities include, inter alia, the United Nations Environment
Programme, the International Maritime Organization, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission
and the Secretariat.
15
A/68/258.
16
Such a database could contain relevant and voluntarily shared information on, inter alia, the location of
dumping sites, the type, quantity and, to the extent possible, the current condition of chemical munitions,
the recorded environmental impact, best practices on risk prevention and response to incidents or
accidental encounters and destruction or impact reduction technologies, including by means of data
collection and management.

3/4

A/RES/68/208

Cooperative measures to assess and increase awareness of environmental effects
related to waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea

and implementation, as appropriate, of the cooperative measures envisaged in the
present resolution, building on and without duplicating existing activities, and with
a view to achieving efficiency and synergies, taking into account the mandates and
capacities of relevant international and regional organizations;
8.
Also invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at
its seventy-first session a report on the matters covered in the present resolution,
prepared using responses of Member States and relevant regional and international
organizations, as well as other available information.
71st plenary meeting
20 December 2013

4/4
