S/PV.8071

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8071st meeting

Tuesday, 17 October 2017, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-33140 (E)
*1733140*

S/PV.8071

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity
to provide the Security Council with an update on the
Secretary-General’s 30-day report and on the situation
in South Sudan. I will begin by sharing some information
on the deployment of the Regional Protection Force
(RPF), to complement the information that has already
been provided to the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
The deployment of the Regional Protection Force
is under way. We expect the main body of the Rwandan
infantry battalion to complete its deployment in
November. The Ethiopian battalion advance party has
started arriving in Juba and its deployment is expected
to be completed by 20 October. The main body’s
road move from Addis Ababa to Juba will commence
in the latter part of October, subject to clearances
by the Kenyan and Ugandan Governments. Despite
various bureaucratic delays, we continue to engage
with the Government on a regular basis to expedite
that deployment. We strongly believe that enhanced
cooperation with the Government on the issue remains
critical for the RPF to implement its mandate.
The security situation in the country remains a
cause for serious concern. During the past month,
the security situation in the greater Upper Nile has
deteriorated, with reports of clashes in northern Jonglei
and the eastern Upper Nile between the Sudan People’s
2/7

17/10/2017

Liberation Army (SPLA) and the pro-Machar forces of
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement in Opposition
(SPLM-IO). On 1 October, the SPLM-IO reportedly
attacked Waat in Jonglei to seize control of the town.
Since that attack, there have been reports of intense
fighting, which has led to heavy casualties on both
sides. Meanwhile, fighting continues for the control
of Pagak. The continued presence of opposition forces
in Nhialdu and other locations in Unity state is likely
to invite SPLA counteroperations, thereby leading to
more internally displaced persons being displaced
towards the Bentiu protection of civilians site.
The security situation in the Equatorias also
remained precarious. In Western Equatoria, there was
an increase in incidents against non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). Some NGO staff members
travelling between Tambura and Yambio were robbed
by armed assailants along the road. The compound of an
international NGO in Yeri, approximately 50 kilometres
north-east of Mvolo, was broken into by armed
perpetrators on 26 September. Furthermore, Mudubai
village, approximately 50 kilometres north-east of
Maridi town, was also attacked by armed assailants on
28 September. Four civilians were reportedly abducted
and tukuls were burned down. In southern Central
Equatoria, SPLA soldiers allegedly killed two civilians
in Abuwa Boma, near Ombaci town.
All of those incidents should be cause for grave
concern, given the imminent start of the dry season,
which traditionally leads to increased levels of violence
with improved mobility across the country. The human
rights situation in the country remains extremely
concerning. Extrajudicial killings of civilians,
arbitrary arrests and detentions, the repression of free
speech with impunity, and the harassment of political
opponents continued throughout the reporting period.
As submitted to the Security Council, within the
tense security environment, the Government’s security
institutions continue to restrict freedom of movement for
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. Similarly,
opposition forces have also restricted access in areas
under their control. I would therefore strongly urge
the Security Council to pronounce itself, highlighting
that the Government’s continued violations of the
status of forces agreement and restrictions imposed by
opposition forces are both causes for grave concern.
Overall, the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate, with continued insecurity and an
17-33140

17/10/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

increasingly challenging operating environment.
Despite a highly effective humanitarian operation
that has reached millions with life-saving assistance,
humanitarian indicators are likely to deteriorate
further unless there is a reduction in conflict and
improved access.
More than 2 million people have fled since the
start of the conflict in 2013. More than 1 million are in
Uganda, with thousands fleeing in recent months from
the counties of Yei, Kajo Keji, Kapoeta North, Mundri
West, Morobo and Maridi. Others have fled to Ethiopia
and the Sudan, most recently following clashes in
Upper Nile. In addition, another 1.9 million people
are displaced within the country. While a significant
portion of the population is already displaced, either
inside or outside the country, further displacement can
be expected and any significant return of refugees or
internally displaced persons remains unlikely. With
the return of the dry season towards the end of the
year, population movements — particularly refugee
outflows — are likely to reaccelerate.
The number of humanitarian access incidents has
grown in recent months. In August, for example, over
100 incidents were recorded and more than half of them
involved violence against personnel or assets. Two aid
workers were killed in August and one in September,
bringing the total number killed this year alone to 18.
Aid workers have been detained on several occasions,
and humanitarian supplies have been regularly looted
from vehicles or compounds. Bureaucratic impediments
imposed by the Government have also become more
constraining, including the imposition of higher taxes
and fees that particularly impact NGOs.
In our view, Juba remains focused on the national
dialogue process as a vehicle to move the process
towards elections, with an overall aim to end the
transition period. The National Dialogue Steering
Committee has reached out to some opposition parties,
as well as to civil society organizations. However, the
credibility of the process remains in question, owing
to significant opposition groups being so far unwilling
to join, against the backdrop of the concurrent SPLA
military operations.
With regard to the revitalization forum announced
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the Government has only given a conditional
response. IGAD has begun consultations and held
meetings with opposition figures, including Riek

S/PV. 8071

Machar in South Africa, who have all declared
cautious support for the process. An IGAD Foreign
Ministers meeting was also held with President Kiir
and his Cabinet on 13 October, during which the latter
reportedly committed to supporting the revitalization
forum, while requesting a series of clarifications on its
objectives that IGAD agreed to address in writing. I
would like to emphasize the criticality of this initiative.
I urge Council members to use their leverage on all
parties and encourage them to engage in this process
meaningfully and without any preconditions.
With regard to the political process itself, I would
like to re-emphasize a few principles. The conflict
in South Sudan is a direct outcome of a prolonged
disproportionate access to power and wealth in the
country. All future dispensations, therefore, must rest
on the principle of inclusivity that leads to equitable
power- and wealth-sharing. Similarly, South Sudan has
been held hostage to personality politics and conflicts
as far back as we can remember. All processes and
international support must strive to build institutions
so that politics shifts from ownership by individuals
to those institutions that must be accountable to the
people of South Sudan.
I would like to reiterate that the conflict in
South Sudan is a man-made conflict for which the
leaders of South Sudan bear a direct responsibility.
The dire economic situation and continued conflict
in the country have come together to inflict a very
heavy price on the South Sudanese population. They
deserve better. The same leaders who are responsible
for the conflict can also bring the country back from
the impending abyss. All that is needed is genuine
political will to halt military operations, peacefully
negotiate and make the compromises that are necessary
to achieve sustainable peace in the country. As I
mentioned earlier, the IGAD revitalization forum will
provide an ideal opportunity for that. I would also urge
the Security Council to pronounce itself in that regard.
It is critical that the leaders of South Sudan hear the
international community’s unified demand for what is
expected of them.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Lacroix
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I thank the Under-Secretary-General for

17-331403/7

S/PV.8071

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for
his briefing, which gives us a comprehensive overview
of the most recent events in South Sudan.
I would like to underscore a few points that I believe
are important.
First, we continue to support the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and commend
its work. It seeks tirelessly to contribute to fostering
dialogue at the political level, which is the only way
to rekindle the peace process in South Sudan and to
pave the way for democratic elections to be held at
the end of the transition period. It is essential that
all parties involved in the quest for a solution to the
conflict, in particular the United Nations and the
African Union, support the IGAD initiative on the
high-level revitalization forum and speak with one
voice in sending a clear and unequivocal message to the
parties to the conflict on the importance of seizing this
opportunity to make progress in resolving the conflict.

17/10/2017

of Government security forces aiming their weapons at
United Nations staff.
All of this is absolutely unacceptable, and there
are only two possible reasons for it. It is the result
either of a clear policy of hostility or, barring that,
of the Government’s complete inability to maintain
proper control over its own armed forces. Either of
those excuses is completely unacceptable and the
Security Council must speak to this. Status-of-forces
agreements are not merely United Nations documents,
but, as we have said thousands of times, they are also a
safeguard to protect the forces provided by the troopand police-contributing countries to peacekeeping
operations. These status-of-forces agreements are the
guarantees offered to all peacekeepers they are deployed
in the field. Therefore, we cannot allow violations of
the status-of-forces agreement.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, for his briefing to the Council.

As we have said in the past, regardless of how
united the United Nations, the African Union and
IGAD may be in terms of the expectations they pin on
the high-level revitalization forum, this initiative will
not amount to anything if the parties to the conflict do
not demonstrate an unwavering commitment to making
headway in seeking a solution to the crisis. We therefore
reiterate our appeal to all parties to immediately stop
their armed confrontations, commit to a ceasefire and
participate in good faith in the forum.

Undoubtedly, we all agree that the situation in
South Sudan continues to be of serious concern.
Whatever Under-Secretary-General Lacroix has said in
this regard is valid. The conflict continues unabated.
The economic and financial problems the country is
facing are indescribably huge. It is not clear how they
can be managed without the support of the international
community. This needs to be looked at very seriously.
It is not unrelated to the effort being made to achieve
peace in the country.

We are saddened to learn from the 30-day report
of the Secretary-General that restrictions of all sorts
are again being imposed on the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan by the Government,
and that only 20 per cent of the Regional Protection
Force, which was approved by the Council more than
a year ago, is currently deployed. Throughout the past
year, we have continued to insist that no State has the
right to block or interfere in the standard operations
of a mission established by the Security Council. In
looking at the Secretary-General’s report, in just 30
days we have 17 recorded cases of lack of compliance
or refusal by the Government of South Sudan to fulfil
the obligations established in the status-of-forces
agreement. There have been all types of repeated
obstructions of the status of forces agreement, including
requests for documents and special permits, and that is
only the tip of the iceberg. We have also heard reports

The humanitarian situation continues to worsen,
and its severity is incalculable. That is what makes the
cessation of all hostilities and violence in the country,
as well as ensuring safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian actors, absolutely critical and urgent. The
lack of meaningful progress in the implementation of
the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan is further exacerbating
the already dire situation. The peace Agreement is the
only viable way forward to bring an end to the conflict
and restore peace and stability in South Sudan.

4/7

The success of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) high-level revitalization forum is
becoming all the more crucial. The high-level forum
is key to restoring the permanent ceasefire and the
full implementation of the peace agreement. Indeed,
we are moderately pleased to see that substantive
progress has been made towards the convening of the
17-33140

17/10/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

high-level forum. The IGAD Council of Ministers
undertook successful consultations with the parties to
the peace agreement and estranged groups as part of
the pre-forum consultations in preparation for the highlevel revitalization forum.
One measure of the success of these visits by
the IGAD Council of Ministers is that all the parties
consulted have expressed their support for the
revitalization forum and the cessation of hostilities. It
must be underlined that when we say that all parties
were consulted, we mean literally all parties without
exception, including the former First Vice-President.
IGAD will be holding a summit in the near future — we
hope in December — to take stock of the outcome of
the series of consultations and to provide directions on
the launch of the actual high-level revitalization forum.
One thing that should be stressed in that regard is
that the high-level revitalization forum should in no
way be understood as a new negotiating platform. It
should rather be seen as an initiative that provides an
opportunity for the parties to the peace agreement and
estranged groups to expedite, in a realistic and genuine
manner, the implementation of the peace agreement
to restore a permanent ceasefire and to develop a
revised and realistic timeline and implementation
schedule towards a democratic election at the end of the
transition period.
Now, IGAD does not have a magic wand to create
miracles in South Sudan. Like all complex peace
processes, this one also exhibits all the complexities
that are rooted in a lack of trust, not only among parties,
but also between parties on the one hand and mediators
on the other. Memories of disappointments and
betrayals in the past aggravate the absence of mutual
trust. The absence of inclusivity, as Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix mentioned, is the other element. Under
these circumstances, even the smallest progress in the
process of this meeting need not be belittled.
It is in part for that reason that the efforts of IGAD
to revitalize the peace agreement, which has gained
encouraging momentum, needs to be sustained. The
support of the international community, in particular
that of the Security Council, is absolutely critical for
ensuring the effectiveness of the revitalization agenda.
Indeed, we cannot overemphasize the importance of the
full support of the Council for the success of the regional
efforts being exerted to ensure the full implementation
of the peace agreement. At the end of the day, it is

S/PV. 8071

only through a carefully worked out political strategy
that the multifaceted problems of South Sudan can be
addressed. Only then can sustainable peace be achieved.
Frankly, at present, the high-level revitalization forum
is the only show in town, and the IGAD countries are
all united behind that agenda.
All talk about the destructive impact of parallel
initiatives should be thrown out the window. The
consultations with the parties that were mentioned
earlier were conducted in the presence of all the
Ministers or their representatives. The Council has no
reason to not fully support that effort, without caveats.
We believe that the United Nations, the African Union
(AU) and IGAD should be commended for maintaining
the unity of purpose among the three organizations
in the search for lasting peace, security and stability
in South Sudan. The high-level revitalization forum
would not have progressed in the way it has without
those three organizations working in close consultation
and coordination. We encourage the United Nations,
the AU and IGAD to redouble their efforts and further
strengthen that positive trend.
We are encouraged to learn that all the parties
have expressed their commitment to the high-level
revitalization forum and the cessation of hostilities.
That is particularly important because no matter
what we — both in the region and in the rest of the
international community — can do, the success of
the revitalization process, as well as addressing the
enormous challenges that South Sudan is facing, will
depend greatly upon the willingness of all the parties,
as the representative of Uruguay said. We still remain
hopeful that all the parties will seize the opportunity
provided and work towards achieving the purposes of
the revitalization agenda.
Finally, we recognize that the deployment of
vanguard units of the Regional Protection Force (RPF)
continues according to the revised timelines. In that
regard, we endorse what Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix said on the matter. Alhough serious problems
linger and need to be addressed, we are particularly
encouraged to see improved cooperation from the
Government with regard to the deployment of the RPF.
The troop-contributing countries to the RPF, including
Ethiopia, remain committed to its deployment, as well
as to its rationale of the Force itself.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank

17-331405/7

S/PV.8071

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing today on the
situation in South Sudan.
Once again, we lament and express our concern
about the deterioration of the situation in the country.
There has been so significant improvement in the
humanitarian, security and economic crisis, while
the people of South Sudan are far from achieving the
peace and stability that they have been unjustly denied
for so long. As a result, every day thousands of South
Sudanese are leaving their homes, thereby giving rise
to new internal displacements that aggravate the crisis.
It is not possible to speak of real progress if the clashes
between the parties do not cease. Several months ago,
the Security Council called for full compliance with the
ceasefire declared by the Government. However, that
call has been ignored. We emphasize that it will not
be possible to establish the necessary conditions for
dialogue if the fighting continues The lack of political
will and leadership remains very evident.
Bolivia underscores that a sustainable solution to
the conflict in South Sudan must be achieved through
a credible political process and inclusive dialogue that
will lead to compliance with the 2015 agreement. In that
regard, the efforts being made by regional organizations
are fundamental to achieving that end — all that is
needed is complementarity among those initiatives.
For my delegation, support for the leadership of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
is indisputable. The high-level revitalization forum is
the only concrete initiative that exists, and we therefore
appreciate the efforts exerted by IGAD in that regard.
We also welcome the support of the African Union,
as expressed in the most recent communiqué of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, which
serves to give new impetus to and re-establish the
political process in South Sudan through the high-level
revitalization forum. We encourage all the parties to
engage and participate constructively. It is a unique
opportunity to establish sustainable peace through
restoring a permanent ceasefire, implementing the
peace agreement and developing a realistic timetable for
a democratic election at the end of the transition period.
Another important point is the call to put
forward a memorandum of understanding on the
establishment of the Hybrid Court. We believe that
justice and accountability would help to bring about
the reconciliation and healing processes, which are key
6/7

17/10/2017

to establishing lasting peace. We emphasize that it is
essential that the process of establishing the Hybrid
Court be African-led. We emphasize the Government’s
willingness to carry out the establishment of the
Hybrid Court.
With regard to the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force (RPF), we welcome the good offices
of the Special Representative. It is essential to work
in harmony and cooperation with the Government
in order to allow the RPF to operate smoothly. Its
deployment will enable the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) to extend its presence to
other areas of conflict, protect civilians and provide
humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, we wish to express our appreciation
to the United Nations country team and to UNMISS
for the work that they carry out in South Sudan. We
commend the approach they have been taking to the
protection of civilians.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of your duties as President
of the Security Council for month of October. I assure
you of my delegation’s support and cooperation.
As has already been reported by the representative
of Ethiopia, this past weekend the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) visited Juba, where, from all
accounts, they held successful consultation meetings
with various stakeholders to the peace agreement in
South Sudan.
I would like to reiterate that my delegation
acknowledges the support and time that the Council
puts into the search for sustainable peace and security
in my country, as well as the crucial roles of the African
Union and IGAD, respectively.
By and large, the Transitional Government of
National Unity again recommitted itself to the highlevel revitalization forum during the visit of the IGAD
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, and the Transitional
Government of National Unity is determined to carry
out the full implementation of the peace agreement.
Therefore, it is the same approach with which they
accepted the revitalization process to be undertaken,
as proposed by IGAD. However, the Transitional
Government of National Unity proposed, and we
17-33140

17/10/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

understand that IGAD accepted, that the Transitional
Government of National Unity would participate in the
forum as one entity.
One of the objectives of the high-level revitalization
forum is to silence the guns and accommodate any
estranged groups that might be holding out from the
peace agreement. We are happy to report that the
Transitional Government of National Unity has declared
itself open to being involved in the implementation of
the peace agreement among the groups that are expected
to denounce violence.
The Transitional Government of National Unity
proposes that the basis for the revitalization forum be
the status of the implementation of the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The process ought to be preceded by update
reports from the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission and the Transitional Government of

S/PV. 8071

National Unity on the status of its implementation,
in order for the IGAD leadership and the participants
in the high-level revitalization forum to appreciate
the provisions of the agreements that have been
implemented, those in the process of implementation
and the ones that have not been implemented and why.
Establishing peace and security in the country is
paramount to unity among the South Sudanese. That
is why the Transitional Government of National Unity
continues to welcome the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force and its equipment. That is also the
main reason that the Transitional Government of
National Unity looks forward to the convening of the
high-level revitalization forum.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

17-331407/7
