UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/897
28 September 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 18 SEPTEMBER 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
16 September 1998, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

98-28423 (E)

280998

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/897
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 16 September 1998 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to
the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
twentieth monthly report on the operations of the Stabilization Force (SFOR)
(see appendix). I would appreciate your making this report available to the
Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1998/897
English
Page 3

Appendix
Monthly report to the Security Council on the
operations of the Stabilization Force

1.
There are approximately 32,500 troops currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all countries of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and from 21 non-NATO countries.
2.
Over the reporting period (21 July-20 August), SFOR continued to conduct
surveillance and reconnaissance by means of ground and air patrols.
Approximately 2,770 sorties were flown by combat aircraft, and the SFOR
helicopter fleet flew approximately 132 hours.
3.
SFOR’s Multinational Specialized Unit became operational on 20 August.
Operating as an integral part of SFOR under the same rules of engagement as
other elements, the Unit will have an enhanced capability to support the local
authorities in responding to civil disorder, without engaging in police
functions, in close cooperation with the Office of the High Representative and
the International Police Task Force (IPTF).
4.
SFOR has continued its monitoring of crossing points on the border with the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its inspections of government factories in
order to help ensure compliance with the prohibition on the transport of weapons
established by the Security Council in its resolution 1160 (1998). No reports
of non-compliance were received in the current reporting period.
5.
On 23 July, in conformity with the restructuring agreement concluded by the
Office of the High Representative in February, SFOR withdrew from the
transmission tower used by Srpska Radio Television in Veliki Zep, in
Multinational Division North. Following an agreement with the Republika Srpska
authorities, use of the Srpska Radio Television Tower in Trebevic, in
Multinational Division South-east, will be shared between Srpska Radio
Television and SFOR, with SFOR providing local security.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
6.
The parties remain substantially in compliance with most military
provisions of the Peace Agreement across the whole area of operations. However,
during the reporting period, there were a number of arson attacks on houses
belonging to all three ethnic groups, and a series of explosions in the Sarajevo
area during the first week of August.
7.
Following the murder in Pale on 7 August of Mr. Srdjan Knezevic, the Deputy
Chief of the Serb Public Security Centre in Sarajevo, SFOR increased its patrols
in the Pale and Sokoloc areas. At the beginning of August, SFOR patrols were
also increased in Stolac in response to threats made by employees of the Renner
Company against members of IPTF during an inspection of Stolac market, and
subsequently, in response to a confrontation with a SFOR inspection team on
13 August.

/...

S/1998/897
English
Page 4

8.
During the reporting period, SFOR troops conducted a total of 346
inspections of military weapons storage sites: 75 Bosniac, 81 Bosnian Croat,
164 Bosnian Serb and 26 Federation. No significant discrepancies were noted and
no weapons were confiscated. In line with the SFOR policy of reducing the
overall number of weapons sites, 45 of the 136 weapons storage sites which were
due to be closed between 10 June 1998 and 28 February 1999 have now been closed,
a reduction of about one third.
9.
The Police Anti-Terrorist Brigade and the Police Unit for the Protection of
Persons and Buildings of the Republika Srpska Specialist Police remain in
compliance with the terms of the Peace Agreement and with the requirements set
out by SFOR on 15 August 1997. In line with the Police Restructuring and
Training Programme, led by IPTF and monitored by SFOR, 577 officers of the
Brigade completed human dignity training between 22 June and 17 July.
10. During the reporting period, SFOR troops monitored a total of 435 training
and movement activities: 30 Bosniac, 15 Bosnian Croat, 250 Bosnian Serb and 140
Federation. SFOR imposed on the Bosnian Serb 701st Brigade a ban on training
and movement from 27 July to 3 August, and a similar one on the First Bosnian
Croat Corps, from 25 to 28 July, in each instance for non-compliance with the
Common Licence Plate Programme. In addition, a training and movement ban was
imposed from 19 August to 5 September on the First and Second Bosnian Croat
Guard Brigades from the Caplinja Instruction Centre.
11. In the period ended 1 July, SFOR monitored a total of 78 demining
activities. On 1 July 1998, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Mine Action Centre
assumed responsibility for humanitarian mine clearing. The Entity Armed Forces
are now insured and accredited by the Centre and are conducting operations in
accordance with international standards for humanitarian mine clearance. There
are currently no bans imposed on the Entity Armed Forces for non-compliance with
mine-clearing operations.
Cooperation with international organizations
12. Within its capabilities, SFOR continues to provide assistance to the
international organizations in theatre, working routinely with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), IPTF, including in its
inspections of local police stations, the Office of the High Representative, the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
13. SFOR continues to support OSCE in its preparations for the September
elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 16 July a Memorandum of Understanding
was signed on SFOR support to OSCE during the election period. Essentially,
SFOR will provide limited security for ballot warehouses and emergency back-up
medical evacuation services. It will also support the monitoring of polling
stations and regional counting centres. The official election campaign started
on 2 August.
14. SFOR continues to provide assistance to the Office of the High
Representative in the field of civil air traffic. As reported last month,
Mostar airport opened to civil traffic on 7 July. With respect to Sarajevo
/...

S/1998/897
English
Page 5

airport, the revisions to the Memorandum of Understanding which will permit
cargo operations and allow commercial aircraft to remain on the apron overnight
are awaiting approval by the Council of Ministers. Civil operations into Tuzla
airport are expected to begin in early September.
15. SFOR continues to play an active role in providing support to the efforts
of the Office of the High Representative to establish joint institutions,
particularly the Standing Committee on Military Matters. At its meeting on
13 August, the Standing Committee directed the Entity Governments to bring
forward legislation to provide for a continuing amnesty with regard to weapons
and munitions, and work continues on an expanded scheme for military helicopter
flights across the Inter-Entity Boundary Line.
Outlook
16. Tension is expected to continue to rise in the run-up to the September
elections. Acts of intimidation and violence towards displaced persons and
refugees can also be expected to continue.

-----
