S/PV.8549

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8549th meeting

Friday, 14 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Special report of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations on the strategic assessment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2019/445)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-17559 (E)
*1917559*

S/PV.8549

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

UNAMID, which also led to the Council’s decision to
postpone the submission of the aforementioned report
by one month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Special report of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations
on the strategic assessment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2019/445)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with article 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, and Mr. Andrew Gilmour, Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/445, which contains the special report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on
the strategic assessment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the situation in Darfur in the context of the mandate
renewal for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
One year on from the adoption of resolution 2429
(2018), I am honoured to bring to the attention of Council
members a joint assessment of the Secretary-General
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
on UNAMID, as submitted in their special report
(S/2019/445) of 30 May 2019, in line with paragraph
7 of the resolution. I will also shed light on the impact
of the political and security developments in the wider
Sudan since 11 April on the projected trajectory of
2/22

14/06/2019

The special report before the Security Council
was finalized against the backdrop of significant
political developments at the national level which led
to the beginning of drastic changes in the 30-yearold system of governance in the Sudan. Since then,
further developments have taken place, resulting
in an increasingly unpredictable situation. What
started in December 2018 as social unrest triggered
by socioeconomic grievances led to the removal of
President Al-Bashir on 11 April and the subsequent
takeover by the Transitional Military Council, which
is currently negotiating with the umbrella opposition
group of the Declaration of Freedom and Change Forces
on the nature and the structure of the governance system.
While the impact of the post-11 April events on the
prevailing situation in Darfur has been so far moderate,
the uncertainty of the negotiations’ outcome may have
repercussions well beyond Khartoum and lead to an
escalation of violence. The 3 June attacks and killings
of civilians, which the Council condemned, exemplify
the risks. Further, the reported perpetration of such
violence by actors such as the Rapid Support Forces,
which are closely linked to Darfur, is worrisome for
its civilian population there. I should add that while
the Mission and its leadership are doing their utmost
to maintain normal interactions with the current
authorities, the prevailing fluid situation in Khartoum
makes it more difficult for the Mission to pursue those
contacts on a regular basis.
In that context, I would bring to the Council’s
attention two specific challenges faced by UNAMID
to date that have unmistakably impacted its operations.
These include, first, the looting the of El Geneina super
camp on 14 and 15 May by civilians and members of
the Sudanese security forces, which was reported
to the Security Council in detail; and secondly, the
Transitional Military Council decree 102 of 2019,
issued on 13 May, requesting UNAMID to hand over
all camps to the Rapid Support Forces, which is in
contravention of United Nations rules and procedures.
Given those developments, we have had no choice
but to suspend the handover of UNAMID sites to the
Sudanese authorities until the Transitional Military
Council’s decree is rescinded. In the meantime, we are
putting in place plans and measures to prevent future
incidents similar to the El Geneina looting.
19-17559

14/06/2019

S/PV. 8549

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Against that backdrop, allow me to briefly introduce
the main findings of the joint African Union-United
Nations assessment, as reflected in the special report.
The conflict trends in Darfur have remained the same
since 2016. The only rebel group active there, the Sudan
Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid, is restricted to pockets
of Jebel Marra, has limited operational capabilities and
is increasingly fragmented by infighting factions. The
other two rebel groups, the Sudan Liberation ArmyMinni Minawi and the Justice and Equality MovementGibril, while having lost their foothold in Darfur,
remain active in the region and have become part and
parcel of the Libyan conflict. While the assessment
concluded that overall intercommunal violence has
visibly declined, the conflict drivers related to access
to land and resources, environmental degradation and
human rights violations need to be further addressed.
The Darfur political process is in a stalemate,
despite a brief breakthrough in December last year
achieved through intensive negotiations led by the
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security.
In the meantime, the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur continued, albeit at
a slow pace, and the Darfur Internal Dialogue and
Consultation process was completed in all Darfur states
at the locality level, formulating specific proposals for
durable solutions for internally displaced persons and
sustaining peace in Darfur.
The current context features a limited capacity
of law enforcement and rule of law institutions; a
prolonged humanitarian crisis, with some 1.5 million
displaced persons living in camps, 90 per cent of whom
cannot afford more than one food basket per day; and
few viable development programmes. This confluence
of factors requires a comprehensive approach beyond
peacekeeping. The Security Council has acknowledged
this shift since the adoption of its resolution 2363 (2017),
which called for the reconfiguration of UNAMID along
the two-pronged peacekeeping and peacebuilding
approach. Last year, resolution 2429 (2018) endorsed
the transition concept and supported the State liaison
functions as its implementation vehicle along four
peacebuilding priorities, while further reducing the
footprint of the peacekeeping component.
The special report reconfirms the continuation of
those trends and concludes that peacekeeping is no
longer the most appropriate tool to address the situation
in Darfur, which will require UNAMID to appropriately
adjust its posture, operations and capabilities towards

the final stages of its existence. The report’s conclusions
therefore point to the continuation of the UNAMID
drawdown process and its exit in 2020, in line with
one of the proposed options, which were carefully
crafted to shape a gradual and responsible drawdown
reflecting the current realities. In addition, to ensure
that this process corresponds to evolving realities on
the ground, the assessment report proposes a review by
November 2019.
Moving forward, attention should be paid to the
conflict drivers, namely, access to land and resources,
climate change and environmental degradation, and
human rights and protection. In that context, human
rights violations, conflict-related sexual violence and
sexual and gender-based violence remain a significant
challenge, and for that reason the assessment
report proposes specific medium- and long-term
benchmarks. The State liaison functions framework,
which the Council endorsed last year to focus on the
rule of law, resilience and livelihood solutions, and
immediate service delivery for internally displaced
persons, will ensure the continuity of our intervention
beyond UNAMID.
With the final exit in mind, the strategic assessment
revisited UNAMID’s priorities to focus on, first, the
revitalization of the political process, including through
an updated United Nations-African Union strategy on
the Darfur peace process; secondly, the strengthening of
the Sudan’s rule of law institutions; and thirdly, support
to long-term stabilization through durable solutions for
internally displaced persons and a sustainable rightsbased approach for the Darfur population. In that
context, the Mission would enhance the role of the
State liaison functions as an innovative integration
mechanism of the whole-of-system approach.
Finally, we call upon Security Council members
to carefully consider the options for the drawdown
and liquidation of UNAMID, in accordance with the
guidance provided in resolution 2429 (2018) and in the
light of all the aforementioned considerations.
The President (spoke
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Gilmour.
Mr. Gilmour: It is an honour to brief the Council,
building on the important briefing by Mr. Lacroix, with
which we fully agree. I shall speak about the human
rights issues impacting peace and security in Darfur.

19-175593/22

S/PV.8549

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Violence between armed militias and State security
forces in Darfur, as well as among communities, has
decreased. We welcome that. At the same time, we are
concerned that the human rights situation in Darfur
has continued to deteriorate in recent months, with
increased reports of killings, abduction, sexual violence
and other violations.
Since April, country-wide protests and political
developments in the capital have had some ripple effect
in Darfur, with thousands of protestors demonstrating in
its major towns and a rise in the number of documented
violations. Many of these protests in Darfur were
violently repressed by State security forces, including
Rapid Support Forces. In this connection, the human
rights component of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) documented
the killing of 47 and the injury of 186 civilians in
various regions of Darfur between 11 April to 12 June.
In Zalingei, Central Darfur, 10 civilians were killed
and 93 injured as a result of what is seen to be excessive
use of force.
There are reports that State security entities have
resorted to arbitrary arrests and detentions to restrict
freedom of movement and assembly, as well as to
suppress dissent or acts of solidarity with the protest
in Khartoum In the past two months, 163 civilians
have been arrested and detained in relation to protests
in Darfur. The human rights section of UNAMID has
received accounts of intensified attacks and harassment
of civilians and the looting of houses and livestock by
Rapid Support Forces. Those same forces are widely
reported to have been involved in violent repression
of the protests in Khartoum, which led to numerous
deaths of peaceful protesters.
We believe that many cases in Darfur remain
invisible and underreported due to lack of access to
some parts of the region. In some areas of Jebel Marra,
the sole representatives of Government present are
the security forces, but they are reported to be the
main perpetrators of violations against the civilian
population — that is, the people they are there to protect.
Clearly, this does not lead to increased trust of
the population in law enforcement bodies. UNAMID’s
presence and its important work on human rights and
the protection of civilians have had a positive effect,
as confirmed by internally displaced persons and local
communities. During this period, UNAMID, including
the human rights section, was able to act to defuse
4/22

14/06/2019

conflict and violence through its interaction with the
population and advocacy with State security forces and
judicial authorities.
In an atmosphere of violence and uncertainty,
upholding the priorities of the protection of civilians
and of human rights in the mandate of UNAMID is of
paramount significance, including through continued
monitoring and reporting of the human rights situation
in the whole of Darfur. We believe that the Mission’s
strengthened civilian presence will have a positive
impact on protection of civilians. Meanwhile, the
UNAMID human rights section continues to reinforce
the capacity of national institutions to protect and
promote human rights through State liaison functions.
Of particular note is the positive collaboration we
have with the National Human Rights Commission,
with which UNAMID has established a framework
of cooperation to further build the national capacity
to protect human rights. UNAMID, through its
human rights component, is closely engaging with
the Sudanese Armed Forces, in particular in North
Darfur, and the Demobilization, Disarmament and
Reintegration Commission to mainstream human rights
in their activities.
The violence and uncertainty that have erupted in
Darfur in the past few months are unfortunately likely
to continue until the root causes — what Mr. Lacroix
has just called the “conflict drivers” — of the conflict
are addressed. The tragic incident in Deleij village,
in Central Darfur, on 9 and 10 June that resulted in
deaths of at least 17 persons related to intercommunity
violence, but involving State actors, illustrates that
point, as well as the direct link between human rights
and security.
We strongly hope that any transition road map will
include measures that permit the population of Darfur
to regain confidence in law enforcement bodies, the rule
of law and broader State institutions, as well as a belief
that there will be some accountability for excessive use
of force and serious human rights violations.
To conclude, we strongly support what yesterday’s
communiqué issued by the African Union Peace and
Security Council on Darfur called “the imperative for
the Republic of Sudan to ensure the full protection of
civilians and respect for human rights and freedoms”.
The President (spoke
Mr. Gilmour for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

19-17559

14/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me, too, thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Assistant
Secretary-General Gilmour for their briefings
this morning.
Let me speak a little, first, about the wider situation
in the Sudan and its impact on Darfur and then,
secondly, on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and our approach to
the upcoming mandate renewal.
We meet again during uncertain times in the
Sudan. When we last met in the Chamber on this issue
(see S/PV.8513), I said that the Transitional Military
Council had a choice. It could choose to deliver on
the legitimate demands of the Sudanese people for a
political system that is inclusive, respectful of human
rights and the rule of law. It could choose to engage
with the international community to gain the support
that the Sudan desperately needs as it seeks to turn
around decades of economic mismanagement and to
help resolve conflict.
Instead, the Transitional Military Council chose
brutal violence that resulted in the deaths of over
100 peaceful civilian protesters and the injury of
hundreds more. Through our press statement this week
(SC/13836), we in the Council strongly condemned
that violence and urged the authorities to immediately
end the use of violence, fully respect human rights and
ensure justice and accountability. I am sure that will be
the clear and unambiguous message that will be sent by
members of the Council today.
We note that, today, the Transitional Military
Council has acknowledged the violations committed
by the security services on 3 June and said that an
investigation is under way. The United Kingdom urges
the military authorities to ensure that the investigation
is transparent and ensures the accountability that the
military authorities have a responsibility to deliver for
the Sudanese people.
May I also say how strongly we support the position
of the African Union (AU). The African Union has
demonstrated strong regional leadership in response to
the situation in the Sudan. We fully support its efforts
to find a peaceful and swift resolution to the current
crisis and we call on all international partners to show
their support for those AU efforts.

S/PV. 8549

Unfortunately, the violence, human rights violations
and abuses perpetrated in Khartoum on and since 3 June
are all too familiar to the people of Darfur. As Andrew
Gilmour referenced, there remain serious human rights
and protection concerns in Darfur. The very forces
that perpetrated the recent violence in Khartoum, the
Rapid Support Forces, have targeted and continue to
target civilians in Darfur. That includes indiscriminate
shooting, the looting and burning of villages and sexual
and gender-based violence, among other crimes.
As noted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, in her statement on the Sudan
yesterday, the Rapid Support Forces have “consistently
been listed by the Secretary-General in his annual report
on conflict-related sexual violence”. Let us not forget
that the Rapid Support Forces came from the militia
known as the Janjaweed. This militia was responsible
for a conflict which the United Nations estimates
left 300,000 people dead and 2.5 million displaced.
It should be of great concern to us all that the Rapid
Support Forces currently occupy most of the team sites
that UNAMID has vacated to date. The Transitional
Military Council has shown no signs of abiding by
previous agreements on the handover of UNAMID
team sites for civilian use. As Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix stated, it has gone so far as to explicitly demand
by decree that UNAMID’s remaining team sites be
given to the Rapid Support Forces.
UNAMID team sites must not be handed over to
the Rapid Support Forces. That would not only violate
existing agreements on the handover of the sites, as
well as United Nations principles, financial rules and
regulations, it would also be grossly negligent. We
would risk enabling violence against civilians. Since
the events of 11 April, Darfur has witnessed a spike
in violence in camps for internally displaced persons,
intercommunal clashes and attacks on humanitarian
actors. This week, UNAMID verified intercommunal
clashes in central Darfur that resulted in the deaths
of 17 people, 15 injured and more than 100 houses
burned. Following the incident, UNAMID plans to
intensify its confidence-building measures to promote
intercommunal dialogue. That is just one example of
the important role that UNAMID continues to play in
Darfur, despite its limited footprint.
The other obvious impact of the wider situation is
on the Darfur peace process, which is currently stalled.
The Transitional Military Council previously stated that

19-175595/22

S/PV.8549

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

14/06/2019

resolving the Sudan’s internal conflicts would be its top
priority, and at the time that was a welcome statement.
However, its recent actions severely undermine that
commitment. The United Kingdom therefore calls on the
military authorities to undertake confidence-building
measures, including agreeing to an independent and
transparent investigation of the violence in Khartoum.

community should be united in demanding that it make
the right choice. That would require immediate steps
to establish a civilian-led transitional authority that in
turn would pave the way for peace in Darfur. Moreover,
it has an obligation to the people of the Sudan, who have
shown tremendous bravery and perseverance in their
dignified and legitimate demands for a better tomorrow.

The United Kingdom remains committed to the
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in
Darfur, and if it is to succeed a number of conditions
should be met. UNAMID’s departure must be
undertaken responsibly, without creating security
and protection vacuums. For peacebuilding to be
sustainable, the international community requires a
willing and able partner in the host State. Unfortunately,
the current conditions do not lend themselves to that.
As a result, we in the Council have a responsibility
to step back, take stock of the current situation and
consider how that affects the assumptions that we have
all previously expressed and shared about UNAMID’s
immediate future.

Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me also thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Gilmour for their briefings.

I would like to say that as we have been since
UNAMID first deployed to Darfur 15 years ago,
the United Kingdom remains firmly committed to
supporting efforts to build peace and stability in
Darfur, and that commitment guides our approach to
UNAMID’s mandate renewal. The United Kingdom
and Germany believe that the most prudent approach
would be a technical rollover of UNAMID’s mandate,
which would provide time for progress on the broader
political situation. It would give time for the issue
regarding the handover of UNAMID’s team sites to
be resolved, and it would enable the United Nations
and the African Union to develop a political strategy
to address the outstanding challenges that will remain
following UNAMID’s departure.
I take note of the communiqué of the African
Union issued yesterday, and in particular its clear
rejection of any handover of assets to the Rapid Support
Forces under any circumstances, and its demand that
the decree issued by the Transitional Military Council
be repealed. Along with Germany, we will engage with
all our colleagues on the Council and especially our
African Union friends with regard to the details of the
proposed technical rollover.
In conclusion, we will be watching the actions of the
Transitional Military Council in the coming days and
weeks. It still has a choice to make. The international
6/22

We continue to follow the situation in Khartoum
very closely and support the mediation efforts of the
African Union and Ethiopia, which should pave the
way to a civilian-led transition. Negotiations should be
resumed as soon as possible. We echo the clear statement
issued by the Council earlier this week (see S/PV.8543).
We strongly condemn the violence against civilians and
call for respect for human rights and for accountability
for the violence committed by security forces. We are
also concerned about the reports alleging that serious
human rights violations have been committed by
elements of the Rapid Support Forces and militias since
3 June and in the aftermath of the attacks on the protest
area. We join Special Representative Patten in urging
for an investigation of all credible allegations of sexual
violence and for accountability for those responsible.
Let me also say that we very much agree with UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and thank him for his view
that the team sites of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) cannot and
will not be handed over to the Rapid Support Forces,
but rather only to civilian institutions, as agreed.
The mission needs a willing and civilian partner for
peacebuilding in Darfur, and we do not see that that is
the case at the moment.
With regard to the future of UNAMID, as we have
heard from Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour, the
protection needs in Darfur are unfortunately growing,
not declining. We hear reports about increasing
intercommunal violence in central Darfur and we have
had to witness the looting of UNAMID team sites. We
strongly condemn any violence or threats of violence
against UNAMID by anyone. The mission has a Chapter
VII mandate that provides for robust self-protection
and protection of its mandate, and despite its limited
capacities, UNAMID continues to play an important
role in protecting civilians, fostering the rule of law
and tackling the root causes of the conflict. Germany
19-17559

14/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

continues to believe that we should transition from
peacemaking to peacebuilding in Darfur, in accordance
with the benchmarks and indicators, as agreed by the
Council, and that the transition should be done in an
orderly, dignified and sustainable manner. We do not
see that the circumstances right now can allow such an
approach to be rapidly implemented.
I would like to say a few words with regard to
suggestions on the way ahead. We, the United Kingdom
and Germany, will suggest a way forward for the
upcoming mandate renewal that reflects the current
fluid situation. We believe that as the Council we
cannot follow a trajectory on autopilot, disregarding
the real situation on the ground. How would we explain
that to the people in Darfur? We have the responsibility
to adapt our approach in the light of the major shifts we
have seen in the Sudan, which are already having clear
repercussions in Darfur.
We also took note of the discussion in the African
Union Peace and Security Council yesterday, which
expresses similar concerns and calls for a suspension of
UNAMID’s drawdown. That is why we believe that the
best way forward at this moment, as my British colleague
said, is with a technical rollover for UNAMID. A
technical rollover would enable UNAMID to continue
its important work at the intersection of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding for the time being. It would give the
United Nations and the African Union time to come
up with a political strategy for Darfur, as suggested in
the special report of both organizations (S/2019/445).
It would also allow all the relevant stakeholders to
agree on a political way forward, including on the
peace process in Darfur, which is currently stalled.
The United Kingdom and Germany will engage with
all Council members in the coming week to discuss
our suggestions in detail, and we look forward to
constructive engagement and discussions.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank both briefers for their insights and
analysis, and we echo what my colleagues from the
United Kingdom and Germany have just said. I would
like to focus on three points. They are our concern
about the situation, the urgent need to do everything
we can to prevent Darfur from again relapsing into
conflict and the call for suspending the withdrawal of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), given the current circumstances.

S/PV. 8549

I should first explain our deep concern about the
situation in the Sudan. France strongly condemns
the violence in the Sudan in recent days. Peaceful
demonstrators were repressed with severe brutality.
Such disproportionate use of force is unacceptable. We
urge all actors to exercise restraint and not to resort
to violence. The Transitional Military Council has
the primary responsibility to ensure the safety of all
Sudanese people. In the light of Pramila Patten’s very
worrying statement, France calls for a full investigation
into the abuses committed, including sexual violence,
and for those responsible to be brought to justice.
The challenge today in the Sudan is the resumption
of political dialogue and the negotiated transition to
civilian-led rule. We call on all parties to resume talks,
to show restraint and openness and to seek compromise.
We recall that the deadline agreed by the African Union
for the transfer of power to a civilian-led transitional
authority will expire on 30 June.
France welcomes the African Union’s firm and clear
position. We hope that the United Nations can fully back
the mediation efforts of the African Union, with the
support of Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed. This
is what France has called for in recent days, including
at the meeting between the French Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission in Paris on 11 June.
In that regard, I welcome the mission entrusted by
the Secretary-General to his Special Adviser, Nicholas
Haysom, to support the African Union mediation.
The initial results are encouraging; the mediation has
brought both parties back to the negotiating table,
which is a very positive step. We call on all partners
of Sudan, particularly the countries of the region and
Sudan’s closest partners, to join their energy to support
an African Union mediation. The stability of the Sudan
can be ensured only if we all work toward the same goal
and speak with one voice.
My second point is that we must do all we can
to prevent Darfur from being set ablaze again. We
are extremely concerned about reports of violence in
Darfur in recent days, particularly in Jebel Marra,
which show that the situation today is once again very
volatile. As we know, Darfur remains a fragile region,
where the root causes of the conflict, including access
to land and the future of 2 million displaced persons,
have not really been settled. We must do everything we
can to prevent the region from collapsing again.

19-175597/22

S/PV.8549

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

UNAMID must therefore remain in the strongest
position to enable it to carry out its missions, particularly
the protection of civilians. We were particularly
shocked by the attack on and looting of the El Geneina
camp in mid-May. The involvement of members of the
Sudanese defence and security forces is unacceptable.
We call on the authorities to shed full light on those acts
and ensure that those responsible are brought to justice.
In addition, I would like to reiterate the importance
of combating impunity in Darfur. Serious crimes,
including those against children and sexual violence,
have been carried out for a long time and continue. I
recall that all parties to the conflict have an obligation
to cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Court and its Prosecutor, in accordance with resolution
1593 (2005).
Finally, in the current context, we must defer any
decision on the withdrawal of UNAMID. It is more
necessary than ever to advocate for a responsible and
prudent withdrawal of the mission. We must postpone
any decision on its withdrawal for several months, for
two reasons.
First, we cannot, in the space of two weeks, decide
to transfer the remaining 15 bases to the Sudanese
authorities when we have no legitimate and reliable
interlocutor in the Government in Khartoum. On the
contrary, last week’s violence compels us to exercise
the utmost caution. UNAMID was right to freeze
the transfer of its bases as long as the decree by the
Transitional Military Council last month — which said
that UNAMID camps should be handed over to the Rapid
Support Forces — is in effect. That decree contravenes
the agreements concluded between the Sudan and the
United Nations and must be annulled, as stated in the
communiqué issued yesterday by the Chairperson of
the African Union Peace and Security Council.
Finally, the situation in Darfur is so unstable and
volatile at the moment that the presence of UNAMID
will still be necessary in the coming months. I am
thinking in particular of the mission to protect civilians,
report human rights violations, resolve intercommunal
conflicts, facilitate humanitarian access and protect
humanitarian personnel. Given the current conditions,
my delegation supports the proposal of the United
Kingdom and Germany for a technical renewal of the
mission’s mandate.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
8/22

14/06/2019

Mr. Andrew Gilmour for their enlightening assessments
of the current situation in Darfur. We also welcome
their relevant recommendations.
Despite the joint efforts of the United Nations and
the African Union within the framework of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), the political and security situations in the
region remain volatile and are a matter of major concern
for the international community.
While we are seeking ways and means for an
orderly withdrawal of UNAMID, the political crisis
and recent events in the Sudan have only exacerbated
our concerns. It is undeniable that the current situation
in this brotherly country is particularly concerning, as
the Sudan is an essential element in the frameworks of
efforts to establish lasting peace, security and stability
in Darfur.
Fully aware of the Sudan’s essential role as a
subregional actor, my country urges all Sudanese
parties to engage in an inclusive dialogue in order to
achieve a bold solution to the crisis that transcends
short-term political interests. In that regard, my country
expresses its full support for the African Union’s
initiatives, as well as for the mediation and good offices
of His Excellency Mr. Abiy Ahmed, Prime Minister of
Ethiopia, and truly hope that their efforts will allow
us to create the conditions for a peaceful transition in
the Sudan.
My delegation believes that any deadlock in the
current crisis is likely to undermine the fragile peace
process and reconciliation process in Darfur and will
significantly diminish the prospects of a UNAMID
withdrawal in June 2020.
With regard to the situation in Darfur, my delegation
notes that, despite encouraging progress, the parties
have not yet reached a final agreement on a cessation
of hostilities, which would constitute an important
step towards peace. While my country welcomes the
progress made in power sharing, it remains convinced
that the diligent implementation by all Sudanese parties
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur is critical
to breathing new life into the current political process.
Only then will the quest for peace in Darfur continue to
mobilize the multifaceted support of the international
community, particularly that of the United Nations and
the African Union.
19-17559

14/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Like all peacekeeping missions worldwide,
UNAMID is not intended to drag on indefinitely
in Darfur. However, Côte d’Ivoire believes that any
decision on a reduction of UNAMID’s presence and a
permanent withdrawal from Darfur should be taken in
the light of a realistic assessment of the sociopolitical and
security situation. Given the current fragility in Darfur,
that position is in keeping with the gradual approach
proposed by the African Union Peace and Security
Council and confirmed by its latest communiqué,
adopted on 13 June — in which the Council insists that
any decision to reduce troops or withdraw UNAMID
must be based on a sober evaluation of the situation
on the ground in order to avoid a security vacuum that
would expose civilians to the risk of violence from
armed groups.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore supports the conclusions
of the strategic assessment team and calls for an
orderly withdrawal. We are in favour of a phased
approach, reflecting security trends and allowing
reserve capacities to be maintained until the end of
the mission. With that view, my delegation urges
UNAMID to continue to support the political process
of crisis resolution and reconciliation, and to continue
its conflict prevention and civilian protection activities,
with a focus on priority actions in Jebel Marra.
UNAMID remains a virtuous model of cooperation
between the United Nations and a regional organization.
The political and security challenges that remain
in Darfur cannot hide the specific and encouraging
progress, albeit fragile, that UNAMID has made.
Côte d’Ivoire sincerely hopes that the gains that
have been made are maintained and that we do not
move hastily, but rather step by step with UNAMID,
and we call upon the United Nations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
to remain firmly committed to peace and stability in
the Sudan and Darfur.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Mr. Andrew Gilmour for their briefings.
I will divide my statement into two parts: first, on
the general situation in the Sudan, and secondly, the
impact of that situation on Darfur and on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

S/PV. 8549

We are shocked by the recent developments in the
Sudan. Since 3 June, the international community has
witnessed deliberate attacks against civilians carrying
out peaceful protests. Belgium strongly condemns that
violence, which led to the deaths of more than 100
people and caused a great number of injured, not to
mention cases of sexual violence.
The Transitional Military Council is responsible
for the protection of civilians and the security of all
Sudanese. The members of that Council must uphold
the individual rights of the Sudanese people, including
the right to freedom of assembly and expression, and
release political detainees.
That unacceptable violence threatens the entire
political process for a civil transition. Belgium welcomes
the strong decision that the African Union made on
6 June and calls on all members of this Council to
respect the African Union’s ownership of the response
to that crisis. Like the African Union, Belgium calls
for the immediate resumption of negotiations, without
preconditions, among all Sudanese stakeholders
with a view to establishing a transitional authority
under civilian direction, in strict compliance with the
decisions of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union. We also support the Council’s request
for an investigation into the deadly events of 3 June.
We support the efforts of the Secretary-General’s
Envoy, the African Union Special Envoy and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to help
resolve the current crisis.
In short, a peaceful and orderly transition with
the objective of transferring political power to a
civil, democratic and representative power is the only
sustainable way out of the current crisis and pattern of
violence before it becomes uncontrollable.
The situation in Darfur cannot be isolated from
the situation of the rest of the Sudan. There is ample
evidence of that. First, the political process has been at a
standstill since last January. Secondly, ongoing human
rights violations are being committed by the Rapid
Support Forces in Darfur, including sexual violence.
Thirdly, it is difficult for the courts to operate in the
absence of clarity in Khartoum. Lastly, a cumbersome
system of approvals and authorizations hinders the
delivery of humanitarian aid.
We are especially concerned by the Transitional
Military Council’s decree indicating that all UNAMID
bases should be handed over only to the Rapid Support

19-175599/22

S/PV.8549

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Forces — the same Forces responsible for the violence
in Khartoum and which, according to some reports,
have set fire to some 62 villages in Jebel Marra since
October 2018. How can we even imagine handing
over UNAMID sites to the same people who created
the situation for which UNAMID was deployed in
2007? It is crucial for those sites to be handed over
only to civilian end-users, as required by the June 13
communiqué of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union.
Darfur remains a fragile region, where the root
causes of the conflict, including access to land and the
future of the displaced, have not been fully addressed.
The Security Council will need to continue to monitor
the situation closely and assess how the situation in
the rest of the country is affecting the UNAMID exit
process, particularly in the light of the mandate review
scheduled for this month. The current situation requires
us to be cautious about the timing of UNAMID’s
withdrawal, taking into account the situation on the
ground. Exit benchmarks should be streamlined and
clarified to guide the withdrawal.
Belgium calls on all the members of the Security
Council to set aside their differences and reach a
consensual vision and strategy for Darfur. The Council
must take its time to consider all the options. That is why
we must envisage a technical renewal of the mandate
for several months so that we can better understand
the implications of the developments on the ground
and give the region some time to get closer towards a
solution. The last thing that we want is for Darfur to
slide back into conflict after UNAMID exits.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the timely convening of this meeting and
the important briefings delivered by Mr. Jean Pierre
Lacroix and Mr. Andrew Gilmour.
The Government of Peru has strongly condemned
the recent acts of violence and the excessive use of force
by the Sudanese military forces against the civilian
population, which resulted in numerous casualties in
Khartoum, and conveys its full support for the decision
of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
to suspend the Sudan’s participation in all its activities
until a transitional civilian Government is established.
In that regard, we believe that it is crucial for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the Sudan to
be respected.
10/22

14/06/2019

While the latest reports of the Secretary-General
showed gradual improvements in safety and security
in Darfur and relative stability, today it is not possible
to continue with that same optimism. The current
uncertain political situation in the country has a definite
direct impact and poses new challenges for Darfur.
That is why a reassessment is needed of the timing and
the most appropriate strategy for the withdrawal of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), so that it takes place in a careful
and responsible manner and does not jeopardize the
gains that have been made.
With regard to the reconfiguration and downsizing
of UNAMID, it suffices to mention that the special
report (S/2019/445) indicates that human rights
violations and abuses continue to occur in areas from
which UNAMID has already withdrawn, such as Jebel
Moon, where an attack in January led to deaths and new
civilian displacements.
Also, as Mr. Gilmore mentioned, human rights
violations continue in Darfur, particularly in the Jebel
Marra area. The main victims of the frequent cases of
conflict-related sexual violence have been internally
displaced persons, especially women and girls. An
aggravating circumstance is that many of those attacks
are organized by Government forces and affiliated
forces, especially the Rapid Support Forces.
Faced with the difficult political situation in the
Sudan, we believe that it is essential to return to the
agreements reached and put a stop to the violence.
In that regard, we welcome Ethiopia’s mediation
efforts for the Transitional Military Council and the
opposition to resume negotiations on the creation of a
transitional authority.
We welcome UNAMID’s work and collaboration
with national and local authorities, the country team
and other partners aimed at facilitating mediation
mechanisms and seeking sustainable solutions to
the root causes of the conflict, such as access to land
and resources. We also condemn the looting that
occurred at the UNAMID West Darfur headquarters in
El Geneina on 14 May, and we reiterate the importance
of the mission being able to exercise its mandate
throughout Darfur, especially in the area of Jebel
Marra.
On the other hand, we welcome the work of the
State liaison functions in the UNAMID transition
process. We highlight their importance in maintaining
19-17559

14/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the progress achieved in the areas of protection, rule of
law, human rights and lasting solutions for internally
displaced persons and communities throughout Darfur.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our support for
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the United Nations system and UNAMID.
We encourage them to join efforts to help the people of
Sudan to shape their own future. It is equally important
that the countries of the region continue to support the
peace process in Darfur, avoiding the proliferation of
initiatives and deterring disruptive elements, with the
ultimate goal of achieving the sustainable peace and
stability in Darfur that we all desire.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Assistant
Secretary-General Gilmour for their detailed and
informative presentations.
Allow me now to share our thoughts with the
Council — first, on the situation in Sudan in general,
and secondly, on Darfur.
Poland strongly condemns latest use of violence
by the Sudanese security forces against demonstrators
in Khartoum, which led to deaths and injuries.
There is no justification for the use of force against
peaceful protesters. All violence against the Sudanese
people — including extrajudicial, arbitrary and
summary killings, beatings and sexual and genderbased violence, arrests and disappearances — must
stop.
We believe that all human rights violations and
abuses committed must be investigated in an independent
and transparent manner and that perpetrators should
be held accountable for their actions. It should be
emphasized that the Transitional Military Council is
currently the body accountable for ensuring security
and rule of law in the country.
Consensus that enables transfer of power to a
civilian-led authority remains a matter of priority. We
expect the Transitional Military Council to respect
the aspirations of Sudanese society and provide for
freedom of expression and assembly and freedom of the
media, civic space and access to the Internet, without
any threat or use of violence. We support the position of
the African Union in that regard.
When it comes to the situation in Darfur, we
note with regret that violations of human rights, in
particular sexual and gender-based violence, continue

S/PV. 8549

to occur across the region. We strongly condemn
the targeting — including by Government security
personnel and the Rapid Support Forces — of the civilian
population, especially those who are most vulnerable,
namely, women, children and internally displaced
persons (IDPs). We believe that the authorities should
spare no effort in holding the perpetrators accountable
and do their utmost to fight impunity in Darfur.
A lot remains to be done in addressing the root
causes of the conflict and instability, including
building effective rule-of-law institutions and creating
the conditions for millions of Darfuri IDPs to return to
their homes. The question of land ownership remains
one of most pressing issues in that regard.
We reiterate our position that there can be no other
solution to the conflict in Darfur than a political one.
We regret that the latest internal situation in Sudan has
led to a loss of momentum in the peace process, but we
believe it can be resumed in the near future.
At the same time, we follow with concern the
activities of the Darfuri rebel groups in neighbouring
countries. As Chair of both the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, and, together
with Germany, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
we intend to hold a joint meeting of the three Sanctions
Committees next week in order to provide the Security
Council with the space to discuss this issue in depth.
Let me conclude by addressing the issue of the
renewal of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Poland looks
forward to the discussions on the new resolution. We
are willing to engage in the negotiations, but while
doing so we will be closely following the developments
in Khartoum, which in our opinion have a direct effect
on Darfur and its future.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour for their
briefings.
In recent years, with the joint efforts of the Sudan,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and international partners, the
situation in Darfur has improved substantially. Since
the second half of last year, when UNAMID began

19-1755911/22

S/PV.8549

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to implement the transition plan through gradual
reconfiguration and drawdown, the situation in Darfur
has continued to be stable. That fully demonstrates that
the Sudanese Government has the capacity to assume
its responsibility to maintain peace and security on its
own. The international community should continue
to provide assistance to Darfur through bilateral and
multilateral channels so as to consolidate the results
achieved and to advance peace and reconstruction in
the region.
China would like to emphasize the following three
points.
First, we should always respect the leadership of
the Sudanese Government on the issue of Darfur. The
Sudanese Government bears the primary responsibility
for maintaining peace and stability in Darfur. When
helping solve the Darfur issue, the United Nations
and the international community should effectively
strengthen communication and coordination with the
Sudanese Government, earnestly heed their opinions
and suggestions and focus on supporting the Sudanese
Government in strengthening security and capacitybuilding.
Secondly, we should continue to promote the
peace process in Darfur. China hopes that all parties
concerned in Darfur will continue to exercise restraint
and call on the opposition parties and armed groups that
have not yet joined the political process to effectively
abandon the military solution, resolve disputes and
differences through dialogue, consultation and other
political means and work together to safeguard peace
and stability in Darfur.
Thirdly, we should continue to provide
humanitarian and economic assistance to support the
peacebuilding efforts of the Sudanese Government
in Darfur. The current focus is to help facilitate the
return and settlement of internally displaced persons
in Darfur. China welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations Development Programme, the Peacebuilding
Commission and others to provide the necessary
support for the construction and development of Darfur
China commends the contributions of UNAMID to
the maintenance of peace and stability in Darfur and
supports the extension of its mandate. China welcomes
the recent joint submission to the Security Council
by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission of the UNAMID strategic
assessment report (S/2019/445). The report indicates
12/22

14/06/2019

that the overall security situation in Darfur is stable
and suggests that, in accordance with resolution 2429
(2018), the drawdown of UNAMID should continue.
We hope that Council members will attach importance
to the recommendations in the report and, on the basis
of respecting the will of the Sudanese Government,
make proper arrangements for the future mandate of
UNAMID to make sure that the mission will complete
its withdrawal as planned, in 2020.
China has always supported the peace process
in Darfur. As one of the major troop-contributing
countries for UNAMID, over the years we have made
positive contributions to the maintenance of peace
and stability in Darfur. China is ready to work with
the rest of the international community to continue to
play a constructive role in realizing peace, stability and
development in Darfur.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix for his briefing on the state of affairs
in Darfur and on the main conclusions of the strategic
assessment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We also
listened carefully to Assistant Secretary-General
Andrew Gilmour’s report on the human rights situation
in the region.
We share the conclusions in the joint strategic
assessment of the Secretariat and the African Union
Commission regarding the fact that there is a noticeable
improvement in the security situation in Darfur. The
various clashes with the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid in Jebel Marra do not change that. We are also
seeing a degree of normalization on the humanitarian
front. The overall trend in the situation in the regions
that the Blue Helmets have already left has not changed.
We believe that all of those arguments confirm that
the Security Council was right in its decision to reduce
the military component of UNAMID with the aim of
fully drawing down the mission by the end of 2020.
In proposing a technical rollover for UNAMID, the
representatives of the United Kingdom and Germany
even referred to the African Union Peace and Security
Council’s communiqué, but for some reason quoted it
selectively. I would like to point out that in paragraph
10 of the communiqué, the Peace and Security Council
approves the strategic assessment and the mission’s
future drawdown. I see no reason why we should call
for any other course of action. I ask our colleagues
19-17559

14/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to follow the spirit and letter of Security Council
resolution 2429 (2018) and discuss the parameters for
the peacekeepers’ withdrawal. Nor can I ignore the
fact that the discussion of their proposal for a technical
rollover has only just begun at the expert level. We have
not yet been able to engage in support of their text. Why
should they fly in the face of Security Council practice
by announcing this in an open meeting and anticipating
the experts’ work? It does them no credit and makes our
work considerably harder. Moves like these display all
the signs of megaphone diplomacy, which we thought
we had all decided to do away with.
I would also like to focus on another aspect. The
ongoing discussions in the United Nations about
the Organization’s difficult financial situation are
constant. The Secretary-General is openly sounding
the alarm, calling for us to work together to deal with
it. The budget deficits for peacekeeping operations are
growing steadily. And what do we see? Despite all of
that, some of our colleagues are calling insistently for
putting the drawdown of an operation that costs more
than half a billion dollars on hold. As a comparison,
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo, whose closure our Western colleagues
have been calling so loudly for despite the continuing
tensions there, costs less than $40 million. What kind
of savings is that?
We are realists, of course. We understand that Darfur
is facing many complex challenges. There are questions
and problems that must be resolved. However, that is a
job for peacebuilding, not peacekeeping. UNAMID was
first deployed 12 years ago and has helped to deal with
the acute phase of the crisis. An analysis of its activities
will be extremely important for future peacekeeping
operations. But the time has come to concentrate
on the restoration and economic development of the
region. That should be the international community’s
priority now.
We are once again astonished to see a number
of our colleagues around this table using this agenda
item not to discuss the parameters for withdrawing a
peacekeeping operation but to voice their opinions of
the domestic political situation in the Sudan, despite the
fact that only a few days ago there was a clear appeal
for refraining from any external interference in the
agreed Security Council press statement (SC/13836) as
well as the African Union communiqué. It seems it is
just those sections of the communiqué that our Western
colleagues have decided to ignore.

S/PV. 8549

I would like to emphasize that we believe that
the resolution of the internal crisis in their country
is a matter for the Sudanese people themselves.
Outside pressure, ultimatums and open support for
one of the parties in the negotiations, let alone blatant
interference in a sovereign State’s internal affairs, are
absolutely unacceptable and will only exacerbate the
disagreements. However, we were pleased to see a
positive trend on the ground in the context of Ethiopia’s
mediation initiative. We should support African efforts
rather than telling the Sudanese people what to do
and how to do it when they are in a difficult situation.
Believe me, they will reach an agreement much more
quickly without lectures from outside.
In conclusion, I would like to ask Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix two questions. Besides decree 102 of
the Transitional Military Council, which he mentioned,
are there any other technical obstacles to UNAMID’s
drawdown? Also, in the Secretariat’s view, what is the
time frame needed for UNAMID’s withdrawal and
complete closure? I would be grateful for his answers.
Mr. Van Schalkwyk (South Africa): My delegation
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. We also thank the briefers for the
comprehensive briefings, which have highlighted
a number of key issues that still require our firm
commitment. I would like to focus on two key issues,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and the political situation in the
Sudan. However, at the outset I want to note that South
Africa deplores the loss of innocent lives that took
place in the past few days in Zalingei. We express our
condolences to the families of the deceased and wish
the injured a speedy recovery.
Turning to UNAMID, we would like to express our
appreciation to Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Joint Special
Representative and Head of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and the UNAMID
team for all their efforts in difficult conditions, which
have so far resulted in the drawdown of 4,000 troops.
We also welcome UNAMID’s continued work with
national and local authorities, as well as with the United
Nations country team and other partners, to facilitate
mediation and address the underlying issues of access
to land and resources. While noting the significant
progress that has been made in the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts in Darfur, we are concerned about
the security challenges that persist, as well as the human

19-1755913/22

S/PV.8549

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

rights violations highlighted in the special report of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General (S/2019/445). The violence against
civilians is particularly unacceptable. Furthermore,
women and children continue to be the most vulnerable
members of the population and the most affected
by sexual violence, which is still a weapon of war in
the conflict.
With regard to the proposed drawdown, we would
like to reiterate the decision of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union of 13 June. It is our view
that in line with the strategic assessment of UNAMID
of 1 June, and given the unfolding situation in the
Sudan, the drawdown and liquidation process should
be carried out in a responsible manner, and UNAMID
troops should be relocated to the remaining team sites
that have been identified as security hotspots until
such time as the situation is stabilized. It should be
systematic, taking into account the security conditions
on the ground and in the Sudan as a whole. It should also
ensure that no vacuum is created, which could hamper
the progress already made as well as undermining the
protection of civilians. We support UNAMID in making
continued efforts to address the security concerns of
the local communities and internally displaced persons,
particularly given the current volatile situation.
Perhaps it is time to ask some questions. Should
we stick to the original drawdown time frames? Should
we not reassess the situation and then recalibrate? The
situation has evolved. It is not the same in the centre
of the Sudan, and we cannot proceed as if nothing has
happened. Darfur is also part of the greater Sudan and is
implicated in that regard. There is too much contestation
of power and too much mistrust. An assessment of
the drawdown is urgently needed, and the Security
Council should reject the Transitional Military Council
decree on handing over its team sites to the Rapid
Support Forces. We should call on the Transitional
Military Council to rescind that decision immediately
and without conditions and to allow UNAMID to hand
over identified assets to civilian entities.
With regard to the attacks on UNAMID and United
Nations agencies and the looting of their property, we
want to reiterate our reminder to the Republic of the
Sudan of its primary responsibility to provide protection
to both the civilian population and United Nations
property, and we call on the Sudan to investigate and
bring to account the people who have been committing
those crimes.
14/22

14/06/2019

With regard to the political situation, too many
people have lost their lives in the political circumstances
that have created so much uncertainty. In that regard,
in line with the communiqué of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union (AU) of 13 June and the
3 June press statement by the three African members of
the Security Council, we strongly condemn and lament
the tragic and unjustified loss of life and remind the
transitional authorities in the Sudan of their obligation
to protect civilians and respect their fundamental rights.
We urge the Transitional Military Council to return
to the internal dialogue with the aim of responding
swiftly and effectively to the legitimate aspirations
of the Sudanese people, as well as to the framework
established by the African Union. We underline the
primacy of African-led initiatives in the quest for
a lasting solution to the crisis in the Sudan. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of Prime Minister Abiy
Ahmed of Ethiopia, Chair of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, to bring the parties back
to the negotiating table in an approach consistent with
that of the AU communiqué of 6 June. It is key that
the Sudanese chart their own path to peace, devoid of
interference, and that is also vital to ensuring that the
substantial progress in peacebuilding that has been
achieved in Darfur is not reversed. We also welcome all
other efforts being undertaken at a bilateral level.
South Africa furthermore stresses how important
it is that UNAMID continue to provide technical and
logistical assistance to the Sudan’s Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission in
disarming and demobilizing armed combatants. We
urge the Transitional Military Council, the Declaration
of Freedom and Change forces and the country’s
political parties to engage in constructive dialogue with
a view to restoring peace and stability in the Sudan.
Given the volatile state of the region, that is also vital
to regional stability. The Sudan remains a key strategic
country on the continent, and it is bordered by seven
countries — Egypt, South Sudan, the Central African
Republic, Chad, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Libya. Instability
in the Sudan will have a negative effect in the region.
In conclusion, the socioeconomic challenges in
the Sudan are part of the root causes of the broader
challenges it faces. We should therefore focus our
support on economic development and home in on
financial mobilization to support the country in its
economic recovery. We commend the countries that
have contributed in that regard.
19-17559

14/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would first like to
join others in expressing my appreciation to UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Gilmour for their comprehensive briefings. We
also thank the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for their special
report on the strategic assessment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) (S/2019/445).
We have all said time and again that the overall
security situation in Darfur has remained relatively
stable. To borrow the language of paragraph 40 of the
special report, there has been “no strategic reversal
of the positive trajectory with regard to Darfur since
the previous mandate renewal”. Indeed, the improving
security situation has enabled the start of the phased
withdrawal of UNAMID, including the handover of
two UNAMID sector headquarters in the past month.
My delegation is encouraged by the continued decline
in intercommunal conflicts made possible by the active
engagement of State and local authorities, supported by
UNAMID. However, we note with concern the recent
loss of innocent lives in the village of Deleij in Central
Darfur, and commend UNAMID’s swift response in
dispatching an assessment mission. Today I would like
to make three important points.
First, we must ensure UNAMID’s responsible
drawdown and exit. I would like to stress the word
“responsible”. We concur that UNAMID’s exit should
not create a vacuum and expose the country’s longsuffering civilians to renewed risks. We regret that some
of the team sites that have been handed over are not
being used for civilian purposes, have been abandoned
or are becoming unusable. We also deplore the looting
of UNAMID sector headquarters in El Geneina during
its handover to the Sudanese authorities last month,
which is unacceptable and put United Nations personnel
at grave risk. The Sudanese authorities and UNAMID
must take measures to strengthen the protection of
UNAMID premises and personnel so as to prevent
similar incidents from occurring. We are nevertheless
pleased to learn that UNAMID’s withdrawal from
areas previously under its control has had only
minimal adverse effects. The Council’s deliberations
on UNAMID’s further drawdown should be guided
by the options presented in the special report and take
into consideration the communiqué of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union (AU) of 13 June.

S/PV. 8549

Secondly, addressing the persistent challenges in
Darfur is a huge undertaking and requires sustained
international engagement. The support of UNAMID, the
AU High-Level Implementation Panel and the Special
Envoy for the Horn of Africa is crucial to advancing
the Darfur peace process. All the parties on the ground
should end hostilities and direct their energies to the
negotiating table.
We note with concern that human rights
violations continue to occur across Darfur and tend
to be underreported. UNAMID should continue its
instrumental role in supporting capacity-building
and strengthening rule-of-law institutions. Greater
efforts must be made to ensure that the Government
is able to bear its primary responsibility to protect
civilians. Promoting socioeconomic development is
equally critical to prevent a relapse into conflict in
Darfur. Durable solutions are desperately needed for
the 1.8 million internally displaced persons in Darfur,
and the humanitarian actors must be given the space
to deliver assistance to those in need. Indonesia would
like to highlight the best practices of State liaison
functions in enabling UNAMID, the United Nations
country team and the Sudanese authorities to work
together on peacebuilding in Darfur. Support for State
liaison functions should be among the main focuses of
UNAMID’s mandate in its final year.
That brings me to my third point. My delegation
continues to observe the developments in the Sudan and
their potential impact on the security situation in Darfur
very carefully. Indonesia reaffirms its principle of
non-interference and respect for Sudanese sovereignty.
We underline the primacy of African-led initiatives
in the quest for a lasting solution in the Sudan. My
delegation would also like to commend the role of the
Prime Minister of Ethiopia in assisting the Sudanese
stakeholders in resuming their talks. In the meantime,
we urge all stakeholders to exercise calm and maximum
restraint, and act in a way that supports a climate of
peace in the country and preserves the gains made so
far in Darfur.
We are now at a critical phase of UNAMID’s
drawdown. Indonesia is proud to have been a troop- and
police-contributing country to UNAMID since 2008.
There is no doubt that its work has achieved a great deal
in Darfur. Some ongoing challenges remain, but there
is a limit to what the mission can do. For Indonesia, the
priorities now are to build on the work of UNAMID and
support the transition to peacebuilding. Indonesia was

19-1755915/22

S/PV.8549

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a member of the Security Council during UNAMID’s
creation in 2007, and in 2019 is proud to be a part of the
Council that will hopefully bring UNAMID’s mandate
to an end. I also hope that the mission will be a success
story in the annals of the Council in bringing peace to
the people of the Sudan.
I would like to add that no military or police
personnel anywhere in the world want to be in a
conflict, but if need be they will put their lives in
harm’s way for the cause of peace. As a diplomat, I for
one would be glad to bring our women and men home
safely from a mission that has done well. We therefore
hope once again that peace will continue in Darfur. I
would like to conclude by reaffirming our support for
our Sudanese brothers and sisters in taking ownership
of their destiny and in their quest to find a peaceful
solution for their country.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Andrew Gilmour for their pertinent briefings.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is extremely concerned about development of
events in the Sudan — a historic land to which we can
wish only peace and prosperity. We reiterate our strong
national belief in the position of the African Union with
respect to unconstitutional changes of Government. We
deplore the acts of violence that serve only to undermine
peace in the country, thereby endangering the lives of
the Sudanese people.
We commend the work that the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) has conducted since its deployment to date,
in an environment that bears no resemblance to the
one that existed when its mandate was established. In
particular, we are especially satisfied with the weaponscollection programme. The full implementation of
that programme is essential not only for maintaining
the current peace in Darfur but also with a view to
establishing definitive and lasting peace, in particular
in the zone of Jebel Marra, where pacification is crucial.
We encourage UNAMID to extend the weaponscollection campaign to rural areas.
Similarly, we deplore the slow progress of the
political process underway on the basis of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. We should encourage
greater support for the political process led by the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel.
16/22

14/06/2019

Although today’s meeting concerns Darfur, we
cannot ignore the events taking place in Khartoum.
My country welcomes and applauds the firm stance
taken by the African Union and its institutions, with
the ultimate aim of ensuring that the will of the noble
Sudanese people is carried out. My country, together
with its African brothers and colleagues, South Africa
and Côte d’Ivoire, already issued a joint communiqué
last week in which we made our position quite clear. We
will reiterate it here today.
Equatorial Guinea appeals to the sense of historic
responsibility of the Transitional Military Council
to rise to the occasion by facilitating a democratic
transition led by civilians. It is imperative not only
to put an end to the violence but also to ensure the
protection of civilians and their fundamental rights.
The disproportionate use of force, in particular when
it leads to indiscriminate deaths, is unacceptable
and cannot go unpunished. We call on the Sudanese
authorities to return to the road map outlined by the
African Union. Any course of action taken must fit
within the parameters set by that regional organization.
In that regard, we applaud the rapprochement between
the parties in conflict that has taken place in recent
days and hope that it will continue in the same vein.
In the light of the renewal of the UNAMID
mandate, which is due to expire shortly, my delegation,
like others, advocates treading cautiously. It would
be counterproductive to reconfigure the mission or
continue with plans previously made. Therefore we
support a technical extension of the mandate for a
few months until the dust settles, which we hope will
be soon.
We would like to conclude by demanding that the
international community refrain from interfering in the
political process taking place in the Sudan. Any action
by third parties, including this Council, must be in line
with the interests of the Sudanese people and within the
parameters set by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First, I would like to thank
Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Gilmour for their briefings.
The Dominican Republic fully supports the press
communication of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Moussa Faki on 3 June, given
the recent developments and tense situation in the
country. The mandate of the African Union-United
19-17559

14/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
indicates that its priority is its responsibility to protect
the civilian population. Based on that premise and
in line with the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/445), which outlines the moderate
impact of incidents in Khartoum on the security
situation in Darfur, it is understood that the mandate is
being implemented.
Regrettably, Darfur remains an area plagued by
injustice, human rights violations, primarily against
children and women, unresolved intercommunal
conflicts, with more than 2 million internally displaced
persons and an area where humanitarian and information
access is routinely restricted. In addition, there are
reports that Government forces and associated militias
have destroyed and burned villages in Jebel Marra.
Unlawful killings, sexual violence, systematic looting
and forced displacement have been documented.
Against that reality, we are on the cusp of
UNAMID’s mandate renewal, and there are many and
frequent questions regarding the future of the mission
and when and how it will exit. It is clear that for
some that time has come. But for others like Adam, a
54-year-old displaced person in Sortony, the presence
of UNAMID is a threat to the security forces who
wish to mistreat the people and commit atrocities. In
some areas of Darfur, such as Jebel Marra, UNAMID’s
protection is urgent and essential.
That urgency is compounded by recent events in
Khartoum, where the Rapid Support Forces attacked
protest sites and opened fire on protesters, killing
more than 100 people. We are concerned that that same
militia, responsible for the atrocities committed in
Darfur, is part of the Transitional Military Council.
The Sudan is in the midst of a political crisis that
requires that we proceed with caution and not rule
out the possibility of an increase in violence against
civilians in Darfur. A clear sign that the architects of
the violence in the Darfur conflict still retain political
and military power is the issuance by the Transitional
Military Council of decree 102, instructing the handover
of UNAMID team sites to the Rapid Support Forces, in
violation of Khartoum’s commitments, including the
status of forces agreement between UNAMID and the
Government of the Sudan. In that regard, we welcome
the decision by the United Nations to suspend the
handover of those facilities, which should be made to

S/PV. 8549

the appropriate institutions for peaceful purposes and
for the benefit of the civilian population.
Twelve years after the deployment of UNAMID,
the conflict in Darfur seems to be continuing. Despite
the relative calm achieved, recent events in Khartoum
have accented the political and logistical challenges on
the ground. The death toll, human rights violations,
the displacement of people, food insecurity and
the effects of climate change continue to require a
strong international response that fulfils the mandate
to protect the civilian population, and an effective
commitment by the Government to the well-being of
the Sudanese people.
In that regard, we are concerned, on the one hand,
about the devastating effects of climate change and
environmental degradation as a multiplier of conflict.
In the case of the Sudan, if the drought trends continue,
the country will face significant food shortages and
large-scale migration due to the loss of livelihoods,
which would aggravate the already difficult situation
facing the Sudanese people.
Moreover, we are alarmed by the growing trend of
conflict-related sexual violence, many cases of which
go unreported. Of the reported cases, 80 per cent are
rapes, of which 30 per cent are carried out by members of
the Rapid Support Forces militia and the armed forces.
It is imperative to ensure the monitoring, analysis
and reporting of these cases, even after UNAMID’s
departure from Darfur, with the deployment of women’s
protection advisers on the ground.
We need to rethink the exit strategy and focus on
preserving the mission’s capacities to protect civilians
and monitor human rights abuses and then, after a
reasonable time, resume talks on a gradual withdrawal
of UNAMID.
The recent events in Khartoum open up a range
of opportunities for transparent, political, civilianled negotiations through open dialogue, with the
participation of all actors, for the restoration of order
and peace for the Sudanese people. Above all, those
negotiations must facilitate a process of accountability
that brings to justice those responsible for acts of
violence against the civilian population and that enables
an independent investigation of such acts.
If a peaceful Sudan is to resurface, those responsible
for atrocities must be brought to justice. The dignity,
respect and democratic aspirations of the Sudanese

19-1755917/22

S/PV.8549

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

people must be ensured, but above all, Sudanese
women must be made whole and their participation in
decision-making must be ensured.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour for their briefings
on the latest developments in Darfur and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).
Since our last briefing in April (see S/PV.8513),
the United States has become increasingly concerned
that political uncertainty in Khartoum is adversely
impacting the situation in Darfur. Stability there is
intertwined with the rest of the country and the region,
as other speakers have noted. The gravity of several
recent incidents in Darfur is especially troubling.
These incidents call into question the commitment of
the Transitional Military Council to respecting the
rights of Darfuris and to acting in good faith to find
durable peace. In that regard, reports of an attack on
civilians in Deleij in Central Darfur on 9 June are
deeply disturbing. That attack resulted in a number of
casualties, and we call on UNAMID to investigate.
Beyond Darfur, the Sudan’s security forces’ reported
use of violence last week to break up a peaceful sit-in
is also alarming. The incident outside of the Sudanese
armed forces headquarters in Khartoum killed more
than 100 unarmed protesters and wounded hundreds
more. Reports that the forces of the Transitional
Military Council have directed such violence against
civilians, obstructed medical care, blocked access to
the internet and restricted media and civil society raise
serious questions about the its willingness to negotiate
a transition to a civilian-led Government.
The United States strongly condemns the killing,
beating and sexual assault of protesters and other
civilians. We call on the Transitional Military Council
to stop these attacks and create a more conducive
environment for renewed political negotiations with the
Declaration of Freedom and Change Forces coalition.
Continued international support for UNAMID must be
considered in the context of good faith efforts by the
Transitional Military Council to responsibly maintain
basic services for the people of the Sudan and its
progress in facilitating a sustainable political solution
for the country.
The Transitional Military Council can take steps
to show that it is ready to negotiate. Allowing for an
18/22

14/06/2019

independent investigation of the events in Khartoum
and holding accountable those responsible for the
recent violence would be a welcomed first step. Beyond
this, allowing all political voices to freely express their
opinions and withdrawing the Rapid Support Forces
and other militia from Khartoum would demonstrate
further good will.
The United States supports the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council’s 6 June communiqué, the
AU’s decision to suspend the Sudan’s membership and
its strong message on the need to transition quickly to
a civilian-led Government. We also welcome the recent
diplomatic initiative by the Ethiopian Prime Minister,
undertaken along with the AU and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, to engage the Transitional
Military Council and the opposition. Those efforts will
help encourage a peaceful resolution of the crisis.
We urge all parties to continue the process towards
a civilian transition in an atmosphere of calm, and we
are ready to work with our partners in the Council and
the region to support these efforts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.
At the outset, I thank Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Gilmour
for their briefings. In my statement, I will focus on three
basic issues: the situation in Darfur, the withdrawal of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the upcoming mandate renewal.
On the situation in Darfur, the joint strategic
assessment report (S/2019/445) reaffirms the continued
security stability in Darfur while excluding the
possibility that the UNAMID exit strategy would
affect the situation there. That makes us in the Council
responsible for preserving the Mission’s gains and
encouraging the steps taken by the Sudan to extend its
authority throughout Darfur.
As to the drivers of the conflict, these could be
addressed through means other than peacekeeping.
Issues related to land and its ownership, climate
change and the safe, voluntary and dignified return
of internally displaced persons should be the core of
post-conflict peacebuilding. Peacekeeping is no longer
the optimal way, as it was in the past, to address the
situation in Darfur. Accordingly, we call on UNAMID
to maintain the current course, as set out in resolution
2429 (2018) and in the Council’s 2018 presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/19.
19-17559

14/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

On the withdrawal of UNAMID, we commend the
Mission’s innovative use of State liaison functions,
which contribute to its smooth and gradual exit through
enhanced cooperation with the United Nations country
team in the area of peacebuilding.
The Mission’s report of two months ago
(S/2019/305) and the most recent report under
discussion today contain calls for streamlining the
benchmarks and indicators, a majority of which have
been achieved in Darfur. Since the Doha Agreement
for Peace in Darfur remains the reference point for a
political solution in Darfur, and since most legislative
frameworks have been established, we believe that the
priority political solution in Darfur is being applied as
required. However, its implementation could have been
better managed in the light of the reluctance of some
parties to join the political process. The Mission and its
exit strategy cannot remain hostage to the willingness
of those parties to cooperate. The Government of the
Sudan has cooperated in this regard, supported by
UNAMID through the Joint Special Representative and
thanks to the laudable efforts of the State of Qatar and
the Federal Republic of Germany.
On the upcoming mandate renewal, we will work
over the next two weeks on a new mandate for the
Mission. We hope that it will be succinct and clear in
laying out the exit options and specifying the priority
areas, such as capacity-building, promoting the rule of
law, strengthening national ownership and enhancing
cooperation and coordination with the United Nations
country team in Darfur. We thank the brotherly Sudan
for its cooperation and look forward to more cooperation
during the drawdown, withdrawal and liquidation
phases of the Mission in a smooth and safe manner.
We are closely following developments in the
Sudan. We call on all parties to exercise calm and
restraint, denounce violence and pursue dialogue in
order to ensure the success of the peaceful transitional
process. We hope that the measures taken to address
those developments will help achieve security and
stability in the Sudan in a manner that fulfils the hopes
and aspirations of its brotherly people. We call on all
Sudanese to place the interests of the nation first, above
all other considerations, for the unity, sovereignty,
stability and territorial integrity of the Sudan.
We stress once again that what is happening
in the Sudan is an internal affair that does not merit
interference, in accordance with the Charter of the

S/PV. 8549

United Nations. We call anew for compliance with
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council on the
Sudan and for the discussion to be restricted to the
subject matter on our agenda, including UNAMID
today. Current developments should not be used to
change courses that have been agreed by the Council in
previous resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to tell you, Mr. President, how happy
we are to see your brotherly country preside over the
Security Council for this month. I also would like
to convey our thanks to Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour for
their briefings.
I further thank the strategic assessment team for its
efforts. The team visited Darfur to assess the situation
on the ground and has presented a highly professional
report (S/2019/445). We have read the report on the
strategic assessment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
which confirms that there is an ongoing improvement
of the security situation in all Darfur states, which
enjoyed security and stability over the past period,
while looking forward to the new era that began in the
Sudan on 11 April.
The strategic assessment team notes in the report
before the Council that the current situation in Darfur
requires a transition from peacekeeping to a new
approach based on economic recovery, development and
stability. We highlight the pivotal role that the United
Nations can play, along with all its institutions and
agencies, including the United Nations country team in
Khartoum, to address the remaining manifestations of
the conflict, which UNAMID is definitely unable to do
with its current components and capacities.
During the past period, there was a focus in
all Darfur states on boosting security and stability
issues through the weapons collection campaign,
strengthening the authority and control of the State to
guarantee the voluntary return of internally displaced
persons and working to ensure the success of the
agricultural season, which we hope will contribute to
improving the security situation and living conditions.

19-1755919/22

S/PV.8549

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I would like to emphasize that the Sudan looks
forward to continued cooperation with the United
Nations and the members of the Security Council
to achieve and implement the exit of UNAMID, in
accordance with the recommendations outlined in the
strategic assessment report. This report was jointly
adopted by the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union yesterday and by the Council in resolution 2429
(2018). The content of the resolution is in line with the
report before us with respect to the specified stages of
UNAMID’s withdrawal from Darfur.
It has been reaffirmed that the Sudan is fully
committed to facilitating the work of UNAMID in
Darfur until its withdrawal. In that regard, allow me to
highlight the following points.
First, the Sudan is an independent State with
full sovereignty over its territories. That is a right
guaranteed by the Charter of the United Nations. The
Charter guarantees the Sudan the right to benefit from
the resources available within its borders, in line with
the general interests of the Sudanese people.
Secondly, the Sudan is committed to all the
agreements it has signed with the United Nations
and UNAMID concerning the use and handover of
UNAMID sites to the Sudanese Government, pursuant
to a memorandum of understanding agreed and signed
as usual by both sides, the Sudanese Government and
UNAMID.
Thirdly, I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to a decision taken by the Transitional Military Council
yesterday to withdraw all armed forces and other
security forces from the sites that the Government of
the Sudan has received from UNAMID and to suspend
the implementation of decree 102, issued in May. I
repeat: The Transitional Military Council has decided
to withdraw its armed forces and other security forces
from the sites received by the Sudanese Government
from UNAMID and to suspend the implementation of
decree 102, issued in May, requesting the handover of
the sites to the Rapid Support Forces. We will provide
the Council with a copy of the text later.
Based on the aforementioned information and
the outcome of the strategic assessment report, it
is necessary to proceed with the implementation of
the proposals contained in the team’s report before
the Council, as adopted by the Secretariat. As those
present know, the deadline suggested and asserted in
20/22

14/06/2019

the report for UNAMID’s drawdown is June 2020 and
its liquidation in December of the same year.
I would like to reaffirm that the categorical position
of the Sudanese Government is to move forward with
the exit of UNAMID according to that time frame,
and we categorically reject any attempt to postpone or
cancel the exit of UNAMID. We reject the option of
UNAMID troops remaining in Darfur, given that there
is no need, justification or reason for their presence
there, in line with the conclusions of a previous
report, issued a year or two ago, on the importance of
withdrawing peacekeeping forces from Darfur in order
to allow for the achievement of development, stability
and investment there. The Council must continue to
look at the situation with an open mind and evaluate
the implications of any attempt to hamper or postpone
the drawdown according to the time frame set out in the
report of the strategic assessment team, which visited
Darfur and saw the situation on the ground.
As I have said before, the position in favour of
proceeding with the withdrawal of UNAMID is in line
with the nature of the situation in Darfur, which requires
a new course of moving forward towards normalizing
life and sustaining peace there, especially following the
great political change. Some Council members said that
the political process is not moving forward. However,
the political transformation that started on 11 April has
paved the way for the participation of armed movements
in the political process. They had refused to participate,
but now they can freely participate in building and
shaping the future of the Sudan. They have the full
right to do so and to be present in the political arena.
I would like to draw the attention of everybody in
general, and the Security Council in particular, to the
importance of taking advantage of this opportunity
before us in the Sudan. Darfur has not been affected
by the political developments in Khartoum. We need
to exploit this opportunity to achieve a comprehensive
peace that reflects the success of UNAMID in Darfur,
as well as its role, which the Council, the African Union
and the Sudanese Government have fully supported.
That would meet the aspirations of our people to sustain
peace and security in Darfur. UNAMID’s exit would
mean that the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union to keep and maintain peace in
Africa was a success. As the three African countries
represented here in the Council will agree, the success
of UNANID’s exit strategy would affirm a principle
that we hold dear in Africa: the principle of African
19-17559

14/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

solutions to African problems. We must support and
protect this principle within the Council.
The Sudan welcomes the extensive efforts
undertaken to complete the peace process and we again
welcome the dawn of peace and peacebuilding in Darfur.
This means development, which will in turn lead to the
eradication of all manifestations of the conflict. My
country’s delegation thanks UNAMID for its efforts
across various fields and the peacekeepers who have
given their lives for security and peace in Darfur. We,
the entire Sudanese people, pay tribute to them and
acknowledge their sacrifices over the years. We also
thank all UNAMID troop- and police-contributing
countries. We reaffirm the Sudan’s readiness to
cooperate with all regional and international partners
until the last UNAMID component exits the territories
of my country.
Allow me to add a few observations that I did
not originally plan to make. Some members of the
Council, however, have discussed the Sudan’s internal
political affairs and therefore I am obliged to make
some clarifications. I hope Council members will
listen to me with open minds and hearts. It appears that
certain members of the Council continue to think with
the historical mindset that my country and Africa in
general have been liberated from for decades. They are
wrong if they believe that they can use this forum and
this agenda item of the Security Council to discuss an
issue that has nothing to do with the matter at hand. The
procedures of the Security Council reject this, as does
the Charter of the United Nations, which specifies first
and foremost when the Security Council can and cannot
interfere in the internal affairs of a country.
I would like to clearly note that the events that have
been taking place in the Sudan since December 2018
remain, to this very day, an internal affair that neither
the Council nor any of its members has any mandate
or right to discuss. As the Council is well aware, this
is pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations and I
do not need to explain that the mandate of the Security
Council is limited to the Darfur states. I recall and
emphasize that this meeting, pursuant to the Council’s
agenda, should focus only on the situation in Darfur in
relation to the UNAMID strategic assessment report.
Allow me also to mention the efforts of the
African Union, the Prime Minister of Ethiopia and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
in mediating and finding common ground between the

S/PV. 8549

Sudanese political parties and their different positions.
This mediation has led to rapprochement that we hope
will lead to a final agreement in the coming days so
that we can achieve, in the near future, a democratic,
civil State that will continue to contribute to building
sustainable peace in Africa and the world. Therefore,
I hope that the Council will not interfere in the efforts
of the African Union and IGAD, as that would have
a negative impact on the ability of the Sudanese
political components to reach an agreement as swiftly
as possible.
Regarding the tragic and regrettable events that
took place on 3 June, we pray for the victims and hope
that those who are injured will make a swift recovery.
However, discussions of these events are inaccurate and
the statistics that have been cited are false. Therefore,
allow me to announce that the Transitional Military
Council has established a military commission to
investigate these events, the findings of which will
be announced tomorrow, Saturday, 15 June. The
Prosecutor General of the Sudan has established a
judicial committee to investigate these events and to
bring the perpetrators to account. They will be justly
prosecuted.
This demonstrates the resolve of the Sudanese
authorities to fight impunity. We are waiting for these
investigations to be completed and their findings to
be announced. Therefore, I hope that members of the
Security Council will not jump to conclusions and
instead wait until the Sudanese authorities — which have
the competence, the capability and the determination to
carry out this task — finalize their investigation and
hold the perpetrators accountable.
I hope that the Council will not interfere in the
political internal affairs of the Sudan. Its members
can rest assured that the noble Sudanese people, with
our deep-rooted civilization and love for our country,
can achieve the objectives of our great revolution. The
Sudanese people can build a promising future in the
service of humankind.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Lacroix to respond to the comments and
questions raised.
Mr. Lacroix: I will be very brief. The representative
of the Russian Federation asked a question regarding
technical issues that could have an impact on the
drawdown process. So far, UNAMID has been able to
carry out the drawdown as decided by resolution 2429

19-1755921/22

S/PV.8549

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

(2018). A number of technical issues must be resolved,
of course, but we are familiar with them and they have
not prevented the drawdown process from taking place.
At the same time, we have had to deal with logistical
constraints and sometimes lengthy procedures,
but those are things that we have been handling in
cooperation with our Sudanese interlocutors.
Based on that, the time frame within which we are
usually able to redeploy our units out of the country
is between six and nine months, more or less. That
includes moving the contingents out of their camps
and regrouping their equipment to El Fasher before
eventually bringing them to Port Sudan and making sure
that the necessary clearances are forthcoming. As I said,
none of that has ever been completely easy, but we have
been able to handle it so far. Of course, the interaction

22/22

14/06/2019

with the Sudanese authorities is very important in that
context, and the fluid situation in Khartoum has had
some impact on that, as I mentioned in my statement.
Whatever potential impact that fluid situation may have
on the overall security situation, not just in Darfur but
in the rest of the country, may also potentially have an
impact on the proceedings that I have briefly described.
That is essentially what I would like to say in response
to my Russian colleague’s question.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Lacroix for his clarifications.

Arabic):

I

thank

There are no names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal consultations
to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

19-17559
