A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/217
21 April 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 112
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/53/521/Add.2)]
53/217. Procurement-related arbitration
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the review of
procurement-related arbitration cases,1
1. Expresses deep concern about the increase of pending procurement-related arbitration claims
instituted against the United Nations, which total 56 million United States dollars as at 19 March 1999;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to it, for consideration at an early stage during its fiftyfourth session, a comprehensive report, taking into account the recommendations of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services and the views expressed by Member States on the issue of arbitration, which should
cover, inter alia:
(a) The reasons for arbitration cases;
(b) The roles and mandates of various Secretariat structures and negotiating teams in arbitration and
settlement processes;
(c) The sources of funding for arbitration awards and settlement payments;

1

See A/53/843.

99-77197

A/RES/53/217
Page 2

(d) The selection of outside legal counsels and provisions to preclude conflict of interest;
(e) Disciplinary action taken against staff members responsible for wrongdoing that resulted in
arbitration;
(f)

Pending arbitration cases;

(g) Measures taken or proposed to prevent or reduce contract disputes which might lead to
arbitration in the future;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, without prejudice to the obligations of the United Nations
under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law,2 to keep
Member States duly informed of all arbitration and settlement cases, inter alia, by clearly identifying such
cases as separate items in corresponding financial performance reports and indicating corrective and
disciplinary measures taken in this regard.
97th plenary meeting
7 April 1999

2

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.V.6.
/...
