S/2019/884

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 November 2019
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 2461 (2019) and paragraph 33 of Council resolution 2472 (2019) and
provides updates on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the
mandates of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers major
developments in Somalia during the period from 5 August to 4 November 2019 and
specific measures related to UNSOS during the period 1 May to 31 October 2019.

II. Political, security and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
The Federal Government of Somalia hosted the Somalia Partnership Forum in
Mogadishu on 1 and 2 October. The Forum was chaired by the Prime Minister, Hassan
Ali Khayre, and the Deputy Prime Minister, Mahdi Mohamed Guled, with the
participation of the presidents of the federal member states Hirshabelle, South-West
State and Galmudug, the Governor of Banaadir and representatives from 42 countries
and international organizations. In the communiqué adopted at the conclusion of the
Forum, international partners recognized the achievements of Somalia and the
significant progress in implementing reforms, while noting that strengthened political
cooperation between the Federal Government and some federal member states would
have accelerated progress. The leaders of Somalia agreed that political cooperation
was critical for further progress and would require the strong personal commitment
of the leaders of all the federal member states and of the Federal Government.
Participants endorsed the Mutual Accountability Frame work, defining specific
priority commitments for the Federal Government and its partners before December
2020 on inclusive politics, security and justice, economic recovery and social
development. They included a recommitment to hold elections in late 2020 or early
2021, the adoption of the electoral bill into law by December 2019 and the completion
of the constitutional review by June 2020.
3.
While the Federal Government maintained cooperative relations with
Hirshabelle, South-West State, Galmudug and the Banaadir Regional Administration,
there was little progress in restoring political relations with the leader s of Jubbaland
and Puntland, who did not participate in the Somalia Partnership Forum. The absence

19-19467 (E)

181119

*1919467*

S/2019/884

of a functioning forum of federal and state leaders for political dialogue and decisionmaking continued to impede progress on national priorities.
4.
The President, Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed “Farmajo”, signed the
anti-corruption commission bill into law on 21 September, a key benchmark in the
Federal Government’s roadmap on inclusive politics. On 9 October, Mr. Farmajo
opened the sixth session of the Federal Parliament after a two -month recess. Prior to
the opening, on 1 October, the Speakers of the House of the People and the Upper
House agreed to improve cooperation between the two bodies. Meanwhile, opposition
figures in Mogadishu and other parts of the country, including former presidents,
raised concerns over the lack of preparation for the upcoming elections. They claimed
that the situation was preventing them from organizing their parties effectively, and
denounced the alleged unwillingness of the Federal Government to allow political
space for opposition parties to operate.
5.
The Jubbaland Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission proceede d to
hold the state presidential election in Kismaayo on 22 August. In a disputed process,
Ahmed Mohamed Islam “Madobe” was re-elected, receiving 56 of the 74 votes cast.
Meanwhile, opposition presidential aspirants Abdirashid Mohamed Hidig and
Abdinasir Seraar separately declared themselves presidents through parallel
processes on 22 and 23 August. The Federal Government rejected Madobe ’s
re-election and called for a fresh process, while the administrations of Puntland and
Galmudug and many opposition political parties, as well as the Government of Kenya,
recognized Mr. Madobe’s victory. On 29 August, the Federal Government banned
direct international flights to Kismaayo and, on 22 September, ordered all flights to
the city to seek authorization 24 hours in advance. On 12 October in Kismaayo,
Mr. Madobe was inaugurated as Jubbaland president in a ceremony attended by
former federal and state presidents, traditional elders, the Puntland President, Said
Abdullahi Mohamed Deni, and a Kenyan parliamentary delega tion, among others.
The following day, the two opposition “presidents” held a joint inauguration
ceremony in Kismaayo. Despite efforts by my Special Representative for Somalia,
James Swan, and other international partners to urge compromise, dialogue betwe en
the Federal Government and Mr. Madobe had not resumed as of the end of the
reporting period.
6.
In Galmudug, following negotiations between the Federal Government and Ahl
al-Sunna wal-Jama’a (ASWJ), Mr. Khayre launched a reconciliation conference in
Dhuusamarreeb on 5 September that brought together over 720 delegates representing
11 clans across the state. Concluding on 16 September, the conference reached
consensus on modalities for the establishment of an inclusive administration. On
8 October, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation announced
the formation of a 13-member technical committee responsible for implementing the
procedures associated with the selection of assembly members. However, on
22 October, the Chief Minister of Galmudug, Mohamed Ali Hassan, appointed a
separate 11-member committee, citing alleged violation of previous agreements by
the Federal Government.
7.
From 7 to 14 September, Mr. Khayre and the President of South-West State,
Abdiaziz Hassan Mohamed “Laftagaren” visited Baidoa, Bay region, Xuddur, Bakool
region, and Marka, Shabelle Hoose, to engage local administrations and communities
on security, socioeconomic challenges and collaboration between the Federal
Government and state authorities, in a bid to promote reconciliation and dialogue. On
5 and 6 October, in Baidoa, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and
Reconciliation facilitated a statewide social reconciliation conference, bringing
together the traditional elders of various communities.

2/17

19-19467

S/2019/884

8.
On 17 August, Mr. Deni appointed nine members, including two women, to the
Transitional Puntland Electoral Commission, in accordance with the state
constitution, to conduct local district elections. The Puntland Investment Forum took
place from 15 to 17 September, with hundreds of participants from local and foreign
businesses, representatives of the Federal Government, diplomats and intellectuals.
Investments worth more than $300 million were announced. Participants stressed the
need for an investment law for Puntland to facilitate and protect international
investments.
9.
In “Somaliland”, a motion to amend the electoral law and to increase the
membership of the Somaliland National Electoral Commission from seven to nine
members failed, following which the President, Muse Bihi Abdi, convinced
opposition parties to take the parliamentary election process forward with seven
members. On 6 October, after negotiations with clan elders, Mr. Abdi pardoned all
militia members under Colonel Saciid Cawil Caare who had deserted from the
“Somaliland” army in May 2018.
10. On 29 August, in Mogadishu, Omar Mohamud Mohamed “Filish” was
inaugurated as the Governor of the Banaadir Regional Administration and Mayor of
Mogadishu, following his appointment by Mr. Farmajo o n 22 August.
11. The International Court of Justice postponed the hearing on the maritime border
dispute between Kenya and Somalia, first from 9 September to 4 November 2019,
and then to 8 June 2020, in response to requests from the Government of Kenya.

B.

Security developments
12. The security situation remained volatile during the reporting period. A total of
109 incidents of armed conflict and 132 incidents of terrorism were recorded in
August and September, compared with 142 incidents of armed conflict and
132 incidents of terrorism during the same period in 2018. Al -Shabaab continued to
be the main source of violence, through attacks on government facilities and
personnel, security forces, international partners’ presences and public places such as
hotels and restaurants.
13. A higher number of airstrikes against Al-Shabaab targets in 2019, particularly
in Shabelle Hoose and Juba Hoose, have resulted in the dispersement of Al -Shabaab
elements from more remote areas into urban centres.
14. Somali-led offensive operations in Shabelle Hoose have resulted in the retaking
of towns previously held by Al-Shabaab. However, Al-Shabaab has shifted its
presence to other locations while maintaining a significant capacity to attack
recovered areas. Although Mogadishu remained the group’s operational focus,
Al-Shabaab continued to be active in the regions of Shabelle Hoose and Shabelle
Dhexe. On 30 September, a suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attack
targeted a European Union Training Mission for Somalia patrol in Mogadishu,
causing an unconfirmed number of civilian casualties. In Shabelle Dhexe, several
Burundian soldiers from the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) died in
clashes with Al-Shabaab on 4 September, while Al-Shabaab attacks on 8 September
and 14 October resulted in the deaths of two deputy governors.
15. In Shabelle Hoose, Al-Shabaab used hit-and-run tactics and launched
improvised explosive devices and sustained, larger-scale attacks against Somali
National Army and AMISOM locations. On 14 August, Al-Shabaab carried out a
large-scale ground attack that lasted several hours at Awdheegle forward operating
base, utilizing mortars and two vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices. Somali
and AMISOM forces suffered heavy casualties but held their positions and repelled

19-19467

3/17

S/2019/884

the Al-Shabaab fighters. On 22 September, Al-Shabaab occupied the operating
position at Ceel Saliini for two hours after a sophisticated assault, resulting in several
casualties and material damage and a number of hostages reportedly being taken.
UNSOS promptly responded by evacuating casualties. On 30 September, Al -Shabaab
launched an unsuccessful, complex attack on Baledogle training facility. No
casualties were reported.
16. From 1 May to 12 October, there were 99 attacks targeting the Somali National
Army within the country involving the use of improvised explosive devices, an
increase from 83 for the same period in 2018. The attacks resulted in 66 fatalities and
110 injuries. During the same period, AMISOM was targeted by 73 attacks involving
the use of improvised explosive devices that caused 21 fatalities and 34 injuries.
17. The Jubbaland electoral process took place without major security incidents,
although the security situation remained tense. There were no major security incidents
during the Galmudug reconciliation process owing to the joint security arrangements
of the Federal Government and ASWJ, supported by AMISOM.
18. Tensions continued in the disputed border regions of Sool and Sanaag, between
Puntland and “Somaliland”, with several armed clashes between groups aligned with
one side or the other. On 22 August, the last battalion of the Warsangali clan, led by
“Somaliland” Army Colonel Yasin Osman Salah “Gurey” defected to Puntland,
alleging marginalization by the “Somaliland” administration. On 14 October,
approximately 150 “Somaliland” soldiers also from the Warsangali clan, led by
Lieutenant Colonel Mustafa Said Toor, reportedly defected to Puntland. That was the
third major defection to Puntland in 2019. In Ceel Afwayn, Sanaag region, violence
between the Habar Yunis and the Habar Jeclo sub-clans of the Isaq re-erupted on
18 September, resulting in casualties.
19. On 13 October, nine mortar rounds were fired at the Aden Abdulle International
Airport zone, within which the United Nations and AMISOM compounds are located.
Six rounds landed in the United Nations compound, resulting in injuries to eight
people, including one United Nations staff member and three AMISOM personnel.
Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for the attack.
20. No security incidents attributed to pro-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
elements were recorded during the reporting period, indicating a continuing decline
in their activity this year.

C.

Economic developments
21. Somalia remained on track to reach a decision point for debt relief under the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative of the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund (IMF). In Addis Ababa in September, Somali authorities and IMF
conducted the first review of the IMF fourth staff-monitored programme (SMP IV),
which covers the period May 2019 to July 2020 and concerns domestic revenue
mobilization, public financial management, financial sector stability and compliance
with the framework for combating money-laundering and the financing of terrorism.
During the review, it was found that all structural benchmarks had been met.
22. At the annual meetings of the World Bank and IMF in Washington, D.C., on
18 October, creditors of Somalia were optimistic that arrears clearance should be
possible ahead of the spring meetings in 2020. Mr. Khayre emphasized the value of
the re-engagement of international financial institutions in Somalia to advance the
political and social cohesion in the country.
23. On 27 October, Mr. Farmajo signed the revenue management bill into law, which
was a benchmark for SMP IV and a critical instrument in raising domestic revenue.

4/17

19-19467

S/2019/884

III. Support for peacebuilding and state-building efforts
A.

Establishment of a functional federal state

1.

Deepening federalism
24. Following the SMP IV review, federal and state finance ministers met in Addis
Ababa on 14 September to discuss debt relief for Somalia in a workshop organized
by IMF, the World Bank and the European Union. The ministers stated their collective
will and commitment in terms of enhancing cooperation towards financial
management system reform and fiscal federalism. Meanwhile, on 17 September, the
federal Minister of Finance announced the release of $6 million for the federal
member states and the Banaadir Regional Administration.

2.

Constitutional review
25. From 15 to 17 September, the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, the
Parliamentary Oversight Committee and the Independent Constitutional Review and
Implementation Commission met to assess the way forward on the constitutional
review process. The entities reached broad consensus o n a timeline and a set of
benchmarks to be jointly implemented, including consultations in the federal member
states, in order to conclude the review by June 2020. They called upon federal and
state leaders to come to an effective agreement on issues in the Constitution requiring
political dialogue, emphasizing the need for consensus and compromise. At the
Somalia Partnership Forum, the Federal Government committed, through the Mutual
Accountability Framework, to effective dialogue on outstanding constituti onal issues
with key stakeholders, including the federal member states leadership.

3.

Prevention and resolution of conflicts
26. Ahead of the Jubbaland elections, my Special Representative, together with
other international partners, engaged with Mr. Madobe, the Jubbaland Independent
Electoral and Boundaries Commission, other presidential aspirants and the Federal
Government leadership to urge parties to make necessary concessions to agree on a
single and inclusive electoral process and ensure the avoidance of recourse to
violence. My Special Representative continued outreach efforts to engage with the
parties and to encourage dialogue to resolve the political impasse following the
completion of the process.
27. In Galmudug, the Prime Minister mediated between two conflicting groups of
the Dir community in Xeraale and Huurshe as part of his efforts to facilitate the
reconciliation and the electoral process in the state. On 4 September, clan elders from
both sides agreed on principles to lay the foundations for lasting peace and formed a
joint peace committee to facilitate implementation of the agreement. In Hiraan region,
a ceasefire agreed on 17 July by Hawadle and Habar Gidir sub -clan elders residing in
Matabaan continued to hold, with no further incidents of violence.

4.

Support for universal suffrage elections
28. The ad hoc parliamentary committee mandated to review the electoral bill held
consultations with stakeholders in all federal member states and Banadir, and is
expected to submit its recommendations to Parliament in mid-November. Puntland
leaders indicated that they would provide a written position paper on the bill. In
Mogadishu, the National Independent Electoral Commission and the UNSOM and
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Integrated Electoral Support
Group made recommendations for consideration by the ad hoc committee to amend
the electoral bill and revise timelines to enable the National Independent Electoral

19-19467

5/17

S/2019/884

Commission to conduct elections in the most efficient and cost -effective manner. The
amendments to the Political Party Law, submitted by Cabinet to Parliament in May,
remain with the Speaker of the House of the People and have not yet been tabled for
a first reading.
29. On 18 September, the Minister of Internal Security appointed a national
electoral security task force, composed of 16 entities comprising federal and regional
security forces, the Ministry of Internal Security, AMISOM, the National Independent
Electoral Commission and United Nations entities, to be headed by the Police
Commissioner of the Somali Police Force. AMISOM, UNSOM and UNDP, and
UNSOS have developed a draft joint concept for security for voter registration for
consideration by the task force. On 10 October, the Peacebuilding Fund approved two
projects of $2.5 million each to support the joint operations centres of the task force
and an electoral dispute-resolution mechanism.
30. The National Independent Electoral Commission board provisionally approved
the refined list of potential voter registration sites for Banaadir, South-West State,
Hirshabelle and Galmudug, which is to be submitted to the electoral security task
force for vetting. Identification of potential voter registration sites in Puntland and
Jubbaland is on hold owing to the political differences between the two federal
member states and the Federal Government.

B.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
31. Sustained efforts by Somali women leaders and activists contributed to
increased female representation in the Jubbaland state assembly during the electoral
process in August, from three (4 per cent) to eight (11 per cent) of the total 74 seats.
32. On 14 August, my Special Representative held a meeting with Mogadishu -based
women civil society leaders and discussed ways to enable the effective participation
of women in the national elections. On 13 September, at a meeting convened by the
Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development in Baidoa, Mr. Khayre
committed to engaging women in political and electoral processes, including through
special quotas, promoting and protecting women’s rights and ensuring that 250
professional women joined the public workforce. On 8 October, my Special
Representative held a meeting with women business leaders to discuss their vital role
in the national economy.
33. From 20 to 22 August, the National Union of Somali Journalists and the
Federation of Somali Trade Unions, in collaboration with the Ministry of Women and
Human Rights Development, with the support of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), convened the first
conference on advancing gender-responsive journalism, which produced key
recommendations for the media for the national elections. On 4 September, the
Ministry, with UNSOM support, organized a conference for women, students and civil
society representatives from federal member states and “Somaliland” to discuss
greater opportunities for women in the maritime sector. In addition, in September, the
Ministry, in collaboration with UN-Women, initiated the development of a national
action plan to provide a comprehensive and coherent approach to the implementation
in Somalia of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace and security.
34. On 23 October, the Deputy Secretary-General visited Mogadishu as part of a
joint African Union-United Nations solidarity mission on women, peace and security
to the Horn of Africa. She held meetings with the Prime Minister and Cabinet, women

6/17

19-19467

S/2019/884

civil society leaders and the United Nations country team to discuss ways to support
the political, social and economic empowerment of wo men.
2.

Youth empowerment
35. On 12 August, International Youth Day was celebrated across Somalia, with
events in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Dhuusamarreeb, Garoowe, Kismaayo, Mogadishu and
Hargeysa. Job fairs and youth-led activities, such as community clean-ups in camps
for internally displaced persons around Mogadishu, a blood donation campaign in
Hargeysa and a tree-planting drive in Garoowe, took place. On the same day, the
United Nations Somalia Youth Advisory Board, which is a gender-balanced and
diverse Board, in terms of geographical representation and expertise, was established
to advise the United Nations leadership in Somalia on youth-related policies and
programmes.
36. United Nations entities continued the implementation of their joint programme
on youth employment, with financial support from donors and the Peacebuilding
Fund. The United Nations Industrial Development Organization provided vocational,
technical and livelihood training to over 500 young Somalis who had been hired to
restore and rehabilitate public assets and critical infrastructure. In Mogadishu,
Kismaayo and Baidoa, 384 unemployed and unskilled youths (including 178 women)
took part in a three-month training course on solar panel installation, maintenance
and entrepreneurship by UNDP, as a result of which 16 solar energy micro-enterprises
were established, generating self-employment for 48 young people. UNDP also
provided training in advanced information and communications technologies to
40 youths with disabilities to improve their job-related skills.
37. To promote advocacy against harmful gender norms through sports, the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) supported a female basketball tournament in
Kismaayo from 15 to 20 September. The tournament created awareness of gender based violence, child marriage and female genital mutilation. UNFPA also supported
national consultations ahead of the International Conference on Population and
Development that was to be held in Nairobi from 12 to 14 November at which the
Federal Government made commitments on eliminating gender-based violence and
female genital mutilation and reducing maternal mortality by 2030.

C.

Development coordination
38. The set of Partnership Principles adopted at the Somalia Partnership Forum, as
part of the Mutual Accountability Framework, underpin the commitments made by
the Federal Government and its partners. The Principles encompass the aid
effectiveness tenets of ownership, alignment, coordination and use of country
systems, regulation of non-governmental organizations and cross-cutting areas of
gender, environment and climate change.
39. On 26 September, the Cabinet approved the ninth National Development Plan,
which sets out development priorities for the period 2020–2024. It was agreed through
a consultative process involving sectoral ministries, federal member states,
development partners and other actors.
40. At the request of the Federal Government, a consultative process is under way
to refine and streamline aid architecture, in order to better alig n its structures with the
pillars of the new National Development Plan, strengthen federal member states ’
engagement and enable more evidence-based decision-making.

19-19467

7/17

S/2019/884

IV. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
41. UNSOM recorded 124 civilian casualties during the reporting period, 50 per
cent of which were attributed to Al-Shabaab, 18 per cent to State security forces,
24 per cent to unidentified actors and 8 per cent to clan militia. Eight death sentences
were pronounced and four executions were carried out.
42. Fifteen journalists were arrested: three in Puntland, five in “Somaliland”, five
in Banaadir and one each in Jubbaland and Hirshabelle. One private television station
was shut down in Hargeysa and the Internet access of one o nline media site in
Puntland was suspended. The Hargeysa Regional Appeal Court upheld the
imprisonment term of three years and six months of one journalist. South -West State,
Jubbaland and Puntland issued measures curtailing freedom of expression and of
peaceful association, such as mandatory registration of the media with the Puntland
administration, in infringement of the Puntland Media Council ’s mandate.
43. On 6 August, Somalia became the 180th State party to the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. On 26 September, to galvanize support for the
Convention’s implementation, the Ministry of Women and Human Rights
Development hosted, together with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, a side event on the rights of persons with
disabilities on the margins of the forty-second session of the Human Rights Council.
The Ministry launched national consultations on the draft disabilities bill on
13 October.
44. On 16 September, Somalia submitted its first report to the Committee on the
Rights of the Child and the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development
completed consultations with stakeholders at the federal and state levels on the draft
child rights bill.

B.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
45. UNSOM continued to support the implementation of various human rights due
diligence policy mitigation measures, including technical advice, the drafting of
programmes and the delivery of training to United Nations entities, Somali security
forces and AMISOM. UNSOM also conducted a human rights assessment of two
Somali National Army battalions whose members had previously received
predeployment training on human rights and international humanitarian law. In
August and September, UNSOM provided human rights training to explosive
ordnance disposal teams in Mogadishu.
46. On 21 August, the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development held
consultations with representatives from various ministries and institutions to develop
a policy on the protection of civilians, with support from the United Nations and
Federal Government joint programme on human rights and in line with measures
identified in the human rights due diligence policy framework on prevention and
response to violations.
47. On 10 October, the United Nations-AMISOM joint working group on the human
rights due diligence policy discussed ways to strengthen measures to prevent and
address civilian casualties, including streamlining the AMISOM Board of Inquiry,
raising ex gratia funds and using tracking devices for AMISOM air assets.
48. To align AMISOM training with United Nations standards, UNSOS conducted
training-of-trainers for 224 personnel from all AMISOM troop - and police-

8/17

19-19467

S/2019/884

contributing countries. A training manual covering mandatory topics, including
human rights due diligence policy training requirements, was developed as a
predeployment guide. UNSOS also established a mechanism for regular visits to
national capitals to monitor and evaluate the predeployment training conducted by
the troop- and police-contributing countries.

C.

Children and armed conflict
49. The country task force on monitoring and reporting on grave violations against
children in armed conflict verified 521 grave violations affecting 335 children (265
boys and 70 girls), 2 attacks on hospitals, 22 attacks on schools and 6 incidents of
denial of humanitarian access. A total of 129 children were victims of recruitment and
use, mainly by parties to the conflict, 130 children were abducted, 98 were victims of
killing and maiming and 34 were victims of sexual violence. The violations were
attributed to Al-Shabaab (53 per cent), federal and state armed forces (29 per cent)
and unknown armed elements and clan militia (18 per cent). Sixteen incidents of
deprivation of liberty affecting 34 boys were attributed to the Somali Police Force
and the Somali National Army. A total of 888 children (758 boys, 130 girls) were
separated from armed forces and armed groups and handed over to United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) partners for rehabilitation and eventual reintegration.
50. On 15 September, UNSOM supported the Ministry of Defence in organizing a
round table to adopt a road map on children and armed conflict to accelerate the
implementation of existing action plans. At the round table, attended by the Minister
of Defence and the Minister of Justice, the steps taken by the Federal Government
and partners to strengthen child protection were noted and key areas for further
improvement were identified. The Peacebuilding Fu nd approved $2 million for
UNICEF and UNSOM to support community-based reintegration of child soldiers in
Somalia.
51. From 27 to 30 October, my Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, visited Somalia for discu ssions with national
and international partners on mechanisms to strengthen child protection and address
grave violations against children. She witnessed the signing of a road map by the
Minister of Defence to accelerate the implementation of action plans on child
protection.

D.

Prevention of sexual and gender-based violence
52. On 11 September, UNSOM and UNDP facilitated a workshop for female
parliamentarians, lawyers and civil society to review the gender justice colour coding
of Somalia, a tool to assess national legal frameworks in terms of catering for equality
before the law and protection from gender-based violence. At the workshop, pending
pieces of legislation, such as the sexual offences bill and the family law, were
identified.
53. On 16 and 17 September, UNSOM conducted training in Mogadishu for 24
prosecutors, judges, police officials and investigators from the criminal investigation
department, including six female participants, on investigations of sexual violence in
conflict and crimes against children, with a view to strengthening the ability of the
justice system to prosecute and adjudicate cases of sexual and gender-based crimes.
On 10 October, the bill on outlawing female genital mutilation was submitted to the
Cabinet to be tabled for discussion.

19-19467

9/17

S/2019/884

V. Humanitarian situation
54. Late and erratic gu rains resulted in a cereal harvest 70 per cent below average,
the poorest harvest since data collection began in 1995. The 2019 gu season was the
third driest in 30 years and followed the previous year’s below-average rainy season.
This second consecutive poor rainy season threatened an already fragile food security
situation in a country recovering from the impact of the prolonged drought of
2016/17.
55. Widespread acute malnutrition persists, owing to a combination of factors
including food insecurity, high morbidity, low treatment rates and poor care practices.
Nutrition-specific responses require immediate scaling up, with 1 million children
estimated to be acutely malnourished. A total of 180,000 children are projected to
endure severe acute malnutrition from July 2019 to June 2020. Integrated
interventions will need to be provided to support recovery and prevent a deterioration
in the nutritional situation of at-risk Somalis.
56. The impact of drought, compounded by protracted armed conflict and barriers
to humanitarian access, worsens protection challenges, particularly for women and
children, as families lose their social networks and coping capacities. So far in 2019,
more than 300,000 people have been displaced by drought and conflict, adding to the
2.6 million internally displaced persons across the country who continue to face
serious risks of evictions, marginalization and exclusion.
57. The latest food security analysis by the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, released on 2 September, showed that, despite the challenging
operating environment, the humanitarian system in Somalia is effective. Swift
financial contributions to the drought impact response pl an enabled aid agencies to
scale up early response. More than 2 million people in crisis and emergency phases
of food insecurity were being provided with assistance by September. Immediate
contributions were required to assist the 2.1 million people curren tly projected to be
acutely food insecure until the end of December 2019. By the end of October, the
humanitarian response plan was 71 per cent funded. Critical clusters such as health,
and water, sanitation and hygiene remained underfunded. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat is working with local
authorities and partners to scale up the response.
58. The deyr rains started in early September and moderate to heavy rainfall has
been received in many parts of the country and within the Ethiopian highlands. This
has resulted in flooding along the two major rivers in Somalia, the Shabelle and the
Juba, causing tens of thousands of people to be displaced, mainly in Beledweyne,
Hiraan region.
59. During his mission to Somalia on 11 and 12 September, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock,
together with senior officials from the World Bank and the Assistant Secretary General for Peacebuilding Support, Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, called for sustained
funding to protect recent gains in beating back hunger. He reiterated the importance
of the Federal Government’s recovery and resilience framework, which is at the
centre of efforts to break the cycle of recurring humanitarian crises in Somalia.
Mechanisms are in place for the rapid scaling up of life -saving and livelihood
response, including significant cash programming, expanded partnerships with vetted
local implementing partners and improved engagement with authoriti es and affected
populations.
60. Humanitarian efforts continue to face operating challenges. So far this year,
some 68 violent incidents against humanitarian operations were recorded across

10/17

19-19467

S/2019/884

Somalia in which 12 humanitarian workers were killed, 5 injured, 11 abducted, 18
arrested or temporarily detained and 3 expelled by the authorities for alleged
infractions. Bureaucratic constraints and limited logistics infrastructure continue to
hamper humanitarian agencies’ ability to reach those in need. The humanitarian
country team is implementing an access strategy that was adopted in May to provide
guidance on engaging with authorities and all parties to the conflict as part of efforts
to enhance the delivery of humanitarian assistance.

VI. Comprehensive approach to security
61. The Somalia Partnership Forum examined progress on implementation of the
transition plan through the comprehensive approach to security. Participants
recognized ongoing security reforms, successful operations to retake and stabilize
territory previously held by Al-Shabaab, increased delivery of social services and
progress towards local reconciliation in some areas. The Federal Government
committed to successfully concluding current security operations, undertaking further
operations against Al-Shabaab and completing priority reforms of security, justice
and human rights institutions. It was agreed that, in 2020, the focus of those efforts
will be jointly identified, to ensure that all stakeholders align their efforts and
resources to agreed locations for a more effective transition from AMISOM to
Somali-led security. International partners committed to supporting the generation of
human rights-compliant security forces, the stabilization of newly recovered areas
and key security sector reforms, including human resources and payroll reforms.

A.

Operations
62. Ongoing Somali-led military operations in Shabelle Hoose remained the focus
of the Federal Government’s transition efforts and enabled the retaking of the town
of Awdheegle from Al-Shabaab control in September. Coordination and planning
between military, police, rule of law and stabilization activities improved, and over
100 Darwish officers of the Somali Police Force were deployed to recovered areas in
Shabelle Hoose. The Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation and
South-West State authorities led the coordination of stabilization efforts in the
recovered areas, with activities supported by donors.
63. However, Al-Shabaab counter-attacks on Somali security forces and AMISOM
in Awdheegle, Bariirre and Ceel Saliini demonstrated challenges in securing
recovered areas and protecting the population from intimidation and retaliatory
violence. Persistent volatility in the areas also hindered access for stabilization
initiatives, and the onset of the deyr rains is also expected to cause further delays in
the subsequent phases.
64. Challenges in generating sufficient resources and forces present an obstacle to
the steady implementation of the transition plan. The Somali National Army has
struggled to meet its target of generating one infantry battalion of 300–350 personnel
a month. The slow pace of generating Somali security forces for fighting and
“holding” presents a continuing concern for sustaining transition operations in
Shabelle Hoose and conducting future operations.

B.

Institutional capacity-building
65. On 7 August, the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Internal
Security co-chaired the inaugural meeting of the joint security sector governance
programme steering committee, which brought together the Ministry of Defence and

19-19467

11/17

S/2019/884

security ministries of federal member states and the Banaadir Regional
Administration to approve the workplan and budget for the newly launched UNDP
and UNSOM joint security sector governance programme to support the
implementation of the national security architecture of Somalia.
66. On 29 August, 187 police officers graduated from basic training in Jawhar and
were deployed throughout Hirshabelle, including to Warshiikh, which transitioned
from an AMISOM forward operating base to a police station. Basic training is
ongoing for 400 police recruits who, upon graduation, will supplement the 100 federal
Darwish police officers recently deployed in recovered districts in Shabelle Hoose.
Under the joint police programme implemented by the United Nations with support
from the AMISOM police, refresher training was conducted for 100 police officers
from Galmudug and Puntland who are assigned to the Gaalkacyo joint police unit,
and the construction of six checkpoints at the main entry points into Mogadishu was
funded as part of the capital’s security plan. With support from partners, the Ministry
of Internal Security developed a Darwish police concept to define the roles a nd
functions of both the federal and state Darwish, including command and control,
training and sustainment processes.
67. In August, UNSOM, the International Development Law Organization and other
partners, under the joint justice programme, supported the Ministry of Justice in
drafting a roadmap of issues to be addressed to enable the transfer of the caseload of
high-risk Al-Shabaab and Al-Shabaab-associated detainees from military to civilian
courts.
68. On 28 September, the Supreme Court of Somalia commenced a 26-week
training-of-trainers programme for 36 judges and prosecutors from federal and state
courts, developed with support from the Global Focal Point for the Rule of Law, to
address gaps identified in a training needs assessment compl eted in June.
69. From 12 to 14 October, UNSOM, the International Maritime Organization and
the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia supported the Federal
Government in launching the Somali Maritime Administration and working on the
county’s international maritime legal compliance, ship registration and crew
certification and the establishment of a maritime rescue coordination centre.
70. The Mine Action Service delivered explosive hazard awareness training to a
total of 120 troops from the Somali National Army in Baidoa from 30 September to
8 October. The Mine Action Service also trained four Somali Police Force improvised
explosive device disposal teams in explosive hazard threat mitigation at the federal
and state levels from 4 August to 4 September.

C.

Supporting activities
71. On 30 September, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and
Reconciliation convened the national stabilization meeting with its state counterparts,
at which progress in the implementation of the Wadajir National Framework for Local
Governance was highlighted. In Hirshabelle, the Ministry of the Interior completed
its first district council formation in Warshiikh. A further 17 district council formation
exercises are ongoing across Jubbaland, South-West State, Hirshabelle and
Galmudug.
72. UNSOM and the International Organization for Migration continued to support
the Federal Government’s national programme for the treatment and handling of
disengaged combatants. As of mid-October, the three rehabilitation centres for lowrisk male Al-Shabaab defectors had provided support to 86 individuals in Mogadishu,
51 in Baidoa and 110 in Kismaayo. In September, South-West State and Jubbaland

12/17

19-19467

S/2019/884

commenced the construction of two rehabilitation centres in Baidoa and Kism aayo to
cater to low-risk female Al-Shabaab defectors and their dependants. The complex role
of women in Al-Shabaab was discussed at a meeting of the strand on the
comprehensive approach to security on preventing and countering violent extremism.
The findings of a variety of research initiatives on women’s recruitment, roles and
responsibilities as members of Al-Shabaab, female defection and the significant
impact of women on men’s defection were highlighted at the meeting.

VII. United Nations Support Office in Somalia support to
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Somali
National Army
A.

Support to African Union Mission in Somalia operations
73. In July, UNSOS and AMISOM commenced a programme to enhance security
and facilities in 21 forward operating bases, which entailed improving perimeter
security, including through the installation of boom gates. As at 31 October, two
forward operating bases in AMISOM sector 1 had been refurbished.
74. In August, UNSOS supported the deployment of an AMI SOM force of 150
troops from the Djiboutian contingent and 70 troops from the Ethiopian contingent to
Dhuusamarreeb to provide additional security during the reconciliation process in
Galmudug.
75. From May to September, UNSOS conducted medical and casualt y evacuations
for 234 AMISOM personnel. UNSOS also delivered battlefield casualty and disease
treatment capacity-building programmes for 31 AMISOM personnel, including
through mentorship and training.
76. To increase accountability, efficiency and transparency, UNSOS completed
quarterly inspections of all AMISOM contingent-owned equipment, including selfsustainment categories. The contingents from Ethiopia, Nigeria and Sierra Leone and
the military contingent from Uganda were found to have met 90 per cent of their selfsustainment commitments. Other troop- and police-contributing countries were at
lower levels or had not taken on responsibility for self-sustainment. Contingentowned equipment experts from UNSOS and AMISOM visited all contributor capitals
in July and August to provide guidance on building self-sustainment capability and to
strengthen awareness of its importance.
77. UNSOS continued to track performance indicators and apply monitoring
measures on fuel provided to AMISOM to ensure that consumpt ion is consistent with
equipment technical specification and performance usage. This resulted in a reduction
of $401,336 in fuel costs during the period April–September compared with the
preceding six-month period.
78. The United Nations trust fund in support of AMISOM, with a current balance
of $3.5 million, has enabled the hiring of personnel with expertise and skills not
available within the African Union and AMISOM, as well as the acquisition of
equipment for mission enabling units. The trust fund was also used to pay $1.8 million
to Uganda as reimbursement for equipment lost in hostile action before February
2012. The United Nations and AMISOM are developing a joint initiative to generate
further contributions.
79. UNSOS enhanced AMISOM and Somali security forces’ effectiveness in secure
communications and open source intelligence through the delivery of capacity building programmes. Additionally, UNSOS established regional signals academies

19-19467

13/17

S/2019/884

in all six AMISOM sector headquarters, in which 1,142 AMISO M and 28 Somali
security force personnel were trained between July and October.
80. UNSOS trained over 700 AMISOM and United Nations Guard Unit personnel
on environmental management with regard to water conservation, waste management,
energy conservation and pollution prevention. Environmental audits were completed
in the United Nations and AMISOM installations in Mogadishu and the AMISOM
sectors to ensure environmental policy compliance.
81. The Mine Action Service, with UNSOS support, continued to suppor t AMISOM
security operations and stabilization efforts with advice, analysis, training and
mentoring on the use of specialized equipment, explosive detection dogs, community
liaison officers and explosive ordnance clearance teams. From 1 May to 31 October,
the Mine Action Service delivered training to 3,209 AMISOM troops to enhance their
capability to find and destroy improvised explosive devices and to safely operate in
the threat environment. The Mine Action Service contributed to the safety and
security of strategic infrastructure through the deployment of 17 teams working with
34 detection dogs to conduct searches of 108,922 pieces of luggage, 205,365 vehicles,
176 buildings, 223,899 square metres of built-up areas and 14,837,990 square metres
of open areas throughout the sectors. The Mine Action Service also supported the
mission enabling units with convoy movements to deliver supplies and equipment
from Mogadishu to and within the sectors.

B.

Support for Somali national armed forces operations
82. UNSOS support to joint AMISOM and Somali security forces operations in
Shabelle Hoose and Shabelle Dhexe included the provision of 168,000 litres of fuel,
833 tons of rations and other materials such as field defence stores, tents, water
storage tanks and field communications to enable effective operations and
interoperability. UNSOS evacuated 113 Somali security force casualties using 37
aeromedical flights and provided air movement support for personnel and equipment.
83. In August, the Somali security forces requested UNSOS to provide further
assistance with joint operations in Shabelle Hoose and Shabelle Dhexe through the
delivery of training in operations management, command and control, force
protection and cybersecurity, as well as intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance,
for which UNSOS is currently developing the requisite training programmes.
84. The United Nations, the African Union and the Federal Government of Somalia
have drafted a tripartite memorandum of understanding for the provision of logistical
support by the United Nations to Somali security forces, including through assistance
from AMISOM. The draft memorandum, expected to be concluded by December
2019, includes agreement on a mechanism to monitor and enhance mutua l
accountability.
85. As at 30 September, the United Nations trust fund for the Somali security forces
had a balance of $5.3 million. Based on the average monthly expenditure of
$1.2 million, current funds are expected to last until early 2020. The United Nations
and the Federal Government are developing a joint initiative to generate further
contributions.

VIII. United Nations presence in Somalia
86. United Nations entities continue to be present in the following locations in
Somalia: Baidoa, Beledweyne, Boosaaso, Dhooble, Doolow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe,

14/17

19-19467

S/2019/884

Hargeysa, Jawhar, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. As at 30 October, 683 international staff
and 1,364 national staff were deployed throughout Somalia.
87. As part of measures introduced following the mortar attac k on the United
Nations compound in Mogadishu on 1 January, UNSOS continued to enhance camp
security through the progressive installation of counter-rocket, artillery and mortar
systems in Mogadishu and the regions for United Nations offices and AMISOM sector
headquarters, with a pilot project completed in Kismaayo. Once completed, this
system will mitigate the threat from indirect fire system weapons.
88. Consultations continued between UNSOM and UNSOS and the Somali
authorities to address challenges resulting from the imposition of taxes and other fees,
in contravention of the status-of-mission agreement signed with the United Nations
in 2014. In particular, the denial of gratis visas and work permits to United Nations
international contractors and United Nations personnel not in possession of laissezpasser negatively affects the ability of the United Nations to implement its mandates
and deliver programmes. Payments for taxes and other fees, made under protest,
continue to substantially burden the UNSOS budget, diverting funds away from
mandated support.
89. In pursuit of the Secretary-General’s system-wide strategy on gender parity,
UNSOS has developed a mission-level implementation plan to advance gender parity,
in consultation with UNSOM. The plan involves the mission Gender Affairs Officer
and a network of 15 gender focal points across the mission. Despite the challenging
operating environment, as of September, 42 per cent of staff at UNSOM and 26 per
cent of staff at UNSOS were women.

IX. Observations
90. The Somali authorities renewed their commitment to state-building in October
at the Somalia Partnership Forum. I welcome the clearly defined and agreed trajectory
until December 2020, with priority objectives and timelines for political reforms,
security and stabilization, and economic recovery and development. This is an
ambitious agenda, which, to be achieved on time, urgently requires the alignment of
efforts of the Federal Government and the federal member states, with support from
the international community.
91. As an overarching priority, political cooperation between the Federal
Government and all federal member states must resume. The continuing political
deadlock is a major impediment to further progress and threatens the plans agreed at
the Somalia Partnership Forum. I renew my call to the country’s leaders to revive
their dialogue and translate their strong individual commitments into a collective
effort towards sustainable progress, resolving all outstanding issues based on th e
values of consensus and compromise and putting the interests of the Somali people
first.
92. Political dynamics and electoral processes within the federal member states
have also affected federal and state relations. It is crucial that these regional pr ocesses
contribute to local reconciliation as well as renewed collaboration and unity of
purpose between the different levels of government. I commend the Federal
Government leadership for its outreach efforts in Galmudug and South -West State. In
Galmudug, all parties must redouble efforts to ensure that inclusive dialogue and
reconciliation lead to a widely accepted electoral process and formation of a broad based state government. In South-West State, continued efforts are needed to
conclude reconciliation efforts and implement agreed decisions. In Jubbaland, in the
aftermath of a difficult electoral process, the parties must now swiftly resume

19-19467

15/17

S/2019/884

dialogue and find a way forward, without recourse to violence and in a spirit of
compromise and reconciliation.
93. This is all the more important because ongoing technical cooperation between
the Federal Government and federal member states in many areas demonstrates that
progress is possible. I commend the Federal Government leadership for its efforts on
improved public financial management and on concluding the National Development
Plan through a consultative process. As a result of these efforts, Somalia is within
sight of debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative of the World
Bank and IMF, on which a decision point is fast approaching.
94. I welcome the public commitment by Mr. Farmajo and the Federal Government
to holding universal suffrage parliamentary elections in the last quarter of 2020.
However, I am increasingly concerned about timelines being missed. It is imperative
for all electoral stakeholders to carefully review the electoral bill and the amendments
to the Political Party Law to achieve broader political acceptance and have them
enacted by the end of this year, as agreed at the Somalia Partnership Forum. The
Federal Government, leaders of political parties and civil society groups must bridge
the increasing division regarding the elections. I welcome the establishment of the
National Electoral Security Task Force, which will wor k closely with the National
Independent Electoral Commission to advance preparations for voter registration. The
United Nations is committed to supporting the Task Force in its work.
95. I welcome the Federal Government’s public commitment to achieving a
finalized Constitution by June 2020. Resumption of dialogue between federal and
state leaders is also necessary to forge ahead on the resolution of outstanding issues
to be translated into constitutional texts. This should be accompanied by inclusive
consultations, which should start soon, with all segments of society, including
minorities, women and youth, to ensure a Constitution for all Somalis.
96. I continue to call for the political participation of women and their enhanced
and effective role in decision-making at all levels of government and society. The full
representation of women in regional electoral and reconciliation processes, in the
nascent political parties and in the national elections next year will be imperative for
success in Somalia. I underscore the importance of women’s active participation in
an inclusive security sector that responds to the security needs of women and girls.
97. I once again encourage the Federal Government to establish the Independent
Human Rights Commission and the Cabinet to quickly approve the draft bill on
female genital mutilation. I also urge Parliament to pass the sexual offences bill.
98. The security situation and operating environment in Somalia continue to be
challenging. Persistent and systematic attacks by Al-Shabaab against Somali security
forces and civilians, AMISOM, the United Nations and international actors are of
great concern. I strongly condemn these attacks and extend my condolences to the
victims’ families. I remain concerned about civilian casualties and urge all parties to
respect international human rights law and international humanitarian law in the
conduct of hostilities. Much more remains to be done to counter the threat of terrorism
and violent extremism in Somalia.
99. Recent offensive operations in Shabelle Hoose demonstrate the ability of the
Somali National Army, with AMISOM support, to start recovering areas from
Al-Shabaab, and to protect those gains despite repeated counter-attacks by the group.
Joint planning on stabilization has also reinforced international coordination
mechanisms, which should be leveraged towards sustaining and extending the
transition. I call on international partners to continue their support to the Federal
Government in these areas, and hope that further imple mentation of the transition

16/17

19-19467

S/2019/884

plan can follow. Additional generation of Somali forces is urgently needed if the
transition plan is to be kept on track and achieve its goals.
100. I remain extremely concerned about the humanitarian situation and its impact
on vulnerable civilians. The growing number of internally displaced persons as a
result of drought and armed conflict is placing an enormous strain on Somali society,
government and humanitarian actors. I call on donors to close the funding gap for this
year and sustain the response into 2020, in order to continue averting a food security
crisis for the more than 2 million Somalis at risk. Without adequate humanitarian
assistance, people face acute malnutrition and severe food insecurity, with dire
consequences, especially for marginalized and displaced communities.
101. I welcome the meeting between Mr. Farmajo and the President of Kenya, Uhuru
Kenyatta, on the margins of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly as a
promise of improved ties between Kenya and Somalia. I hope for strengthened bonds
and revitalized cooperation among the countries in the Horn of Africa for the benefit
of all the people of that dynamic region.
102. I am grateful to the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the European Union, Member States, non-governmental organizations
and other partners for their continued support for peacebuilding and state -building in
Somalia. I pay tribute to AMISOM and the Somali security forces for their brave
efforts and sacrifices for the sake of peace and stability in Somalia.
103. The partnership between Somalia and the United Nations remains strong. I thank
my Special Representative, James Swan, for his efforts to deepen this partnership for
the benefit of the Somali people, as the anchor of the country’s continued progress. I
condemn in the strongest terms the mortar attack on the United Nations and AMISOM
compounds by Al-Shabaab on 13 October, and wish a speedy and full recovery to the
injured personnel. I thank the Federal Government for its swift and fulsome
condemnation of the attack. I express my admiration for all United Nations staff in
Somalia for their outstanding work under difficult conditions and reiterate my
commitment to ensuring their security and welfare.

19-19467

17/17
