S/2017/995

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 November 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Central Africa and the activities of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement of the President of
the Security Council dated 11 June 2015 (S/PRST/2015/12), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to keep it informed about the activities of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). In the present report,
an assessment of the major political and security trends in the Central African
subregion since my previous report, dated 31 May 2017 (S/2017/465), and an update
on progress in the implementation of the mandate of UNOCA and on efforts to
implement the United Nations regional strategy to address the thr eat and impact of the
activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) are provided (see S/2012/481). An
update is also provided on the situation in the Lake Chad Basin region, pursuant to
Council resolution 2349 (2017), and on the activities of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel, pursuant to Council resolution 2358 (2017).

II. Major developments in the Central African subregion
A.

Political, peace and security developments and trends
2.
The situation in Central Africa was marked by continued political and social
tensions in a context of economic downturn and disputed electoral processes. Crosscutting challenges stemming from the ongoing Boko Haram crisis continued to
demand the attention of Governments in the area as well as regional and
international stakeholders. Efforts continued to address the persisting threat posed
by LRA, including the ongoing reconfiguration of the African Union Regional Task
Force.
Political developments and trends
3.
In Angola, elections were held on 23 August, with the ruling party, Movimento
Popular de Libertação de Angola, winning over 61 per cent of the vote and 150 out
of 220 seats in Parliament. The former Minister of Defence, João Lourenço, of
Movimento Popular, was declared the country’s new President and sworn in on
26 September. The opposition parties União Nacional para a Independência Total de
Angola and Convergência Ampla de Salvação de Angola — Coligação Eleitoral

17-19959 (E)

301117

*1719959*

S/2017/995

garnered approximately 26 per cent of the vote (51 seats in Parliament) and 9 per
cent of the vote (16 seats in Parliament), respectively. While União Nacional had
initially challenged the outcome of the elections, citing irregularities, and called
upon its elected Members of Parliament to boycott legislative proceedings, on
16 September it announced a reversal of its boycott call.
4.
In Cameroon, the situation in the North-West and South-West anglophone
regions remained calm but volatile, with a continued heavy State security presence.
The Government implemented several measures to address the grievances expressed
by the Cameroon Anglophone Civil Society Consortium in the judicial and
educational systems, including the creation of a common law section at the École
nationale de magistrature, a department of English law at several universities
(Douala, Ngaoundéré, Dschang and Maroua), the redeployment of magistrates
according to linguistic criteria and the appointment of more anglophone magistrates
to the High Court. In addition, on 30 August, the Government decided to release and
drop all charges against most of the leaders and sympathizers of the anglophone
movement who had been detained since January 2017. However, tensions persisted
as demonstrations and “ghost town” protests were held. Several incidents involving
the use of improvised explosive devices took place in Bamenda, North -West region,
in September and October and in Douala on 22 September; the Government blamed
activists of the anglophone separatist movement for those incidents.
5.
In anticipation of the planned events for the Unification Day holiday on
1 October, security forces were heavily deployed and restrictions on movemen t and
assembly were imposed. Access to social media was suspended from 28 September,
but intermittent access was restored a few days later. Nevertheless, on 1 October,
supporters of the secessionist movement took to the streets, ostensibly to hoist a flag
representing an independent English-speaking State. Security forces dispersed
protestors, resulting in an unconfirmed number of deaths, injuries and arrests. On
17 October, the Prime Minister, Philémon Yang, visited the two anglophone regions
to engage in dialogue. A similar mission led by former Prime Minister and Chair of
the National Commission for the Promotion of Bilingualism and Multiculturalism,
Mafany Musonge, was deployed to the South-West region. Owing to targeted attacks
on security checkpoints between 6 and 10 November, which resulted in the deaths of
four members of the country’s defence and security forces, the Government imposed a
curfew from 8 to 23 November and ordered the closure of shops and public places in
the city of Bamenda, North-West region. The Government also indicated that several
weapons caches had been identified. The Government also launched a judicial
enquiry into human rights violations and abuses allegedly committed in the North West and South-West regions on 1 October, including the disproportionate and
excessive use of force by security forces.
6.
In Chad, the economy continued to be under huge strain from high security
expenditures in a context of lower oil proceeds, resulting in a tense social situation.
On 11 July, the Plateforme syndicale revendicative suspended its participation in the
social dialogue following the Government’s decision, on 6 June, to reflect a freeze
on transport costs for government workers in the budget alignment. On
21 September, it signed a joint communiqué to resume dialogue with the
Government. On 6 June, the opposition coalition, Front de l’opposition nouvelle
pour l’alternance et le changement, issued a memorandum questioning the
legitimacy of the President, Idriss Déby Itno, and attributing the financial crisis to
poor governance, mismanagement of funds and the inability of the Government to
provide basic social services. On 9 June, the opposition coalition refused to
participate in a national forum to adopt institutional and constitutional refor ms,
calling instead for an inclusive political dialogue. On 10 August, the President held

2/17

17-19959

S/2017/995

separate consultations with representatives of the opposition, although a key
opposition leader, Saleh Kebzabo, declined the invitation.
7.
On 2 August, the results of the parliamentary election in the Congo were
announced; the ruling party, Parti congolais du travail, won 90 of the 151 seats
available, while the opposition parties Union panafricaine pour la démocratie
sociale and Union des démocrates et humanistes won 8 seats each. Elections were
not held in eight constituencies of the Pool region owing to insecurity. On
16 August, Clément Mouamba was reappointed as Prime Minister of the Congo, and
on 23 August he announced a new Cabinet, whose main tasks would be to n egotiate
an adjustment programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to assist the
flailing economy. From 26 September to 4 October, IMF deployed a mission to
Brazzaville to take stock of economic developments, finalize an assessment of the
country’s debt and update macroeconomic projections. On 5 October, the
Government issued a communiqué stipulating its intention to renegotiate the terms
of its debt with creditors, which was estimated by IMF to be $9 billion, or 110 per
cent of the gross domestic product.
8.
Concerns remained about the prolonged detention without trial of political
leaders arrested following the 2016 presidential election. Despite assurances from
the Government that timely and fair trials would be held, initial hearings had yet to
take place, including for two former presidential candidates, Jean -Marie Michel
Mokoko and André Okombi Salissa. On 11 August, the Government authorized the
medical evacuation to France of the detained opposition leader, Modeste Boukadia,
who had been sentenced to 30 years of forced labour.
9.
In Equatorial Guinea, early legislative and municipal elections were held on
12 November, with a total of 325,554 registered voters and 18 participating political
parties. Ahead of the vote, the opposition party Ciuda danos por la Innovación
accused the Government of excluding it from the elections, including by preventing
it from organizing campaign events. In a meeting with political parties, the
Government encouraged them to participate in the elections using their o wn funds,
adding that it would refund them after the final results were announced. On election
day, security forces were deployed, Internet access was suspended and the use of
private vehicles was banned. Social media had been inaccessible since the start of
the campaign, on 27 October. According to reports in the media, most polling
stations opened on schedule and the vote took place peacefully. Opposition
representatives claimed incidents of fraud and irregularities. On 13 November, the
Government convened a meeting with the international community to announce the
preliminary results, which indicated that the ruling party, Partido Democrático de
Guinea Ecuatorial, had taken the lead across the country.
10. In Gabon, the continued contestation by the opposition candidate, Jean Ping,
of the re-election of the President, Ali Bongo Ondimba, in 2016, along with
economic hardship, including multiple strikes, dominated the political and social
scene in the period under review. On 2 June, Mr. Ping rejected calls by his political
allies to participate in a dialogue with Mr. Bongo Ondimba, calling instead for
international mediation. On 18 August, Mr. Ping called upon his supporters to
demonstrate until he assumed power. On 4 September, 19 individuals were arrested
during a rally in Libreville in support of Mr. Ping. On 9 September, the president of
the political movement Rassemblement héritage et modernité, Alexandre Barro
Chambrier, which is aligned with Mr. Ping, issued a statement in which he
denounced what he described as an increase in arbitrary arrests targeting the
opposition and called for the unconditional release of all political detainees. On
13 September, the Prime Minister, Emmanuel Issoze-Ngondet, rejected calls for an
international enquiry into the 2016 post-electoral violence, instead announcing the
creation of a national commission.
17-19959

3/17

S/2017/995

11. On 11 July, ruling on a petition from the Government, the Constitutional Court
of Gabon authorized a further postponement of parliamentary elections to April
2018 at the earliest. The elections had originally been scheduled for December 2016
and had already been postponed once, to July 2017. The decision by the Court
generated criticism from several opposition figures, who argued that there was no
justification for an additional delay. On 21 August, a new Cabinet was unveiled, led
by the incumbent Prime Minister and tasked with finalizing, by November 2017, the
new Constitution, which would subsequently be adopted by the National Assembly.
A former presidential candidate, Pierre-Claver Maganga Moussavou, was appointed
Vice-President, while Mr. Ping’s former campaign manager, René Ndemezo’o
Obiang, was appointed President of the Economic and Social Council of Gabon.
12. An intensified political dialogue between the European Union and the
Government of Gabon was launched on 13 September. The discussions were
focused on the outcome of the national dialogue and electoral reforms, as well as
human rights, democratization and fundamental freedoms.
13. In Rwanda, the President, Paul Kagame, won 98.79 per cent of the vote in the
presidential election held on 4 August. His two opponents, the independent
candidate, Philippe Mpayimana, and the candidate of the Democratic Green Party,
Frank Habineza, won 0.73 per cent and 0.48 per cent, respectively. Opposition
figure Diane Rwigara was barred by the National Electoral Commission on the
grounds that she had submitted forged signatures in support of her candidature,
which fell short of the required 600 signatures. Ms. Rwigara was arrested i n
September, along with two family members, on charges of tax evasion and forgery.
On 3 October, the authorities charged her, along with her mother and sister, for
incitement to insurrection against the State. At the time of reporting, judicial
proceedings were under way against Ms. Rwigara and her mother, having been
denied bail on 20 October. Ms. Rwigara’s sister was released provisionally after the
judge decided to drop the charges against her because of a lack of evidence.
14. On 28 July, the Electoral Commission of Sao Tome and Principe announced
that 90,932 voters had been registered, representing a decrease from the previous
111,222 voters registered for the 2016 presidential election. On 14 August, the
Government announced that regional and local elections planned for 2017 had been
postponed to 2018 to combine them with legislative elections.
Sahel
15. The cross-border dimension of terrorism and its linkages with organized crime
continued to pose a serious threat to stability in the greater Sahel region, including
in Chad. The establishment of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
earlier in 2017 is a welcome development, demonstrating the commitment of the
five countries to take ownership of and collectively address the security chall enges
in the region. Since the issuance of my previous report on the Joint Force
(S/2017/869), on 28 October the Joint Force launched its first operation in the
Liptako-Gourma triangle that borders Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali. Code-named
Operation Hawbi, the campaign deployed several hundred soldiers from Mali, the
Niger and Burkina Faso. In its operations, the Joint Force prioritized the Central
Sector, bordering the three countries, as it has been the epicentr e of cross-border
activities by armed terror groups and drugs and arms traffickers in the region.
16. Chad continues to work towards the mobilization and deployment of its own
contribution to the Joint Force. On 13 October, Chad repatriated hundreds of its
troops from the Niger, where they had been fighting Boko Haram, to their base in
Wour, in the Tibesti region, within the framework of the ongoing deployment of the
Joint Force. Citing serious financial difficulties in his country, the President of Chad
4/17

17-19959

S/2017/995

has publicly raised concerns about the ability of Chad to field troops for the Joint
Force.
17. An international conference on security and development in the Sahel is
scheduled to be held in Brussels on 14 December 2017. The United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel serves as a vehicle for providing a holistic response
to the challenges confronting the Sahel region. Through the Executive Committee
working group on the Sahel, chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General, the United
Nations is mobilized to accelerate implementation of the strategy, including by
raising additional resources.
Security developments and trends
Boko Haram/Lake Chad Basin
18. Despite significant efforts deployed by affected countries, the Multinational
Joint Task Force and regional and international partners, Boko Haram remained a
persistent threat in the Lake Chad Basin. The group continued to carry out suicide
bombings, banditry, kidnapping, arson attacks and raids on villages, individuals and
military installations. Since the issuance of my report on the situation in the Lake
Chad Basin region (S/2017/764), from 1 June to 15 October at least 111 civilians
were killed and 131 were injured in Cameroon and 1 civilian was kille d in Chad.
19. Multiple attacks took place in northern Cameroon, the majority of which were
perpetrated by adolescent female suicide bombers targeting camps for internally
displaced persons and other places crowded with civilians. The use of young women
and girls as suicide bombers increased, creating an atmosphere of suspicion towards
women and girls and rendering them targets of harassment, stigmatization and
arbitrary arrest by police and military forces. On 14 October, former fighters who
had surrendered and their families were handed over by vigilante committees to the
local authorities in Mozogo, in the Far North region. Originally from Cameroon,
these people, including 58 men, 86 women and 244 children, reported that they had
been abducted by Boko Haram during attacks on their villages and taken to Nigeria,
where they were forced to join the group.
20. In Chad, only one major attack was reported, although Boko Haram activities
continued to disrupt the livelihoods of the local population, in particular transborder
trade. The Chadian army reported that on 24 and 25 June, 8 Chadian soldiers were
killed and 18 wounded while fighting Boko Haram insurgents on the islands of Lake
Chad.
21. The Peace and Security Council of the African Union undertook a visit t o the
Lake Chad Basin from 27 to 31 July. It subsequently adopted a decision on
28 September in which it, inter alia, expressed concern regarding the resource
challenges of the Multinational Joint Task Force and the dire humanitarian situation
prevailing in the region; reaffirmed the need for a comprehensive approach in the
fight against Boko Haram; and called for a dedicated summit of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), with a view to developing a strategy for the
promotion of peace, security and development in the Lake Chad Basin.
Lord’s Resistance Army
22. According to the LRA crisis tracker, there were 48 LRA -related criminal
incidents during the reporting period, resulting in 7 deaths and 158 abductions. LRA
elements continued to pose significant risks to civilians in northern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The locations of security incidents were along the
movement corridors of LRA from the Central African Republic through the
17-19959

5/17

S/2017/995

provinces of Bas-Uélé and Haut-Uélé and in and out of Garamba National Park in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The national park remained a key source of
poaching and gold-mining for LRA. Most of the group’s attacks consisted of
looting, ambushes, temporary abductions and sexual violence. The dry season from
March to June coincided with a peak in LRA-attributed incidents.
23. LRA groups continued to attack and loot communities in the Central African
Republic along the Obo-Zemio axis and in the Haute-Kotto prefecture, neighbouring
the Kafia Kingi enclave, where LRA fighters were often dispatched to loot food,
gold and diamonds. On 5 July, LRA elements entered the town of Kotto 3 and
demanded a meeting with community leaders for food. Betwee n 17 and
24 September, LRA elements attacked the community of Kpabou in Haute -Kotto
and clashed with ex-Séléka faction fighters.
24. Between April and October 2017, 12 LRA attacks allegedly took place in the
Central African Republic, leading to 4 deaths and 35 abductions. This constituted a
decrease from 46 attacks during the same period in 2016. Since May 2017, a rift
between two powerful factions of the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique provoked a resurgence of armed clashes in Haute -Kotto and Mbomou
prefectures, as well as the mobilization of anti-balaka groups along the BangassouObo axis, which created a challenging environment for LRA groups. Consequently,
LRA groups gradually shifted to south-eastern Mbomou and Haut-Mbomou
prefectures, possibly to avoid confrontations with other armed elements.
25. Nonetheless, the withdrawal of the African Union Regional Task Force from
the Central African Republic has left a security vacuum that has been exploited by
loosely associated armed militias, criminal gangs and various local splinter factions
operating in Mbomou and Haut-Mbomou. The economic consequences have
affected localities, illustrated most tangibly by price inflation for basic foodstuffs.
As insecurity has disrupted seasonal harvesting, strong food demand is outstripping
the capacity of the local market.
26. While the resurgence of violence throughout the subregion has had a harsher
impact on civilians, the declining trend in LRA attacks has led to abductions rather
than civilian casualties, necessitating new approaches to the protection of civilians.
The deliberate targeting of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) by armed groups
has restricted the Mission’s capacity to respond to incidents and threats in areas
affected by LRA.
27. On 4 July, the African Union Regional Task Force completed its withdrawal
from Yambio, South Sudan, and moved its headquarters to Koboko, Uganda.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
28. Since my previous report, seven incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea
in the Gulf of Guinea have been reported by the International Maritime
Organization.
29. Following a meeting held in Yaoundé on 8 June, the Gulf of Guinea
Interregional Network was established to tackle maritime crime in the Gulf of
Guinea. With a total budget of 9.2 million euros for a four -year period, the network
is supported by the European Union and covers all the coastal countries of the Gulf
of Guinea.
Poaching and the illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources
30. On 25 and 26 July, ECCAS organized an expert-level meeting in N’Djamena
on conflicts related to land use, wildlife and natural resources, followed by a
6/17

17-19959

S/2017/995

ministerial meeting on 27 July at which several strategic and operational tools were
validated, including a human/wildlife conflict management system and land conflict
management mechanisms.

B.

Humanitarian developments
31. Ongoing conflicts and new outbreaks of violence continued to a ffect millions
of people across the subregion. Some 2.4 million people have been displaced by the
Boko Haram crisis, which has also sparked severe food insecurity and health and
protection risks, including widespread sexual and gender -based violence. In the
affected areas across the Lake Chad Basin, humanitarian organizations were striving
to assist 8.2 million people, including 1 million people in the affected areas of
Cameroon and Chad.
32. The humanitarian response to the Lake Chad Basin crisis, which wa s scaled up
further in 2017, has effectively reached more than 5 million people. Needs are likely
to remain acute into 2018 and beyond, however, and require sustained aid and
recovery efforts. By September 2017, just over half of the required $1.5 billion for
relief assistance across the four affected countries had been funded. To address the
most urgent needs until the end of the year, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations were still seeking $661 million.
33. In the Central African Republic, approximately 600,000 people were internally
displaced, an increase of almost 50 per cent between January and August 2017,
while the number of refugees had also risen to 500,000, bringing the total number of
displaced persons to 1.1 million, the highest level recorded in the country.
Humanitarian operations have come under huge strain. Since the beginning of 2017,
there have been more than 200 acts of violence against aid workers. Relief
assistance was suspended multiple times or stopped entirely in some violencestricken localities in a country where half of the population needs aid to survive.
With the worsening crisis, the response budget was increased to $497 million from
around $400 million to provide life-saving aid to 1.8 million people. As at
13 November, it was only 36 per cent funded.

C.

Human rights trends
34. In Chad, reports of restrictions on the rights to freedom of expression,
demonstration, assembly and association continued, combined with claims of
harassment, arrest and detention of opposition and civil society leaders. The
Government has refuted these claims and reiterated its commitment to institutional
reforms to consolidate the rights of citizens and the rule of law. The Government
submitted a draft law to the National Assembly to reform the legal framework that
established the National Commission on Human Rights, which would help Chad to
comply with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights.
35. In its final report, issued on 4 September, the Commission of Inquiry on
Burundi concluded that there were reasonable grounds to believe that crimes against
humanity had been and continued to be committed since April 2015 and requested
the International Criminal Court to open an investigation. The Commission
documented human rights violations and abuses, including extrajudicial executions,
arbitrary arrests and detentions, torture, cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment,
sexual violence and forced disappearances. The Government has not agreed to
cooperate with the Commission thus far. On 13 September, six unidentified armed
persons broke into the premises of the Office of the United Nations High

17-19959

7/17

S/2017/995

Commissioner for Human Rights in Bujumbura. The authorities have opened an
investigation into the incident. On 9 November, the International Criminal Court
announced that on 25 October, the Office of the Prosecutor formally opened an
investigation into the situation in Burundi, and that there was a reasonable basis to
believe that members of the Burundian security forces and the Imbonerakure had
carried out a deliberate attack against the civilian population.
36. On 28 and 29 September, the Human Rights Council adopted two resolutions
on Burundi. In its resolution 36/2, the Council requested the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to urgently dispatch three experts to collect and
preserve information on the human rights situation, to be forwarded to the judicial
authorities of Burundi to pursue accountability. The High Commissioner was also
requested to present an oral and written report regarding the findings of the experts
to the Council in 2018. In its resolution 36/19, the Council extended for a period of
one year the mandate of the Commission of Inquiry on Burundi and requested the
Commission to present a report to the Council and at the seventy -third session of the
General Assembly, in 2018.
37. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, widespread violations of civic and
political rights continued in the context of a persistent trend of restrictions on
democratic space, intensified inter-ethnic and intercommunal violence and human
rights violations by defence and security forces. In the Kasai region, 87 mass graves
were identified and several hundred civilians reportedly killed. In Tanganyika
Province, intercommunal violence resulted in the killing and rape of dozens of
civilians. A general ban on demonstrations remained in place. Alarmingly, there
were increasing restrictions on the work of journalists and human rights defenders.
38. In the Central African Republic, MINUSCA documented verified incidents of
violations or abuses of human rights, including targeted attac ks against civilians
along religious and ethnic lines. Following his visit to the country from 6 to
11 October, my Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide condemned the
manipulation and incitement to ethnic and religious hatred.
39. In Cameroon, on 9 October, the National Commission on Human Rights and
Freedoms condemned violence committed against demonstrators on 1 October, as
well as arbitrary arrests and detentions. It reiterated its call for constructive dialogue
to find lasting solutions to the crisis. On 13 October, an international
non-governmental organization reported that at least 500 people were arbitrarily
arrested and detained during a string of demonstrations in September and October.
Some 200 detainees have reportedly been released since .
40. The United Nations continued to receive allegations of impunity for violations
and abuses of international human rights and international humanitarian law in the
context of counter-terrorism responses to Boko Haram by the Multinational Joint
Task Force and the security forces of Cameroon and Chad. Such information
included arbitrary arrests, prolonged detentions without trial and incidents of rape,
including in camps for internally displaced persons. The application of the death
penalty by Cameroon and Chad, as provided under the current terrorism legislation,
remained of concern.

D.

Socioeconomic trends
41. A slow recovery in commodity prices and the sharp fall in oil prices between
2014 and 2016 revealed major policy and structural deficits in the countries of the
subregion, including the inadequate diversification of the national economies,
non-inclusive growth, insufficient creation of income -generating jobs, especially for

8/17

17-19959

S/2017/995

a growing youth population, and a general lack of significant improvement in the
lives of populations.
42. Member States of the Central African Economic and Monetary Community
(CEMAC) have made concerted efforts to improve policies and ensure
macroeconomic stability at the national and subregional level, in compliance with
the decision taken by Heads of State and Government during the Yaoundé summit of
December 2016. The leaders have endorsed structural reforms aimed at
strengthening public financial management, fighting corruption and enhancing the
business environment and policies that would promote measures to reduce
macroeconomic imbalances. Those efforts culminated in the approval by IMF of
new support programmes for Cameroon and Chad of $666.2 million and
$312.1 million, respectively, under its Extended Credit Facility, and $642.0 million
for Gabon, under its Extended Fund Facility. IMF provided additional support to the
Central African Republic and is currently in discussions with the Congo and
Equatorial Guinea.
43. On 30 October, at an extraordinary summit held in N’Dj amena, CEMAC took
note of the ratification by all its member States of the 2013 agreement on the free
movement of persons within the subregion.
44. From 6 to 8 September, the Government of France hosted a round table for
donors in Paris, at which the Government of Chad presented its national
development plan for the period 2017–2021. The event was chaired by the President
of Chad, with organizational support from the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank. The Government of Chad received
pledges totalling $20 billion, including $7 billion from multilateral and bilateral
partners and $13 billion from private investors.

III. Activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa
A.

Good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation
45. During the reporting period, my Special Representative for Central Africa was
actively engaged in the subregion in promoting regional peace and security and
preventing conflict, including by undertaking several country -specific visits.
Burundi
46. From 8 to 13 July, my Special Representative visited Burundi, where he met
the President, Pierre Nkurunziza, senior Government officials, members of the
diplomatic corps and the United Nations country team. He underscored the need for
genuine and sustained commitment to and support for an inclusive dialogue that
contributes to reconciliation, stability and prosperity in Burundi.
Central African Republic
47. My Special Representative for Central Africa continued to engage with
regional leaders on the situation in the Central African Republic, in close
coordination with my Special Representative for the Central African Republic. In
this context, he mobilized the coordinated support of neighbouring countries and
subregional organizations for the peace process, urged the region to demonstrate
leadership and called for the harmonization of all diplomatic efforts under the
umbrella of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation and the Libreville
road map. In this regard, a country-specific discussion on the situation in the

17-19959

9/17

S/2017/995

Central African Republic took place during the forty-fourth ministerial meeting of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, held in Yaoundé from 29 May to 2 June, and it was decided that a mission of
the Committee Bureau would be deployed to the country ahead of the forty -fifth
ministerial meeting of the Committee. The Bureau visited the Central African
Republic on 30 and 31 October.
48. While in Chad from 27 to 30 July, my Special Representative met with the
President of Chad to seek his views on developments in the Central African
Republic and discuss avenues for the contribution of Chad to reinforce bilateral
cooperation and the stabilization of the country. They agreed that a relaunch of the
bilateral joint cooperation commission, which covers issues of common interest
such as security, transhumance and refugees, would be a valuable next step.
49. I visited the Central African Republic from 24 to 27 October. In addition to
spending United Nations Day in Bangui, I met with the President, Faustin -Archange
Touadéra, the Government, religious leaders and representatives from civil society,
women and youth groups. I visited Bangassou (Mboumou Prefecture) and the
predominantly Muslim PK5 neighbourhood in Bangui. I also addressed the National
Assembly. In my interactions, I stressed the need to advance the peace process and
national reconciliation
Cameroon
50. Throughout the reporting period, my Special Representative ma intained close
contact with the Cameroonian authorities and continued to encourage dialogue to
defuse tensions in the English-speaking North-West and South-West regions.
UNOCA took part in a United Nations electoral needs assessment mission to
Cameroon from 10 to 21 July.
51. On 27 October, I met with the President, Paul Biya, during a stopover in
Yaoundé. I reiterated the commitment of the United Nations to the unity and
territorial integrity of Cameroon, while also calling upon the Government to ensure
the proportionate use of force in responding to the crisis in the country, in
conformity with international human rights standards. I reiterated the call for
genuine dialogue to find a lasting solution to the crisis and underlined the readiness
of the United Nations to provide any assistance requested by the Cameroonian
authorities.
Chad
52. My Special Representative travelled to N’Djamena from 26 to 30 July, where
he met with the President of Chad, senior Government officials, political actors and
international partners to discuss the internal situation and regional issues. He
reiterated the need for inclusive dialogue and encouraged national stakeholders to
meet to discuss the time frame and modalities for such dialogue. An initial round of
meetings between the President and political and civil society actors was held in
N’Djamena in August and September.
53. From 6 to 8 September, my Special Representative participated in the Paris
round table for donors, at which he urged national and international part ners to
support the national development priorities, given the contribution of Chad to the
stability of the subregion and the humanitarian crisis it faced. He stressed the need
to pursue an inclusive and genuine political dialogue towards implementing poli tical
and institutional reforms.
54. From 25 October to 1 November, UNOCA co-led an inter-agency mission to
Chad to assist the United Nations country team in developing a peacebuilding
10/17

17-19959

S/2017/995

strategy, following my designation of Chad as eligible for financing fr om the
Peacebuilding Fund.
Gabon
55. My Special Representative maintained regular contacts with political actors,
with the aim of defusing tensions that have persisted since the 2016 presidential
election. He emphasized the need for dialogue to address grievances and to refrain
from acts of provocation. Following the national dialogue that ended on 27 May, he
interacted frequently with Government officials and opposition leaders to encourage
them to take the steps necessary to implement the recommendati ons resulting from
the dialogue. He underlined the need to work collaboratively on the agreed reforms
and on a comprehensive road map to ensure the peaceful holding of legislative
elections.
56. My Special Representative welcomed the decision of the Govern ment of
Gabon to engage in an intensified political dialogue with the European Union, with
a view to normalizing relations following the post-electoral crisis. UNOCA
participated as an observer in the dialogue that was held in Libreville in September
and October.
Congo
57. In the run-up to the legislative and local elections, my Special Representative
visited the Congo from 3 to 5 June to encourage inclusive participation and to
promote a peaceful environment. He also stressed the importance of stabiliz ing the
Pool region and called upon the Government to create conditions conducive to the
holding of legislative elections in the eight constituencies of the region, where
voting did not take place owing to security reasons. My Special Representative
travelled to Brazzaville again on 13 October, where he met with the President of the
Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, and the presidents of the two chambers of the
parliament. He welcomed the initiatives of the Congolese authorities aimed at
resolving the crisis in the Pool region through dialogue and encouraged the
Government and the parliament to accelerate the operationalization of the platforms
for political and social dialogue provided for under the Constitution of 2015. My
Special Representative highlighted the need for a timely and fair trial and good
detention conditions for the detained opposition leaders in accordance with
international standards. He commended the authorities for the release of some
detainees on humanitarian grounds.
58. UNOCA deployed a technical team to Brazzaville from 27 June to 2 July to
highlight the importance of further addressing the root causes of the situation in the
Pool region, including persisting impunity and human rights abuses, and the need
for a disarmament programme. My Special Representative consistently urged the
Government to allow humanitarian access to the region.
59. On 8 October, UNOCA deployed another working-level mission to the Congo
to participate in a conflict analysis and scenario -planning exercise, jointly with the
United Nations country team and UNDP.
Sao Tome and Principe
60. From 6 to 10 August, my Special Representative undertook a visit to Sao Tome
and Principe, where he met with the President, Evaristo Carvalho, the Prime
Minister, Patrice Trovoada, and the Minister of the Presidency of the Council of
Ministers and Parliamentary Affairs. He also held meetings with the National
Electoral Commission and representatives of political parties. He was briefed on the
preparations for local elections, including the updating of the voter list. He
17-19959

11/17

S/2017/995

encouraged the Government to take appropriate measures to address the concerns
expressed by the opposition with regard to the accuracy of the updated voter list and
the lack of universal fingerprint identification.

B.

Support to United Nations, regional and subregional initiatives on
peace and security
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa
61. In its capacity as the secretariat of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, UNOCA organized the forty fourth meeting of the Committee, held in Yaoundé from 29 May to 2 June. The
Committee reviewed the political and security situation in Central Africa and made
specific recommendations on actions to address the prevailing challenges. It
dedicated a session to the regional dimension of the situation in the Central African
Republic and adopted a declaration on the issue. The Committee considered the
findings of the evaluation that had been commissioned at its forty-third meeting and
adopted a declaration endorsing some of the recommendations resulting from the
evaluation, in particular those pertaining to its working methods and the need for
greater collaboration and synergy with relevant ECCAS peace and security organs.
Among other things, the Committee agreed to a more flexible agenda, a revised
format for the ministerial meeting and the institutionalization of national focal
points to improve the implementation of the Committee’s recom mendations by
relevant national authorities. The forty-fifth meeting of the Committee is scheduled
to be held in Kigali from 4 to 8 December.
62. UNOCA organized a visit by the Bureau of the Committee to Bangui on 30
and 31 October to assess recent developments in the Central African Republic. The
findings of the mission will be presented at the forty-fifth ministerial meeting.
Collaboration with regional, subregional and intergovernmental organizations
63. On 21 July and 12 October, my Special Representative and the SecretaryGeneral of ECCAS convened their second and third working meetings, respectively,
to strategically assess the situation in the region, identify key issues and priorities
for joint action and examine progress in the cooperatio n between their respective
institutions.
64. On 31 July and 1 August in Libreville, UNOCA and the ECCAS secretariat, in
collaboration with the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), the ECOWAS Commission and the West Africa Network for
Peacebuilding, organized an interregional workshop at which participants
exchanged good practices between civil society in West and Central Africa. Over 40
representatives of civil society organizations from the ECCAS region participated in
the workshop, at which an action plan was adopted for developing a more
coordinated partnership between ECCAS and civil society in early warning and
conflict prevention in Central Africa.
65. Furthermore, from 2 to 4 August in Libreville, the four partners organized
another workshop on mainstreaming gender in early warning and conflict
prevention in Central Africa. The workshop, which was facilitated by the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women),
was attended by around 22 participants from the ECCAS secretariat, the ECOWAS
Commission and relevant ministries from five ECCAS member States.

12/17

17-19959

S/2017/995

66. On 30 August in Yaoundé, UNOCA, in collaboration with ECCAS, facilitated
the creation of a regional network of women in the media for peac e and security in
Central Africa. The network will contribute to a greater mobilization of women
across the region, promote enhanced advocacy for the effective implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), serve as a platform for collaboration with
other entities and highlight issues with regard to women and peace and security in
Central Africa.
67. In furtherance of the women and peace and security agenda, UNOCA, in
collaboration with ECCAS, has recruited an international consultant to facilitate the
development of a regional action plan for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). The consultant will seek political commitments from
countries of the subregion to reduce gender inequalities and the underrepresentation
of women in peace processes and governance. Additionally, UNOCA, in
cooperation with ECCAS and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, developed a joint three-year regional programme on
strengthening the capacity of youth in managing an early warning system to
promote peace and security in Central Africa. A workshop to launch the subregion wide, three-year project is planned to be held in Libreville from 30 November to
2 December.
Mediation
68. From 11 to 13 September, UNOCA and UNOWAS organized a workshop for
the ECCAS secretariat and the ECOWAS Commission in Abuja. The workshop
benefited from the technical expertise of the Department of Political Affairs of the
Secretariat, UNDP, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the West Africa Network for Peacebuilding. The subregional
organizations exchanged lessons learned and good practices in early warning,
mediation support, civil society engagement, electoral violence prevention, security
cooperation, regional integration, institutional reforms and resource mobilization.
Participants agreed to finalize a memorandum of understanding between the ECCAS
secretariat and the ECOWAS Commission to formalize their cooperation and
coordination in addressing transregional challenges and priorities.
Boko Haram
69. In accordance with the United Nations Global Counter -Terrorism Strategy,
Security Council resolution 2349 (2017) and the United Nations system-wide
strategy on the Lake Chad Basin crisis, UNOCA is developing an integrated plan to
tackle the root causes of the crisis. The plan will be focused on non -military
solutions to support Multinational Joint Task Force operations and actions to help to
remedy the effects of the violence committed by Boko Haram and the consequences
suffered by local populations. A joint monitoring system will be initiated with
UNOWAS to pool efforts and assist in creating coherenc e with regard to the
interventions of the two regional offices.
Regional integration
70. Despite constraints, some progress was made by ECCAS in the
implementation of its sector programmes designed to facilitate trade and the free
movement of people, notably in the areas of policy advocacy and institutional
capacity-building. My Special Representative reinforced the work of the ECCAS
secretariat by advocating to Heads of State and Government for the need to
overcome barriers to regional integration in Central Africa, including by
accelerating institutional reforms to the ECCAS secretariat, and by advocating to
Heads of State and Government for the rationalization of ECCAS and CEMAC.
17-19959

13/17

S/2017/995

71. As part of a broader strategy to strengthen the institutional capaci ty of the
ECCAS secretariat, participants in the ECCAS-ECOWAS workshop mentioned in
paragraph 68 above discussed lessons learned and strategies in accelerating regional
integration, fostering intraregional security coordination and cooperation in support
of regional integration, and undertaking institutional reforms and transformation.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
72. On 4 and 5 October, UNOCA participated in a meeting of Navy Chiefs of Staff
and other maritime actors of ECCAS member States in Libreville. The aim of the
meeting was to, inter alia, further implement the Code of Conduct Concerning the
Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery Against Ships and Illicit Maritime Activity in
West and Central Africa, propose judicial reforms concerning maritime affairs and
further clarify and implement the legal, operational and financial measures provided
for in the regional maritime security strategy.
Regional strategy and plan of action on counter-terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in Central Africa
73. Following extensive consultations between member States of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, the
Committee reiterated, at its forty-fourth meeting, that the coordination of and
follow-up to the implementation of the regional strategy would be placed under the
responsibility of the ECCAS secretariat. The Committee also called upon the
ECCAS peace and security organs, notably the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa, to officially endorse the strategy, and urged ECCAS member States
to take ownership of the strategy.
Coordination of the implementation of the United Nations regional strategy to
address the threat and impact of the Lord’s Resistance Army
Operationalization of the African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army
74. From 23 to 30 July, UNOCA and the African Union conducted a joint mission
to assess the prevailing situation in Obo, Central African Republic, following the
withdrawal of the Ugandan troops from the African Union Regional Task Force and
the end of the mandate of the special forces of the United States of America.
Information gathered during the mission indicated the threat of inc reased violence
in Obo, along with concerns about social cohesion and food security in the area. The
mission recommended a strengthened security presence in Obo with an intensive
awareness campaign on the importance of social cohesion and the rehabilitatio n of
the Obo-Bambouti road, which would enable the flow of goods and ease food
security concerns.
75. In cooperation with the African Union, UNOCA organized a workshop on
19 and 20 October in Entebbe, Uganda, for the benefit of sector commanders of the
African Union Regional Task Force and with the overall aim of establishing an
information-sharing forum between the Regional Task Force and United Nations
missions in areas affected by LRA.
76. On 30 November and 1 December, UNOCA, in cooperation with the Afr ican
Union, organized the tenth meeting of LRA focal points to review the regional
strategy.

14/17

17-19959

S/2017/995

Protection of civilians and humanitarian assistance
77. Also under the regional strategy, MINUSCA advocated for reinforcement of
the Central African Armed Forces in Obo and reinforced its own contingent there as
part of the current arrangement with the national armed forces for improved
coordination on the ground.
Disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
78. The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continued to encourage LRA elements to surrender,
including through broadcasting campaigns. Ten individuals surrendered during the
reporting period.
Long-term development and peacebuilding support
79. Stabilization and recovery efforts in areas affected by LRA remain seriously
underfunded and mostly unaddressed. State authorities and humanitarian and
development actors, including United Nations entities, are largely absent.

C.

Enhancing United Nations coherence and coordination in
the subregion
80. Enhanced cooperation between my Special Representative and United Nations
resident coordinators and country teams in the subregion has further improved the
ability of the United Nations to engage with national authorities and other relevant
actors with a view to defusing political tensions, facilitating confidence -building
measures and ensuring inclusive dialogue. It has also been essential for highlighting
links between existing national and subregional priorities for conflict prevention
and peacebuilding and for strengthening United Nations system-wide cooperation
and support for the subregion.
81. Ahead of the legislative elections in the Congo, UNOCA, in cooperation with
UNDP and UN-Women, supported the holding of a capacity-building workshop for
300 female candidates in Brazzaville from 19 to 24 June. The elections resulted in
an increase in the number of women representatives in the National Assembly from
12 to 17 and in the local councils from 135 to 246.
82. On 6 October, UNOCA and UNOWAS convened a joint meeting in Dakar to
strengthen their partnership in support of ECCAS and ECOWAS. The two regional
offices agreed to institutionalize their cooperation in the areas of mariti me security,
the prevention of and the combat against violent extremism and terrorism,
transhumance and the provision of institutional capacity-building support to the
subregional organizations.

IV. Observations and recommendations
83. I remain concerned by the continuing political tensions in parts of the
subregion linked to contested electoral processes and exacerbated by social and
economic difficulties. These tensions have the potential to spiral into widespread
violence. I call upon all stakeholders to resolve their differences in a peaceful
manner and in conformity with existing legal frameworks. I also call upon the
Governments of concerned States to ensure that internal security measures and
operations are conducted in conformity with international law. I welcome and

17-19959

15/17

S/2017/995

encourage the efforts that have been undertaken to calm tensions, including through
inclusive dialogue.
84. I call upon the Government of Cameroon and all Cameroonians to take
immediate steps to prevent any further outbursts of violence and to work together,
including through a process of open and inclusive dialogue, to devise long -term
solutions to address grievances. I welcome the launch of the judicial investigations
into alleged human rights violations and abuses committed agains t demonstrators by
security forces in the North-West and South-West regions on 1 October. I condemn
the use of any form of violence and reiterate the need to exercise restraint. I urge the
Cameroonian authorities to ensure that security forces exercise res traint and take
measures to prevent the use of force when policing demonstrations.
85. I call upon the Government of the Congo to put in place the Commission
nationale du dialogue. I call upon the Government of Gabon to ensure the full
implementation of the recommendations from the recently held national dialogue. I
encourage the Government of Chad and Chadian actors to further open the space for
political dialogue and to work together towards common solutions for the
challenges faced. My Special Representative will continue to carry out his good
offices role and engage in preventive diplomacy across the subregion, in
cooperation with regional organizations.
86. I am encouraged by the efforts undertaken to strengthen the capacities and role
of ECCAS and by the outcome of the evaluation of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, and I call for further
work and progress to harmonize regional efforts to address common security threats
and strengthen capacities. I welcome the efforts by Governments of the subregion to
accelerate and deepen the process of regional integration. UNOCA will work with
the member States of ECCAS in this regard.
87. I am equally encouraged by the successes in the fight against Boko Haram an d
by the regional and international cooperation that made those successes possible.
This has resulted in commitments to address the root causes of the crisis beyond the
military dimension. However, the terrorist group continues to pose a serious threat
to regional peace and security and remains capable of carrying out asymmetric
attacks that result in devastating consequences for the affected areas.
88. I urge all stakeholders to redouble their efforts to address the Boko Haram
crisis, in full conformity with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law. I call upon the Governments concerned to address the immediate
manifestations of Boko Haram violence and accelerate the development of a
regional strategy to address the root causes of the crisis, as well as to deal with the
cases of former Boko Haram members who surrender in addition to those already in
custody. I urge the international community to increase its political, humanitarian,
early recovery, logistical and financial assistance to the a ffected countries, the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. Additionally,
I encourage ECCAS and ECOWAS to continue to deepen cooperation and
coordination on this issue. UNOCA and UNOWAS stand ready to support the two
organizations in this regard.
89. The upcoming international conference on security and development in the
Sahel, to be held in Brussels on 14 December, provides another opportunity to
mobilize resources for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and ra ise
awareness of the development needs of the region. I urge the international
community to contribute generously to ensure that the Force is fully equipped to
deliver on its mandate. However, the international community should not lose sight
of the broader objectives of promoting peace, good governance and development in
the Sahel region.
16/17

17-19959

S/2017/995

90. I reiterate my call upon Member States of the region and international partners
to provide the resources needed to fully operationalize the Interregional
Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea and for
the full implementation of the maritime security strategy. I also call upon ECCAS,
ECOWAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission to deepen their cooperation and
coordination to fully realize the gains and advantages of the strategy. UNOCA and
UNOWAS will continue to provide assistance and mobilize support for combating
maritime insecurity.
91. Poaching and illicit wildlife trafficking continue to threaten endangered
animals and have a negative impact on the overall environmental, governance and
security situation in the subregion, including through the continuing links between
the illicit wildlife trade and armed groups. I urge Governments in the subregion to
focus efforts on eradicating poaching and on operationalizing the decisions
contained in General Assembly resolutions 69/314 and 70/301 and the African
Strategy on Combating Illegal Exploitation and Illegal Trade in Wild Fauna and
Flora in Africa. In collaboration with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, UNOCA will continue to support subregional efforts to identify
collaborative approaches to address the issue.
92. I am extremely concerned by the deterioration of security in certain parts of
the Central African Republic, as well as the overall, pervasive instability and
continued human rights violations in the country. I urge the African Union, ECCAS
and Governments of the subregion to quickly operationalize the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation and to remain actively engaged in stabilization efforts.
My Special Representative for the Central African Republic and my Special
Representative for Central Africa will continue to work closely with neighbouring
States and regional and subregional organizations in support of national efforts
towards finding a peaceful solution to the crisis. They will also work to mobilize
financial support for the humanitarian response program mes for the affected
population.
93. I remain concerned that LRA continues to demonstrate its ability and
willingness to target civilians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic and negatively affect the security situation in both
countries. I call upon the African Union and troop -contributing countries to quickly
agree on the necessary reconfiguration of the African Union Regional Task Force
and increase their support for the training of the Central African Armed Forces. I
reiterate my conviction that a steady commitment on the part of affected States and
regional and international partners to address the immediate manifestations of LRA
violence, as well as to finance broader protection, humanitarian and development
programmes, is crucial to finally ending the threat posed by LRA.
94. I would like to express my appreciation to the Governments of the region,
ECCAS, CEMAC, the African Union, the Gulf of Guinea Commission and other
regional and subregional institutions for their continued collaboration with
UNOCA. I would also like to express my appreciation to the Multinational Joint
Task Force and troop-contributing countries for their dedication and commitment to
the service of peace and stability. I am grateful to the Government and people of
Gabon for their generous hospitality and support to UNOCA. I would like to thank
the various entities of the United Nations system working in Central Africa,
including the heads of United Nations peace operations, regional offices, countr y
teams and other entities, for their support to and cooperation with UNOCA.
95. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, François Louncény
Fall, and the staff of UNOCA for their continuing efforts to advance the cause of
peace and security in Central Africa.

17-19959

17/17
