V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and unacceptably low levels of income among the vast
majority of the population,
Affirming the urgent need for international action to assist
the Government of Liberia in its efforts for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the country,
l. Urgently appeals to all Member States, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system and international financial and development institutions to contribute generously, through bilateral or multilateral channels, to the reconstruction, rehabilitation and
development of Liberia;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to organize an international programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Liberia to enable it to meet its long-term needs
with respect to reconstruction, rehabilitation and development;
3. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization and the United Nations Children's Fund--to expand their programmes of assistance to Liberia, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme
of assistance and to report periodically to him on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made available
to help that country;
4. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental
organizations, as well as the international financial and development institutions, to give urgent consideration to the
establishment of a programme of assistance to Liberia or,
where one is already in existence, to the expansion of that
programme;
5. Urges Member States and the relevant United Nations bodies,.-in particular the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Health Organization and
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities-to
provide all possible assistance to help the Government of
Liberia to meet the critical humanitarian needs of the
population and to provide, as appropriate, food, medicines
and essential equipment for hospitals and schools;
6. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consi~eration, the special needs of Liberia and to report the
decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by 15
July 1982;
7. Invites the Government of Liberia to provide the
Committee for Development Planning, on the basis of the
existing criteria, with up-to-date statistical data and information pertinent to the examination of the country's economic situation, with a view to considering the possibility
of its inclusion in the list of the least developed countries;
8. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite
the Committee for Development Planning, in the light of
the new data and information provided by the Government
of Liberia, to consider, on the basis of the existing criteria,
the eligibility of that country for inclusion in the list of the
least developed countries;

139

9. Requests Member States and the organizations of the
United Nations system to accord Liberia, in view of its
critical economic situation, assistance that is adequate to
the needs of the country until the situation returns to normal;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To dispatch a mission to Liberia with a view to
holding consultations with the Government on the additional
assistance which it needs for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the country and to communicate
the report of the mission to the international community,
the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly;
(b) To ensure that adequate financial arrangements are
made for the organization of an effective international programme of assistance to Liberia and for the mobilization
of international assistance;
(c) To inform the Economic and Social Council, at its
second regular session of 1982, of the assistance granted
to Liberia;
(d) To keep the situation in Liberia under review and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the implementation of the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December I 981

36/208.

Special economic assistance to Benin

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/88 of 5 December 1980, in
which it appealed to the international community to provide
effective and continuous financial, material and technical
assistance to Benin so as to help that country overcome its
financial and economic difficulties,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 419 ( 1977) of
24 November 1977, in which the Council appealed to all
States and all appropriate international organizations, including the United Nations and the specialized agencies, to
assist Benin,
Having heard the statement made by the representative
of Benin before the Second Committee on 29 October
1981 183 describing his country's serious economic and financial situation,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 184
to which was annexed the report of the interagency mission
which he dispatched to Benin in May 1981 ,
Noting from the report the serious economic and financial
problems that confront Benin, which arise primarily from
the weak and underdeveloped state of its economic and
social infrastructure, its lack of financial and material resources and its chronic foreign trade deficit,
Noting further that Benin's terms of trade have deteriorated sharply and that the production of export crops has
been adversely affected by drought,
Taking note of the recommended programme of assistance
to Benin drawn up by the mission in consultation with the
Government, 185
Noting further Benin's urgent need for international assistance in its health programmes, as well as for food aid,
Aware of the desire of the Government of Benin to organize, with the assistance of the United Nations Development Programme, a round-table conference of providers
of funds in 1982 to discuss the country's development needs

'"Ibid., Second Committee, 27th meeting, paras. 30-33.
A/36/269.
'"' Ibid .. annex. sect. IV.

IM

140

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

and to consider ways and means of backing the Government
in its efforts to meet those needs,
Bearing in mind that Benin is classified as one of the
least developed countries,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the measures he has taken to organize an international
economic assistance programme for Benin;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations
of the mission, contained in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General;
3. Urgently reiterates its appeal to all Member States
to provide ample and appropriate assistance, through bilateral and multilateral channels, wherever possible in the fonn
of grants or concessionary loans, in order to enable Benin
to implement fully the recommended special programme of
economic assistance;
4. Urges Member States, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system. regional and interregional governmental bodies, financial and development
institutions and non-governmental organizations to support
fully the efforts of the Government of Benin to mobilize
funds for its special programme of economic assistance and,
to this end, to respond generously to the needs of Benin at
the forthcoming round-table conference;
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization and the
United Nations Children's Fund-to maintain and expand
their programmes of assistance to Benin, to co-operate
closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective
international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on the steps they have taken and the resources they have made available to help that country;
6. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental
organizations, as well as international financial and development institutions, to give urgent consideration to the establishment of a programme of assistance to Benin, or where
one is already in existence, to the expansion of that
programme;
7. Urges Member States and the relevant United Nations bodies-in particular the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Health Organization and
~e United ~ations ~und for Population Activities._-,to provide all possible assistance to help the Government of Benin
to meet the critical humanitarian needs of the population
and to provide, as appropriate, food, medicines and essential
equipment for hospitals and schools;
8. Invites the United Nations Development Programme.
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank
an~ the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
bnng to the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consideration, the special needs of Benin and to report the
decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by IS
July 1982;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective program of financial, technical
and material assistance to Benin;
(b) To ensure that the necessary financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the organization of the

international programme of assistance to Benin and the
mobilization of that assistance;
(c) To keep the situation in Benin under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council.
at its second regular session of 1982, of the status of the
special programme of economic assistance for Benin;
(d) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of Benin and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special programme of economic assistance for
that country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenarv meetinx
17 December /9R/

36/209.

Assistance to Sao Tome and Principe

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/ 187 of 21 December 1976. in
which, inter alia, it expressed deep concern at the serious
economic and social situation in Sao Tome and Principe as
a result of the total lack of infrastructure for development
and appealed urgently to the international community to
assist the Government of Sao Tome and Principe to enable
it to establish the necessary social and economic infrastructure for development,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/96 of 13 December 1977.
33/ 125 of 19 December 1978, 34/131 of 14 December 1979
and 35/93 of 5 December 1980, in which it reiterated its
appeal to the international community to provide financial,
material and technical assistance to Sao Tome and Principe.
Bearing in mind its resolution 31 /156 of 21 December
1976, in which it urged all Governments. in particular those
of the developed countries. to lend their support, in the
context of their assistance programmes, for the implementation of the specific action envisaged in favour of developing island countries, and its resolution 32/ I 85 of 19
December 1977, in which it urged all organizations in the
United Nations system to implement, within their respective
spheres of competence, appropriate specific action in favour
of developing island countries, as well as its resolution 34/
205 of 19 December 1979, which sets out a specific action
programme in favour of developing island countries.
Recalling its resolutions 32/160 of I 9 December 1977
and 33/ 197 of 29 January 1979 on the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa,
Having considered the conclusions and recommendations
contai_ned in_ the report of the Committee for Development
Plannmg on its seventeenth session concerning identification
of the least developed countries, 186
Noting the renewed request of Sao Tome and Principe
that its exceptional economic circumstances should again
be reviewed by the Committee for Development Planning.
Taking account of the statement made by the representative of Sao Tome and Principe before the Second Committee on 29 October 1981 187 to the effect that there are no
recent official national income statistics available for Sao
Tome and Principe and that available published data are out
of date and do not reflect the current situation in that country.

"" See Official Records or rh,· t:conomic and Social Council. 19/i I.
Supplement No. 7 (E/1981/27). ~hap. IV.
"' Official Records or the General Assemhlv. Thirtv-sixth S,•.Hion. Sl'<ond Commit/et'. 27th meeting. para,. 52 and -53.
·
