V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

it impossible for the Government to undertake a programme
of reconstruction, rehabilitation and development, owing to
inadequate external financial assistance,
l. Expresses its gratification to the Secretary-General
for the efforts he has made to mobilize resources for carrying
out the programme of assistance to the Central African
Republic;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the States, the international; regional and interregional organizations and other
intergovernmental organizations for their contribution to the
programme of assistance to the Central African Republic;
3. Notes with concern, however, that the assistance provided under this heading continues to fall far short of the
country's urgent needs;
4. Urgently draws the attention of the international
community to table 6 of the annex to the Secretary-General's
report, 38 which indicates the projects for which financing is
partially assured and those for which no financing has been
forthcoming;
5. Reiterates its appeal to all States to contribute generously, through bilateral or multilateral channels, to the
reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the Central African Republic;
6. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund
for Agricultural Development, the World Food Programme,
the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization-to maintain their programmes of assistance
to the Central African Republic, to co-operate closely with
the Secretary-General in his efforts to organize an effective
international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on the steps they have taken and the resources they have made available to help that country;
7. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental
organizations--in particular the European Economic Community, the European Development Fund, the African Development Bank, the Arab Bank for Economic Development
in Africa, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries Fund for International Development, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development, the Kuwaiti Fund and
the Abu Dhabi Fund-to give urgent consideration to the
establishment of a programme of assistance to the Central
African Republic or, where one is already in existence, to
the expansion and considerable strengthening of that programme with a view to its implementation as soon as possible;
8. Urges all States and relevant United Nations bodies--in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the World Food Programme, the United Nations
Children's Fund, the World Health Organization, the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities and the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization-to provide
all possible assistance to help the Government of the Central African Republic to cope with the critical humanitarian
needs of the population and to provide, as appropriate, food,
medicines and essential equipment for schools and hospitals, as well as to meet the emergency needs of the population in the drought-stricken areas of the country;
9. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to

119

bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consideration, the special needs of the Central African Republic and to report the decisions of those bodies to the
Secretary-General by 15 July 1983;
IO. Again draws the attention of the international community to the special account opened by the SecretaryGeneral at United Nations Headquarters in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 35/87 for the purpose
of facilitating the channelling of contributions to the
Central African Republic;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to organize a special emergency assistance programme with regard to food and health,
especially medicaments, vaccines, hospital equipment, generating sets for field hospitals, water pumps and food products in order to help the vulnerable populations, whose
steadily deteriorating situation is becoming a matter of increasingly serious concern;
(b) To continue also his efforts to mobilize necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to the Central African Republic;
(c) To ensure that the necessary financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the organization of the
international programme of assistance to the Central African
Republic and the mobilization of that assistance;
(d) To keep the situation in the Central African Republic
under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations and the international financial
institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of I 983, of the
status of the special programme of economic assistance for
the Central African Republic;
(e) To report on the progress made in the economic
situation of the Central African Republic and in organizing
and implementing the special programme of economic assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.

109th plenary meeting
17 December /982
37/146.

Assistance to Sao Tome and Principe 19

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/96 of 13 December 1977, 33/
125 of 19 December 1978, 34/131 of 14 December 1979.
35/93 of 5 December 1980 and 36/209 of 17 December
1981 , in which it reiterated its appeal to the international
community to provide financial, material and technical assistance to Sao Tome and Principe to enable it to establish
the necessary social and economic infrastructure for
development,
A ware that the economic and social development of Sao
Tome and Principe has been seriously hindered by inadequate health, educational and housing facilities, as well as
by inadequate infrastructure, and that urgent improvement
in these sectors is a prerequisite for the country's future
progress,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-GeneraJ, 40
to which was annexed the report of the review mission sent
to Sao Tome and Principe,

'" See also resolution 37 / t:n ahove.
"' A/17/127.

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

120

1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to Sao
Tome and Principe;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations
contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
and international organizations which have contributed assistance to Sao Tome and Principe;
4. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system, regional and interregional organizations and
other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as international financial institutions,
to assist in the development of Sao Tome and Principe
through bilateral and multilateral channels, as appropriate;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To keep the situation in Sao Tome and Principe
under constant review and to apprise the Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular session of 1984, of the
current status of the special economic assistance for Sao
Tome and Principe;
(b) To report on the progress made in the economic
situation of Sao Tome and Principe and in organizing and
implementing the special programme of economic assistance
for that country in time for the matter to be considered by
the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
109th plenary meeting
17 December I 982

37/147.

Assistance to the drought-stricken areas of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan
and Uganda

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/90 and 35/91 of 5 December
1980 and 36/221 of 17 December 1981 on the question of
assistance to the drought-stricken areas of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda,
Concerned about the continued adverse effects of drought
on the economic and social development of those countries,
Noting the reports of the Secretary-General on Djibouti,
Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda, 41
Bearing in mind the ongoing consultations between the
countries concerned to establish the intergovernmental body
recommended by the General Assembly in its resolution
35/90,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 36/221 on assistance to the
drought-stricken areas of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda;
2. Endorses the recommendations made by the multiagency mission to Ethiopia; 42
3. Takes note of the ongoing consultations between the
Governments concerned on the establishment of the intergovernmental body to combat the effects of drought and
other natural disasters and urges them to finalize, as soon
as possible, the necessary arrangements for the establishment of that body;
4. Notes that the Secretary-General has made arrangements with the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, subject to the availability of funds,
for a unit within the programmes administered by the Administrator to be assigned responsibility for assisting the
41

42

N37/122 and A/37/198.
See A/37/198, annex.

affected countries in the region and for co-ordinating the
activities of the United Nations system in support of recov ·
ery and rehabilitation in those countries;
5. Appeals to Member States to provide the Secretary
General with the resources required to meet the operational
costs of such a unit as soon as the intergovernmental hody
is established;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in close co-ordina
tion with the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the appropriate specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, to
continue to extend all necessary assistance to thrn,e countries
in their efforts to combat the effects of drought on the hasis
of the recommendations of various multi-agency missions.
pending the establishment of the intergovernmental body:
7. Also requests the Secretary-General, in close co
ordination with the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the appropriate specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, to assist the Governments of the region, at their request.
in establishing or improving national machinery to rnmbal
the effects of drought and other natural disasters and to
report to the Economic and Social Council, at its second
regular session of I 983, and to the General Assembly at its
thirty-eighth session on the progress achieved in the implc
mentation of the present resolution.

109th plenary mel'ting
17 Decemher /9~2

37/148.

Assistance to Botswana

The General Assembly.
Recalling Security Council resolutions 403 ( 1977) ut
14 January 1977 and 406 (1977) of 25 May 1977, which
concerned the complaint by the Government of Botswana
regarding acts of aggression committed against its terrilor)
by the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 460 ( 1979) ol
21 December 1979, in which all Member States and spe
cialized agencies were called upon to provide urgent assist
ance to Zimbabwe and the front-line States,
Recalling its resolutions 32/97 of 13 December 1977, .BI
130 of 19 December 1978 and 34/ 125 of 14 December 1979,
in which the General Assembly, inter alia, recognized the
special economic hardship confronting Botswana as a result
of diverting funds from development projects to effective
arrangements for security against attacks and threats by
Southern Rhodesia, and endorsed the assessments and rec·
ommendations contained in the notes of the Secretary.
General dated 28 March l 977 4 ~ and 26 October 1977 44 and
in his reports of 7 July 197845 and 28 August I979, 40
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General ot
16 August 1982, 47 to which was annexed the report of the
mission which he sent to Botswana in response to General
Assembly resolution 36/222 of 17 December 1981 ,
Taking into account the fact that Botswana's economic
situation has been further aggravated by a serious drought
and a sharp fall in export earnings,

43
Official Record., of the Security Council. J'/1irn• ..,e, ,md !'ear. \111'
plement for January, February and March 1977. document S 1 12307
44
Ibid., Supplement for October, November and Deamha /977. dol·
ument Sil 2421.
"'A/33/166 and Corr. I
46
A/341419-S/13506.
47
A/37/132-S/1531 I
