I,,,ii. I ,! i 5$!7
I.

United Nations

4

‘j

i-:

S/PV.37@ (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Fifty-second Year

3745

th Meeting
Thursday, 6 March 1997, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wlosowicz

. . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Poland)

Members:

Chile ..........................................
China ..........................................
Costa Rica .......................................
Egypt ..........................................
France ..........................................
Guinea-Bissau ....................................
Japan ..........................................
Kenya ..........................................
Portugal ........................................
Republic of Korea .................................
Russian Federation .................................
Sweden .........................................
United Kingdom of Great Britain ‘and Northern Ireland ........
United States of America ............................

Mr. Larrain
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Berrocal Soto
Mr. Elaraby
Mr. Thiebaud
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Konishi
Mr. Mahugu
Mr. Soares
Mr. Choi
Mr. Fedotov
Mr. Osvald
Sir John Weston
Mr. Richardson

Agenda
The situation in the occupied Arab territories

This record contains the original text of speechesdelivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the OfSicial Records of the Security
Corrrzcil. Corrections should be submitted to original speechesonly. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record snd be sent under the signaturd of a member of the delegation concerned,
wifhirl one tvcek of t/~e date qf publication,
to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The meeting was suspended at 6.35 p.m., 5 March
1997, and
resumed at 10.50 a.m., 6 March 1997.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have just received a letter from the representative of
Malta in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pace (Malta)
took the seat resewed for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Algeria. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (interpretationfrom Arabic): First
of all, Sir, I should like to convey to you my most sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I am firmly convinced that
your well-known wisdom and experience and your
knowledge of world affairs will ensure the successful
completion of the Council’s work.
I also take pleasure in extending my thanks and paying
tribute to my dear brother, the Permanent Representative of
Kenya to the United Nations, for his competence in leading
this body during a period when its activity was on the
increase.
At a time when hopes were being raised that the peace
process was once again slowly moving in the right
direction - in spite of all the obstacles created by the
Israeli authorities, which had almost brought the process to
a standstill - these authorities decided to build a major
settlement within East Jerusalem. It appears as if the goal
of this serious step is to undermine the peace process as a
whole and to provoke the international community, and in
particular the Council, which has repeatedly condemned the
settlements policy.
Indeed, this policy cannot be taken in isolation. It is
part of the considered, calculated plan followed by the
Israeli authorities since the occupation of Jerusalem and the
other Arab territories - a plan designed to continue the

2

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
settlement policy, whatever the cost, whatever the
international reaction and whatever the grave dangers
involved for peace.
Everyone - including the Israeli authorities knows that the settlements policy flagrantly contravenes
the basic tenets of the peace process. This policy is
contrary to the spirit and the letter of the IsraeliPalestinian peace accords and the American guarantees
submitted to the Arab parties at the Madrid Peace
Conference. This policy is also quite clearly a ViOlatiOn Of
the relevant United Nations resolutions, including Security
Council resolutions, which have consistently stated that
the measures and steps taken by the Israeli authorities,
including the expropriation of land and property, Larenull
and void.
In this connection, we should like to refer to an
important resolution adopted by the Council. Resolution
476 (1980) forbids any alteration of the geographic or
demographic nature of the city of Jerusalem.
Consequently, this latest Israeli measure is null and void
and can receive no international recognition.
Apart from the fact that this decision by Israel
represents a flagrant violation of international law and of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, we are even more
concerned at the fact that the proposed Israeli settlement
is intended to house 35,000 Jews from all different ‘areas.
It is part of a broader project that began in 1967, under
which more than 39,000 housing units have been built in
East Jerusalem. This project would open up Jerusalem to
tens of thousands of Jewish settlers. It is designed
radically to change the demographic nature of the Holy
City, thereby serving the purposes of the Israeli
authorities: to use this new status as a means for
manoeuvres and pressure during the upcoming
negotiations on the future of the city.
Algeria reaffirms its dedication to a just and
comprehensive peace as a strategic choice of the Arab
nation - a peace based on internationally binding
resolutions and on the principle of land for peace. Algeria
therefore vigorously condemns this latest Israeli measure
and demands that it be rescinded.
The Israeli authorities have been pursuing a policy
of provocation and of fait accompli vis-&vis the
international community and internationally
binding
resolutions, including Security Council resolution I 073
(1996), which has not yet been implemented. In the face
of the grave risks and dangers that the latest Israeli

Security Council
Fiftv-second vear
measures pose for the pea& process and for security and
stability in the region as a whole, our Council must today
fully discharge its responsibilities and react immediately
and in a practical manner to bring pressure to bear on the
Israeli authorities so that they rescind their decision. This
would reaffirm the credibility of the’Counci1 in the area of
the maintenance of international peace and security and in
restoring justice and the rule of law.
The President: I thank the representative of Algeria
for the kind words he addressed to me. The next speaker is
the representative of the United Arab Emirates. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation
from Arabic): I am pleased to convey to you, Sir, on behalf
of the delegation of the United Arab Emirates, our heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We would like also to
express our sincere thanks to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Kenya, for the exemplary way
in which he conducted the business of the Council last
month.
The Security Council is meeting today to consider the
decision of the Israeli Government to establish a new
Jewish settlement comprising 6,500 housing units in the
southern part of occupied East Jerusalem - specifically in
the area of Jabal Abu Ghneim - only days before the
beginning of the final status negotiations. The Council’s
consideration of this subject is an expression of the deep
concern of its members regarding the grave consequences
to the peace process of the Israeli decision. In particular,
that decision runs counter to the clear political and legal
principles reaffirmed in Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and to the principle that territory
may not be acquired by force. All this makes it clear that
such measures are both illegal and null and void.
This Israeli scheme, aimed at the Judaization of East
Jerusalem and the consolidation of the occupation is a
sequel to previous settlement schemes, including the
opening of the tunnel under the Haram al-Sharif by Israeli
forces in defiance of Security Council resolution 1073
(1996); the demolition of the building belonging to the Burj
al-Laqlaq association within the walls of the Old City; the
denial of the right of residence to Palestinians; the
expropriation of their land, in particular in East Jerusalem
in preparation for an illegal campaign for the absorption of
thousands of new Jewish immigrants at the expense of the
Palestinian people. In addition, Israeli authorities continue

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
to isolate the city of East Jerusalem from the other cities
of the West Bank and to deny Palestinians access to the
Holy City. Recently, the Israeli authorities closed the
offices of Palestinian national institutions.
All these measures are null and void. They have also
been rejected not only by the Palestinian and Arab
peoples of the occupied territories, but also by all peaceloving countries and peoples of the world. Given the
spiritual and cultural importance of this Holy City for the
three divine religions, it should be a city of peace,
tolerance and coexistence for the peoples of the region
instead of a cause for war and conflict.
The United Arab Emirates condemns all these Israeli
infractions. We consider them to be flagrant violations of
Security Council resolutions, international law, the Madrid
framework and the agreements concluded by the Palestine
Liberation Organization and Israel. Indeed, these measures
strip the peace process of all content. They are
provocations aimed at the Palestinian and Arab peoples
and can only result in an escalation of violence and
tension in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories.
They also threaten international and regional peace and
security. They run counter not only to the agreements
reached between the Palestinians and the Israelis, but also
to internationally recognized human rights norms, the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons In Time of War, and the
Hague Convention of 1907.
The United Arab Emirates reiterates its full support
for the demands of the Palestinian people, who reject all
these unjust settlement activities in their territories, and in
particular in Jerusalem. The United Arab Emirates looks
forward to the full assumption by the international
community and the sponsors of the peace process of their
responsibilities with regard to the question of Palestine
and its many facets in order to ensure Israel’s compliance
with its obligations under the peace agreements and the
relevant resolutions of international law providing for the
immediate cessation of the establishment and expansion
of Israeli settlements and the dismantling of those that
exist within the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories.
The Israeli Government’s continued defiance of the
resolutions of the Security Council and the relevant
agreements - in total disregard of all moral norms and
values, as well as the principles of the United Nations
Charter and of international law - is indeed a dangerous
phenomenon. It not only undermines the peace process,
but creates an abnormal environment in international

3

Security Council
Fifty-second year
relations. The Security Council is therefore urgently
required to adopt the measures necessary to persuade Israel
to abrogate its recent decision concerning East Jerusalem
and immediately to stop all its other settlement practices
and legislation, including the expulsion of the inhabitants,
the closure of their national institutions, the expropriation
of Arab and Palestinian land and property and all the other
forms of daily harassment of the Palestinian people by the
occupation authorities.
The United Arab Emirates reaffirms the importance of
the resumption of negotiations on all tracks, including the
Syrian and Lebanese tracks, in order to achieve a just,
lasting and peaceful settlement based on the Madrid
Conference framework, the principle of land for peace, the
agreements concluded and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 425 (1978). The just and lasting peace sought by the
Arab countries is a strategic objective that requires a
corresponding commitment from the Israeli Government.
That Government should ensure the restoration of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, the complete
Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories, including AI-Quds, the Syrian Golan and
southern Lebanon. This would fulfil the aspirations of the
countries of the region for stability, peace, and social and
economic development.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Tunisia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretationfrom Arabic):
I am pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, I wish you every
success in your endeavours. I also wish to express our most
sincere and profound thanks to Mr. Mahugu, the
Ambassador of Kenya, for having guided the Council’s
work so well last month.

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
and the international community promptly denounced this
unjust decision and demanded that the Israeli Government
refrain from building the settlement and provoking the
Palestinians.
Last week, this Council adopted a very clear
at that time,
Ambassador Mahugu, expressed the COUtlCil'S COnCern
after Israel had announced its intention to take this
decision. The Council requested Israel to refrain hOIn any
action that might endanger the peace PrOCeSs. It iS
regrettable that the Council did not reCeiVe hlm the
Israeli Government the clarification requested on the steps
it intended to take. Its response contained fallacious
reasoning, as all observers of the settlement policies
implemented by Israel in the occupiecl Arab territories
were aware, These policies were in flagrant violation of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, decisions under
international law and even the 0~10 accords.
position, The President of the Council

It is clear that the building of this new settlement is
part of a plan to isolate Jerusalem from the rest of the
West Bank, change the urban environment and the
demographic composition of the population and impose a
new reality on the ground, which would thwart the desire
to see international agreements respected.
The peace process in the Middle East has been based
on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace. The Oslo
accords were in keeping with these principles and
developed a step-by-step plan for their implementation, a
plan aimed at establishing trust between the two parties in
order to facilitate the attainment of the objectives. It was
agreed that certain important subjectswould be deferred
until the negotiation of the definitive settlement, given the
delicate and sensitive nature of these matters. This in no
way authorizes changing the facts on the ground or
redefining the situation in order to leave the negotiations
devoid of substance and remove their &sort d’&re.

The international community had hardly breathed a
sigh of relief after the signing of the Al-Khalil protocol in spite of the lacunae in that agreement - when the Israeli
Government announced plans for a new Israel in Jabal Abu
Ghneim in occupied East Jerusalem, These plans are in
violation of the signed agreement and represent a consistent
wish to impose a policy of fait accompli.

East Jerusalem is an occupied land beyond Israeli
sovereignty. The annexation decision taken by Israel has
no legal validity, and any measure aimed at prejudging
the results of the final negotiations runs counter to the
text and the spirit of the peace process and jeoparrlizes it.

The Israeli Government disregards the counsel of all
those who have asked it to refrain from taking this illconceived measure, showing its inability to gauge the
consequences of such an action, International public opinion

From the very beginning, Tunisia has always worked
Persistently and with determination to ensure the success
of the peace process, because we are firmly co&nced
that only by peaceful means can the issue of Palestine and
the Israeli-Arab conflict be resolved, Tunisia is therefore

4

Security Council
Fifty-second year
deeply concerned and disturbed by certain Israeli practices
that utterly contradict the agreements reached. Should they
continue, these practices would only push the region back
into a cycle of violence and confrontation.
We invite this Council to make it clear to Israel how
important it is to pursue the peace process and preserve it
from failure. This peace process is an international
accomplishment, and no party has the right to manipulate
it and jeopardize its foundations.
The question of the city of Jerusalem is a grave one
for the Palestinian people, first and foremost, but also for
all Muslims, for whom Al-Quds is the first direction of
prayer and the third of the Holy Places. Jerusalem/Al-Quds
is a highly symbolic place of very special importance from
a religious standpoint. Israel constantly attempts to weaken
this aspect by insisting on the Judaization of the city and by
placing obstacles in the way of its Arab, Muslim and
Christian inhabitants in order to encourage them to
emigrate.
The building of a settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim,
which until 1967 was part of the municipality
of
Bethlehem, is an attempt to cut the links between Christian
Palestinians in Al-Quds and in Bethlehem, the cradle of
Christianity, and to reduce the Christian presence in the
region. At a time when the inhabitants of Al-Quds are
being prohibited from rebuilding their homes, when they
are fined for doing so, obtaining building permits has been
made dependent on their allowing Jewish extremists to lay
hands on Arab territories in the city. On the basis of this
same strange logic, the Israeli Government is establishing
a link between Palestinian acceptance of the decision to
build this new settlement and the completion of the
withdrawal of its forces from certain areas of the West
Bank by virtue of the agreement reached between the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian National
Authority, thus endangering the implementation
of
contractual obligations.
It is perhaps useful to recall that whenever the world
denounced such decisions in the past, Israel hastened to
claim that its agreement to the construction of Arab
dwellings came in exchange for the building of settlements;
this is what Israel announced this time again, in an attempt
to mislead the international community. These policies are
completely illegal. Moreover these ploys are aimed at
justifying the construction of settlements, which usually
takes place in the calm that follows the storm and in the
end have no effect on the ground.

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
This Council must take a firm stand regarding this
Israeli policy of settlements, which undermines the
foundations of the peace process. One either respects the
principles of the Madrid Conference and of the Oslo
accords or one doesn’t. Should the settlement policy in
occupied Palestinian lands, including East Jerusalem,
continue, along with continued violations of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and lack of respect for commitments,
the peace process can only be endangered.
The international community, represented here by
this Council, must condemn the construction of the Jabal
Abu Ghneim settlement and oblige Israel to reverse its
decision and adopt a policy that establishes trust, without
which no step forward can be taken to find a definitive
solution to the issue of Palestine.
The President: I thank the representative of Tunisia
for his kind words addressed to me. The next speaker is
the representative of Kuwait. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (inferpretntr’on from
Arabic): First of all, on behalf of my delegation, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for this month. I am convinced that you shall
lead the work of this Council to success.I would also like
to thank your predecessor, the Ambassador of Kenya, for
leading the work of the Council last month. I would like
to commend him on the exceptional manner in which he
led the work of the Council.
We are meeting here in the Council today to discuss
one of the most serious measures adopted by the Israeli
Government in the occupied Palestinian territories and in
Al-Quds Al-Sharif. Contrary to measures that we had
hoped would bring us closer to peace and stability, we
now find ourselves faced with regressive steps that
destroy peace and shake confidence rather than
consolidate it, dashing our spirits instead of raising them.
Measures such as those being adopted by the Israeli
Government as part of an ongoing policy are designed to
thwart all the efforts now being made for peace. This
Government does not realize that, in the final analysis,
these policies will lead to confrontation, violence,
instability and a resumption of tension, whereas all
peoples in the region want to see such tensions disappear.
We believe that this cycle of violence will in fact negate
the very concept of security as understood by the Israeli
Government.

5

Security Council
Fifty-second year
My Government has followed with great concern the
latest decision of the Israeli Government to build 6,500
housing units in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Jabal
Abu Ghneim. This decision is part and parcel of a series of
steps that compel us to call into question the very intentions
of Israel with regard to Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
The Arab and Muslim world, for its part, has also
followed Israel’s illegal measures, which include the plan
to create a settlement in the Ras al-Amud section within the
original borders of the municipality of East Jerusalem; the
continued opening of the tunnel under Haram al-Sharif, in
spite of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1073
(1996); the Israeli authorities’ ongoing deprival of the
Palestinian inhabitants of the city of their right of residence;
and the Israeli authorities’ isolation of the city of East
Jerusalem and the West Bank. Kuwait reaffirms here that
this Israeli plan.violates the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949, the Hague Rules of 1907 and all Security Council
resolutions on Al-Quds. This Israeli plan is also a serious
violation of the Declaration of Principles signed by the
Israeli Government
and the Palestine Liberation
Organization in 1993.
Today, quite obviously, the Israeli Government would
like to impose more faits accomnplis. It wishes to make
these facts reality on the ground in order to drive out the
population of the city and to create settlements within and
outside the city before negotiating its final status. This only
confirms that the Israeli policies are the result not of
arbitrary measures or spontaneous decisions, but of a
calculated plan to increase the authority of the new Israeli
Government and the adoption by that Government of a
policy of expansion that violates all conventions and
international norms. This policy also represents the
culmination of the new strategy of the Israeli Government
to abrogate all these agreements, to shirk its commitments
and to obviate the principle of land for peace. The policy
of expansion at all costs by the Israeli Government
threatens to bring the region to the brink of destruction and
violence.
The Arab and Muslim world, of course, can only
condemn such violations and demands that the Israeli
Government put an end to the violation of Arab rights
under the pretext of security. We demand that the Israeli
Government also try to find ways to support the peace
process. We call on it to respect the principles on which the
process was based in 1991 in Madrid so that it can resume
on all its tracks, especially the Syrian and Lebanese tracks,
and on the basis of the principle of land for peace. In this

6

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
way will the Middle East become a region of security and
peace for all time.
In conclusion, Kuwait appeals to this body to take a
speedy decision to prevent Israel from implementing such
a plan. We call upon the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities to preserve the sacred nature of Al-Quds
and urge it to uphold international legality. This Council
cannot disappoint the hopes of peoples for lasting peace
simply because some people do not respect international
rule of law.
The Presiden’t: I thank the representative of Kuwait
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Wisnumurti
(Indonesia): Permit me at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
delegation has full knowledge of your diplomatic skills
and leadership qualities and is therefore assured that, with
you as President, the work of the Council is indeed in
capable hands. May I also take this opportunity to extend
our felicitations to your predecessor, Ambassador
Njuguna Mahugu of Kenya, for his outstanding leadership
and contributions to the work of the Council during the
month of February,
My delegation is deeply concerned over Israel’s
decision on 26 February 1997 to pursue its unlawful
policy of establishing settlements in the Holy City of
Jerusalem. This decision to build new settlements in Jabal
Abu Ghneim in Jerusalem represents the latest brazen
attempt at preempting the outcome of negotiations on
final status by changing the legal status and demographic
composition of Jerusalem. Over the years, we have
chronicled a series of Israeli policies and practices most recently, the decision to build another new
settlement in the Ras al-Amud region and the opening of
the tunnel located within the Haram al-Sharif - all of
which are aimed at creating new facts on the ground to
the detriment not only of the interests of the Palestinian
people, but also of the very peace process itself,
These actions were unacceptable then, are
unacceptable now and will be unacceptable in the future.
They are in clear violation of Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions and incompatible with the
Declaration of Principles, subsequent agreements, both in

Security Council
Fifty-second year
letter and in spirit, and indeed with generally accepted
principles of international law.
This latest negative development is particularly
unfortunate against the backdrop of recent signs that the
peace process has returned to its proper course despite
Israeli procrastination and attempts at reinterpreting
agreements already reached. This is fully demonstrated by
the agreement reached earlier this year on the complex
issue of Israeli withdrawal from Hebron. However, all of
this, not least of which is the mutual trust and confidence
which have assiduously been built over the past four years,
is being placed in jeopardy by Israel.
Furthermore, we are concerned that the arbitrary acts
by Israel may provoke a new wave of Palestinian anger and
frustration, with unpredictable consequences. Yet we should
be clear where the onus of responsibility lies. The
Government of Israel cannot shirk its responsibility for the
consequences emanating from its ill-conceived policies and
practices.
In this regard, the Islamic Group of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference (OIC) in New York, at its
meeting held on 3 March 1997, issued a communique in
which it calls on the Security Council, inter &a, to take
urgent steps to ensure that the Government of Israel
reverses its decision and renounces any settlement activity
in all occupied Arab territories, in particular East Jerusalem.
My delegation is therefore hopeful that our deliberations
today will lead to the adoption by the Council of concrete
measures to reverse these latest Israeli transgressions in the
occupied territories, as called for by the Islamic Group and
the Group of Arab States.
The peace process in the Middle East has raised hopes
for a new era of peace, stability and prosperity for the
peoples of the region, including the long-suffering
Palestinian people. Indonesia has long stood firm on the
principles of respect for the rights of the Palestinians and
their claim to sovereignty over their land. The peace
agreements signed by Israel and the Palestinians have been
the stepping stones to a new level of relations between the
peoples of Israel and Palestine. The peace process was to
mean that differences could be worked out through
negotiations and that the interests and needs of both parties
would be respected. Unilateral Israeli actions were to be
part of the past and violence would subside. Clearly,
however, challenges abound in the realization of such a
vision.

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
Given the provocative measures taken by Israel, my
delegation would like to commend the Palestinian
Authority for encouraging restraint and opting for
peaceful methods to resolve the current crisis. Moderation
should be a key word while the parties navigate the
difficult waters of establishing peace in the Middle East
base on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978). Actions that could jeopardize this
fragile process must be avoided and the endeavours for
peace must be made irreversible.
The gains attained thus far in the peace process are
indeed of historic significance. It is now up to Israel
scrupulously to implement the provisions of the various
agreements reached with the Palestinians. The recent
agreement on Hebron should be followed by negotiations
on other contentious issues, most notably the future status
of Jerusalem, the question of settlements, refugees and
borders, as well as the final status of the occupied
territories.
Through peace, the Middle East has the potential for
great transformation, both economically and politically.
The peace process and the relevant agreements that have
been accepted by both parties must be implemented in
their entirety with consistency and fairness, not
selectively, sporadically and conditionally.
The President:
The next speaker is the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Wehhe (Syria) (interpretation from Arabic): I
would like at the outset of my statement to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We are convinced
that your wisdom and experience will contribute to
ensuring the success of the Council during this period. I
would also like to take this opportunity to express our
thanks and profound appreciation to your predecessor, the
Ambassador of Kenya, for his efforts last month.
Given the attempts made in the occupied Arab
territories to undermine the foundations of the peace
process in the Middle East, the Security Council is
meeting under extremely delicate and important
circumstances. Israel is ,once again defying international
will by taking the decision to build a new settlement and
to continue its settlement activities in the region of Jabal
Abu Ghneim in the southern part of East Jerusalem.

7

Security Council
Fifty-second year
It is no longer possible to remain silent in the face of
all these injustices inflicted by Israel on the Palestinian
people, particularly in the face of the serious and contiqued
attempts to change the urban and demographic character of
the City of Al-Quds, a historic and holy city and symbol.
This is being done in order to enshrine the occupation of
Al-Quds, judaize the Holy City and drive out the Arabs still
living there.
All this constitutes a clear and flagrant violation of the
principles and basis of the peace process and of the
decisions of the international community - particularly
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 252 (1968), 338
(1973) and 465 (1980) - that affirm the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force. These decisions deem
all measures and actions, including the expropriation of
land and property, to be null and void and without effect on
the status of occupied Jerusalem.
The Netanyahu Government planned this new
provocation very well within the framework of his
aggressive colonization and ongoing campaign to Judaize
Al-Quds. Indeed, it has already built the first Jewish
neighbourhood in the Al-Quds neighbourhood of Ras alAmud. It is clear that this recent decision of the Israeli
Government is aimed at creating an explosive situation, as
was the opening of the tunnel under the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
At that time, the Security Council adopted resolution 1073
(1996) of 28 September 1996. In that resolution, the
Council called for:
“the immediate cessation and reversal of all acts
which have resulted in the aggravation of the situation,
and which have negative implications for the Middle
East peace process”. (r-es. 1073 (1996), para. 1)
It is regrettable that Israel has not respected that
resolution just as it has not respected other
internationally
binding resolutions. Israel’s feverish
settlement activities may be seen in the framework of its
aggressive behaviour, which is provocative and defies the
binding decisions of the international community; the
international
community must firmly denounce and
condemn that behaviour. The representatives who spoke
here yesterday expressed that position exactly.
As early as 1 December 1996, the Council of the
League of Arab States condemned the settlement activities
in the occupied Arab territories and the attitude of the
Israeli Government, which persisted in its expansion of the
settlements in violation
of international law and
internationally binding decisions, in particular Security

8

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
Council resolution 465 (1980). That resolution determined
that the settlements were an obstruction to achieving
peace, and called upon Israel to dismantle them.
Resolution 497 (1981) declared null and void the Israeli
decision to annex the occupied GOT;
this was adopted
following the Israeli Government’s decision to expand its
settlements in the occupied territories, in particular in the
West Bank, the Arab part of Jerusalem, in Gaza and in
the occupied Syrian Golan.
Likewise, the Foreign Ministers of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, meeting at Jakarta on 14
December 1996, called upon the international COlmnUnity,
the Security Council, the sponsors of the peace process
and the European Union to persuade Israel to abandon its
settlement policies in the occupied Arab territories,
including Al-Quds and the occupied Syrian Golan which, it was stressed, are part of the occupied Arab
territories, The Israeli authorities were called upon to end
their settlement policies aimed at changing the
demographic nature of Al-Quds, desecrating its Muslim
and Christian holy places with a view to judaizing it,
sealing it off and isolating it from the rest of the West
Bank.
International reaction to these latest Israeli
Government measures to intensify the settlement policies
has focused on the following points: First, settlement
activities undermine the peace process. Second, the Israeli
decision raises doubts and does not inspire trust. Third, it
could mark a return to violence and tension in the Middle
East. Fourth, it constitutes a declaration of war against the
Arab, Muslim and Christian worlds, against the peace
process, and against efforts to revive that process. Fifth,
the settlement policies foreshadow a new catastrophe in
the region. Sixth, the international community is urged
firmly to condemn past, present and future settlement
policies. Seventh, the question of Al-Quds is extremely
sensitive, and could become explosive,
Some condemnations of the settlement policy have
been moderate. There have been appeals for an urgent
meeting of the Al-Quds Committee presided over by His
Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco, for an Arab summit,
and for meetings of the Security Council. Yesterday and
today in this Chamber, we all listened most attentively to
the reactions of the representatives of many countries.
They all called for prudence in the light of possible
reactions to the Israeli decision.
With great arrogance, the Israeli Government has
asked Arab leaders to shoulder their responsibilities and

Security Council
Fifty-second year
demonstrate political wisdom - at a time when the Israeli
Government is doing its best to destroy the peace process,
with no regard for a just and comprehensive peace, while
seeming determined to strike blow after blow against the
peace process, thus to kill that process. We wonder,
therefore, whether it is political wisdom to continue
building settlements in the Holy City in the face of
condemnation from the entire international community. Is
it political wisdom for the Israeli authorities to harden their
policies and attempt to return the peace process to square
one? It seems to me that Israel simply wants the Arabs to
yield, in order to demonstrate what it would call political
wisdom.
True political wisdom dictates that the Arabs view the
peace process as a strategic policy that must exist within a
framework of international legality; this requires a serious
commitment by Israel to continue the peace process and to
restore rights in the occupied territories, in order to
guarantee a balanced peace for all the countries of the
region. This cannot take place if Israel continues to build
settlements and undermine the whole peace process.
In the light of all these facts, and of the fact that Israel
arrogantly continues its settlements and expansion despite
the Arab choice of peace as its strategic option, we are
obliged to ask a number of very important questions,
relating not only to the seriousness of the Israeli
Government, which is not respecting the peace process, but
also to the Israeli intention to undermine that process.
We would recall that the leaders meeting at the Arab
Summit held at Cairo from 21 to 23 June 1996 reaffirmed
their commitment
to the United Nations resolutions
requiring non-recognition and non-acceptance of any
situation resulting from Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Arab territories, inasmuch as such activities are
unlawful and create no rights and no obligations. They
considered that the establishment of settlements and the
introduction of settlers violate the Geneva Conventions and
the Madrid framework and represent an impediment to the
peace process. There should thus be a halt to all Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied Syrian Golan and the
occupied Palestinian territories, especially Jerusalem, and
the settlements should be removed. The leaders affirmed
their rejection of any alteration to the physical
characteristics or legal status of Arab Jerusalem.
We, cannot remain silent about the settlement policy,
because that policy could return the region to the cycle of
violence and tension; this would be the sole responsibility
of the Israeli Government.

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
Israel’s arrogance stands in complete disregard of
internationally binding decisions and of the position of the
international community
against the building
of
settlements. We have seen many Israeli statements,
including Mr. Netanyahu’s recent insistence that
Jerusalem was the eternal, indivisible capital of Israel. In
the face of this assault and in the face of the recent
statement by the Israeli Minister of the Interior, as quoted
in The WashingtonPoston 25 February, that the “battle
of Jerusalem had begun”, the Security Council, which
bears responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace, must succeed in seeing through all this and issue
a presidential statement. It must take action commensurate
with the need to put an end to the occupation of all the
occupied territories, including Al-Quds and the occupied
Syrian Golan.
Yesterday, the representatives of the United
Kingdom and of many other countries addressed the
Security Council; we are grateful to them for their
statements. We also heard the representative of Israel,
who tried to give us a history lesson. We are not here for
history lessons.
I believe that statements by representatives of States
in the Security Council and in the General Assembly are
in themselves a response to the historical, political and
geographic situation of the city of Jerusalem. On this
basis, my country strongly condemns all these measures,
such as Israel’s settlement activities, be they the building
of new settlements or the expansion of existing ones.
My country considers that all these measures are in
violation of the principles of the peace process. The
Israeli decisions that constitute provocation violate
international law and internationally binding decisions and
resolutions, and they undermine the foundations of the
peace process. This can only undo the efforts that have
been undertaken over the past five years, plunging the
region back into a cycle of instability and conflict.
It is for this reason that we invite the Council and all
the States of the world, and in particular the two sponsor
States of the peace process and the European Union, to
work speedily in order to put an end to the expansion of
Israeli settlements; to dismantle existing settlements and
to put pressure on Israel, the occupying Power, to respect
the Hague Convention of 1907 and the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 - which prohibit any change in the
demographic or urban character of the occupied
territories, including Jerusalem and the occupied Syrian
Golan - and to invite Israel to respect the resolutions of

9

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997

the Security Council and of other organs of the United
Nations.

choice, therefore, is to work towards a genuine, just and
comprehensive peace.

We also invite the two sponsors of the peace
process - the United States and the Russian Federation as well as the States of the European Union to play their
role in order to save the peace process, which is at an
impasse and could even be in a state of regression.

Today, the eyes of the world are on the Council. We
are waiting for the Council to shoulder its responsibilities
and adopt a resolution that demands that Israel, the
occupying Power, immediately put an end to its
settlement activities in all the occupied Arab territories,
including Jerusalem and the Golan.

Syria is fully prepared to conclude a just and
comprehensive peace. We believe this to be a strategic
choice as long as Israel participates seriously in the
achievement of that goal in a way that ensures justice and
human dignity, because this is in the interest of the peoples
of the region. These are vital interests for the region and for
the world.
If Israel is truly serious, if it wants to pursue the peace
process, if it wants to achieve a just and comprehensive
peace on the basis of Madrid, the principle of land for
peace and Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and other
resolutions, then Israel must continue negotiations from the
point where they were interrupted during the tenure of the
preceding Israeli Government. It must also withdraw to the
line of 4 June 1967, without any attempt to impose
preconditions, because these are the underpinnings and the
frames of reference of the peace process not
preconditions.

The President: I thank the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic for the kind words he addressed to
me.
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi
Arabia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Ahmed (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation Jkonz
Arabic): It gives me pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency for this month, and I
wish you every success in the discharge of your
responsibilities, I should like also to thank your
predecessor for his outstanding performance as President
of the Security Council during the past month.
Holy Jerusalem is the crux of the Arab-Israeli
conflict and the most pivotal issue for the Arab Muslim
world. The way in which this issue will be resolved will
decide the future of the peace process as a whole. We are
concerned to see the Israeli authorities continuing to
commit certain acts that are intended to change the Holy
City’s demographic and institutional character in order to
Judaize Arab Jerusalem and alter its legal, historical,
religious and cultural reality. This is a violation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the Hague
Convention of 1907. It will also prejudge the negotiations
on the final status of that city,

The road to peace is open, and it is known to all. The
security of States cannot be based on occupation, on
expansion and on the refusal to recognize the rights of
others. All those who are trying to convince the world that
peace exists in the region are only lying to themselves,
because a just and comprehensive peace cannot be achieved
except through Israel’s total withdrawal from the occupied
Arab territories, through the respect for international
legality and the principles of international law, and by
restoring to the Palestinian people their legitimate rights,
including the right to self-determination. This is what the
countries of the region and the countries of the world at
large want. This is how we will be able to achieve a just
and comprehensive peace. This is how peace and stability
will be brought to the region and to the world.

The Holy City of Jerusalem is of the utmost
importance to the Arab and Muslim worlds, to the world
community as a whole and to the three monotheistic
religions. That is why the illegal Israeli policies and
practices in Jerusalem are of an extreme gravity.

Israel cannot build settlements and drive out the Arab
peoples; it can bring in Jewish settlers who have never
before lived in that region and whose ancestors have never
lived in that region. Israel can continue to expand. It can
continue to demolish houses and to kill people in the
occupied Arab territories, but everyone must be aware that
Israel will not be able to stifle the Arab will. Israel’s only

The announcement by the Israeli Government that it
intends to build a new settlement comprising 630
housing units in East Jerusalem, in the area of Jabal A~u
Ghneim, is but the latest in a series of policies and acts
aimed at expanding the settlements, notwithstallding
the
fact that the international community and the Security
Council have issued clear resolutions &&ring such

10

Security Council
Fifty-second year
policies illegal, null and void. In addition, the international
community has demanded that Israel desist from such
policies and practices. Despite all these clear signals, the
Israeli authorities continue their dangerous practices and
policies in the occupied Palestinian territories, disregarding
every convention and recognizing no right, as if no
deterrent could bring them back to legal norms.
Some of the most continually destabilizing factors in
the occupied territories are the Israeli settlements in the
West Bank and The Gaza strip and their constant expansion.
One can only imagine how dangerous this would be within
Holy Jerusalem. The city is the first kibluh and the thirdholiest place for Muslims, and the center of Muslims’
attention. They will not be satisfied until all their rights are
restored to them in this Holy City. The announcement by
the Israeli Government that it intends to build a new
settlement in East Jerusalem despite all Arab, Islamic and
international warnings constitutes a new challenge to the
international community and threatens the return of tension
to the region, where violence and instability will prevail
once again.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia affirms that no lasting
peace will be achieved in the Middle East without a just
solution to the issue of Holy Jerusalem in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
which demand Israel’s withdrawal from the Arab territories
occupied in 1967, and resolution 252 (1968), which deals
with Jerusalem, Accordingly, the future of the Middle East
and peace in that region are in the hands of the
international
community.
Unless the international
community moves to save this peace by demanding that
Israel cease its settlement practices and policies in the city
of Jerusalem, the peace process in the Middle East and the
integrity of the agreements already signed between parties
to the conflict will be seriously threatened.
The Government of the custodian of the two holy
mosques considers that the decision of the current Israeli
Government to build new settlements in Holy Jerusalem is
illegal and constitutes a dangerous violation of international
conventions and agreements. This decision reaffirms the
continuation of the Israeli Government’s plans to Judaize
the city of Jerusalem and efface its Arab and Islamic
character. Saudi Arabia also believes that such policies and
practices contribute to increasing tension; in addition, the
Israeli Government loses its credibility in the context of the
peace process and thus threatens to destroy that process.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, under the leadership of
the custodian of the two holy mosques, rejects the continual

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
Israeli attempts to build new settlements. We also
emphasize the extreme gravity of this decision and ask
the Security Council to make every necessary effort to
ensure that Israel, as the occupying Power, will desist
from these policies and practices, and in particular will
completely stop any settlement activity in Arab Jerusalem,
Failure to achieve this will push the region back into a
spiral of conflict, tension and instability.
We hope that the Security Council will discharge its
responsibilities in connection with events in Holy
Jerusalem to prove to the whole world that it is on the
side of righteousness and legitimacy.
The President: I thank the representative of Saudi
Arabia for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan, I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Abu-Nimah
(Jordan) (interpretatiorz fronz
Arabic): At the outset, I have the pleasure of extending to
you, Sir, my congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am deeply
convinced that your wisdom, long experience and
knowledge of world affairs will lead the Council to
success.I would also like to extend my congratulations to
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Kenya,
Ambassador Mahugu, for all his efforts in leading the
Council last month.
I also take pleasure in thanking you for convening
this meeting on an urgent basis, at the request of the Arab
Group, in order to discuss a very important issue. In
acceding so quickly to that request, the Council has
shown that it seesthe danger posed by any impasse in the
peace process, while also showing its concern for
shouldering its responsibility with regard to this issue.
The Israeli Government has taken the decision to
create a new settlement in the southern part of East
Jerusalem, in Jabal Abu Ghneim, on the ,road to
Bethlehem in Arab territory. Israel should have returned
this land to the Arab Palestinian population as part of the
peace process and on the basis of one of the essential
tenets and foundations of the peace process: the exchange
of occupied Arab land for peace.
Jordan has already expressed its firm opposition to
the Israeli decision because it believes that the Arab city
of Jerusalem is territory fhat has been occupied since

11

Security Council
Fifty-second year
1967, like the rest of the West Bank. This Israeli decision
poses a great danger and is fraught with consequences. This
step runs counter to all the foundations of the peace
process; to the Madrid principle of land for peace; to
Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which affirms that
the acquisition of territories by force is illegal; to
resolutions 338 (1973) and 242 (1967), which are the
reference points for the peace process; and to international
law, the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the Hague
Rules of 1907 and their annexes. This decision constitntes
a violation of the right to private property, and an attempt
to expropriate territories and force out the population. It
also goes against all the resolutions adopted by this
Council. Israel has always refused to renounce its
settlement activities.
There have been some positive achievements since the
Madrid Peace Conference. The Arab side has shown that it
can be committed to peace, that it can work seriously and
sincerely for achieving peace. As part of this process,
Jordan, for its part, signed in autumn 1994 a full peace
treaty with Israel. Jordan has complied with all the
modalities and commitments of that treaty. Jordan continues
to comply with all the requirements of the peace process.
The Palestinians and Israelis, for their part, have concluded
the Oslo agreements and other important agreements, each
of which is a step towards the goal of a final agreement
and compr&hensive peace for both parties. The latest
agreement is on the partial withdrawal from Al-Khalil.
There can be no doubt that the Palestinian side has
honoured all its agreements, especially with regard to the
suppression of all violent demonstrations and in connection
with serious security assurances in all areas under the
control of the Palestinian National Authority, with strict
respect for the most important Israeli requests. Furthermore,
a number of Arab States from outside the region, stirred by
their desire to support peace and to see it restored in lasting
form, have established relations with Israel and have tried
every possible means of dealing with Israel and cooperating
with it.
We hope that all these achievements will lead to
additional achievements, and will culminate in the
restoration of the comprehensive and lasting peace we all
desire. We hope that this will put the region on the path
towards economic reconstruction and development and
scientific and technological progress, which will make
peace meaningful and help remedy the effects of decades
of conflict and bloodshed in the region.

12

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
Unfortunately, this has not been the case. Tensions
have worsened. Today we see that, after thinking that the
peace process would move forward, the fear has now
arisen that the peace process will move backwards. This
is evidenced by the fact that some States have stopped
actions intended to normalize relations with Israel.
We are deeply concerned to see the peace process
take a turn for the worse in the area because of Israel’s
non-compliance with the principles of peace. The problem
we are addressing today in the Council is not Israel’s first
violation. Israel has persisted in its settlement activities in
occupied Arab territories and has not fulfilled its
commitments. Indeed, the Council was compelled to meet
last September when Israel opened a tunnel beneath a
mosque, prompting an outbreak of violence and violating
the rights of Palestinians and the feelings of the Arab and
Muslim world. We also saw the delays in implementation
of the Al-Khalil protocol, despite the conclusion of this
agreement by the previous Israeli Government.
The continuation of these measures, the ongoing
expulsions and demolition of homes, the issuance of
identity cards to the inhabitants of Al-Quds and their lack
of access to holy sites in the city and the isolation of
territories are all practices that created the atmosphere that
prevailed in the region a few years ago and which we
believed was a thing of the past.
The persistence with which Israel continues to
occupy lands and create settlements clearly demonstrates
that Israel is not committed to shouldering its
responsibilities and complying with its commitment to
return occupied lands to their rightful owners in exchange
for peace. How, then, can we hope that peace might be
achieved? The only way to establish peace is to comply
with all the agreements concluded. We cannot
contemplate peace without a return of land in accordance
with the peace process. It is because we believe in peace
and that peace is a necessity for all peoples and States in
the region - and first and foremost for Israel - that we
urge this Council to assume its responsibilities and
speedily to adopt a firm resolution that will declare null
and void the steps Israel has taken while demanding that
Israel rescind its decision, cease any settlement activities
and remove any obstacles that might hinder steps towards
peace.
We also call upon the international community, and
those responsible for the peace process in particular, to
oppose these settlement activities by compelling Israel to
rescind its decisions and to pursue the path of peace.

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997

We consider the commitment to peace and to
complying with all of its requirements to be our only
choice. We will never flinch in the face of this commitment
and shall always devote ourselves to this goal. We know
the consequences for the region should peace fail to
materialize, but peace cannot be achieved on a unilateral
basis; it can be consolidated only if all parties to the
process choose peace and if this process is based on justice
and mutual recognition
of legitimate
rights and
requirements.

Government is a party, but also raises serious doubt about
the sincerity of the Israeli Government towards the entire
peace process. Israel is now trying to preempt the
outcome of the negotiations on the final status by
changing the legal and demographic composition of the
Holy City of Jerusalem. But we want to remind Israel that
Jerusalem is not only a city as close to the hearts of the
Palestinians as to the Israelis themselves; it is a place of
crucial importance to the entire Muslim world, in
particular, and to the international community in general.

The President: I thank the representative of Jotdan
for his kind words addressed to me.

Jerusalem constitutes the critical test of Israeli’s
sincerity and commitment to the peace process. It is a
commitment Israel has made so many. times to the
international community. No mistake should be made that
the Israeli move on Jerusalem stands in clear violation of
relevant Security Council resolutions. Israel must not
underestimate the devastating backlash which this hasty
and provocative decision on East Jerusalem might
unleash. This could throw the entire region back into a
spiral of uncertainty and chaos. The international
community is not ready to tolerate any situation that has
been created deliberately to satisfy the objectives of
domestic political aspirations in Israel.

The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I would like to join
my colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
Allow me also to pay a warm tribute to Ambassador
Mahugu of Kenya for his wise and skilful guidance of the
proceedings of the Council in Fibruary,
A series of intense negotiations and considerable
sacrifices have shaped the momentum of the Middle East
peace process, which began in Madrid in 1991 and was
formalized in the Declaration of Principles and subsequent
agreements. Despite often deep frustrations, the
international community hoped that Israel would honour its
commitment to the peace package in all its aspects.
Unfortunately, Israel has often faltered, under various
excuses and pretexts, in fulfilling
its obligations.
Nonetheless, with the recent signing of the Hebron protocol,
the prospects for a continued partnership in peace between
the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government grew
brighter, The basis for final status negotiations on Jerusalem
and other remaining issues was laid out in a workable
framework. It was in this context that Bangladesh
welcomed the signing of the Hebron protocol and expressed
the hope that all parties would work towards the creation
and nourishment of a climate for achieving a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. At the same time,
we reiterated that the immediate withdrawal of Israeli
troops from all;occupied Arab and Palestinian lands was an
essential prerequisite for this goal.
We were jolted by the recent decision of the Israeli
Government to build new settlements in Jabal Abu Ghneim
in East Jerusalem. Clearly, this move not only violates the
spirit and terms of the agreements to which the Israeli

Bangladesh therefore expressesits deep concern and
deplores the illegal and provocative measures initiated by
Israel, which may jeopardize whatever progress has been
achieved in the ongoing peace process in the Middle East.
Bearing in mind the special responsibility of the Security
Council in respect of the overall peace process in the
Middle East, it is our earnest hope that the Security
Council will take urgent steps to ensure that the Israeli
Government reverses its decision to build settlements in
Jabal +bu Ghneim and desists from any settlement
activity in the occupied territories in future.
The President: I thank the representative of
Bangladesh for his kind words addressed to me. The next
speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement,
Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): First of
all, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also wish to pay tribute to the Permanent Representative
of Kenya for his excellent work during his presidency last
month.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council has been
called to consider yet another instance of the old

13

Security Council
Fifty-second year
ambitious and expansionist policy of the Israeli regime in
the sensitive region of the Middle East. The notorious
policy of building settlements in the occupied territories has
been part of the grand design of the occupiers to change the
basic characteristics of the Palestinian territories in order to
perpetuate their occupation. This policy is being pursued in
blatant contravention of international law and in open
defiance of clear provisions of numerous United Nations
resolutions, including those adopted by the Council itself.
Under the circumstances prevailing in the aftermath of
the cold war, it is indeed very difficult to conceive that the
violation of the most fundamental principles of international
law could be perpetrated with such a sense of impunity.
The only explanation seems to lie in the fact that Israel has
realized that the Security Council is not prepared to live up
to its commitments to stop aggression, thanks to the
unqualified and continuous support of certain members
who, at most and out of sheer embarrassment, express
dissatisfaction with the atrocious Israeli practices in the
occupied areas. Had the Council adopted concrete measures
in the past to discharge its obligations effectively in the
face of persistent Israeli intransigence, we would not have
faced the present calamity.
The recent decision of Israel to build 6,500 housing
units in Jerusalem is also designed to change the Islamic
character of the city in the continuous process of
judaization of Jerusalem, which is sacred to all Muslims.
As the first kiblah of Muslims, Al-Quds Al-Sharif has a
special place in the heart of every Muslim. Therefore, to
presume that the illegal continuation of occupation, the
imposition of demographic changes in Jerusalem as well as
the daily harassment of the Muslim inhabitants of the city
would erode the love and devotion of every Muslim to this
Holy City is pure delusion and, as such, out of touch with
reality and, in the final analysis, utterly impracticable.
History attests to the fact that Muslims have always
comprised the majority of inhabitants in Jerusalem and any
claim to the contrary is not only a mere fabrication of
historical facts but an insult to human conscience. All of
the Islamic countries are united on this position and the
Qrganization of the Islamic Conference, which owes its
ruison d’&re to the Muslims’ response to an act of arson
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem, has always
condemned the Israeli practices in Palestine and called for
the liberation of the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
The Security Council has the legal and moral
responsibility to speak out against the violation of
internationa1 law by the Zionist regime. The urgency of

14

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
forceful action by the Security Council becomes all the
more imperative in the light of the fact that the leaders of
Israel are intent on building these new illegal settlements
despite the outrage of the local inhabitants and
condemnation from all over the world. Bearing in mind
that Israel is creating afait accompli throughout Palestine,
particularly in Jerusalem, the Security Council should
condemn in the strongest possible terms the decision of
Israel to build new settlements in Jerusalem. It should
also take the necessary measures in accordance with the
Charter to reverse this decision. Only through the
adoption of decisive and effective measures can the
Security Council enhance its credibility. The Security
Council is called to act at a time when the memories of
the second Persian Gulf war and the way the Council
handled that conflict are still alive. Therefore, in order not
to be accused of further resort to double standards, the
Security Council should act expeditiously and vigorously.
The Israeli regime, shamelessly flouting international
norms and principles and even its own commitments
undertaken in bilateral agreements, deserves no leniency
whatsoever.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker is the representative of
Afghanistan, I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan) (interpretation from
French): In congratulating you most sincerely on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council, Sir, I would
also like to say that we know you personally and your
ability successfully to guide the work of the Security
Council in such an important and emotional debate as that
under way. I would also like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya, the President for the
month of February, who led the work of the Council with
skill.
There is great concern throughout the world over the
fact that Israel, the occupying Power, is initiating a new
phase in its construction of settlements in the occupied
territories. These steps are unlawful both in the southeastern suburbs of the Holy City, adjacent to Arab
Jerusalem - a territory occupied following a war - as
well as in the occupied Syrian Arab Golan. Furthermore,
these practices, as has been thoroughly explained here
since yesterday, are doing great harm to the peace
process. These are violations of article 49 of the Fourth

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 and to the many
resolutions adopted by the Security Council that have been
referred to by delegations that have spoken before me.
Yesterday afternoon, the representative of Israel
concluded his statement by quoting the Bible. He gave us
a rather brief summary of five paragraphs at the beginning
of Chapter 8 of the Book of Zechariah.
The Lord does indeed talk about old men and women
and small boys and girls living in Jerusalem. But at the end
of that same chapter 8, verse 23 talks about people
speaking different languages and belonging to different
nations coming to Jerusalem to worship God. We must
above all cite the words of the Lord in verse 17 of the
same chapter of the book of Zechariah, which is the
confirmation of a commandment:
“And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts
against his neighbour”. (The Holy Bible, Zechariah
8:17)

The Koran, Holy Book and divine word for more than
a billion Muslims, respects Jerusalem. In sura XVII, entitled
“Children of Israel”, verse 1, Al-Quds is the Holy City of
three Abrahamic religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
According to verses 77 and 78 of sura XXII of the Koran,
Abraham was not the spiritual ancestor of a nation, but of
all believers, as God tells all the believers of all centuries
and of all nations, “Abraham is your ancestor”. The use of
the word ancestor is therefore quite spiritual and goes far
beyond the physical sense.
The question of Al-Quds Al-Sharif obviously concerns
Palestinians, the great majority of whom are Muslims,
though some are also Christians. The question concerns
Arabs because Palestinians are Arabs. The Security Council
has before it document S/1997/157, which contains a
communiqu6 issued by the General Secretariat of the
League of Arab States.
However, the question is also Islamic. The Council has
before it document S/1997/182, which contains a letter from
the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United
Nations, who is the Chairman of the Islamic Group of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
More than a quarter of a century ago, in 1969,
following an act of arson that took place in the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the first summit of Islamic
countries was held in Rabat, Morocco. I was present there
as a member of the Afghan delegation, and I saw the

intense devotion of the representatives of Islamic
countries throughout the world to the question of AlQuds. It is therefore the Islamic people of the world who,
considering Al-Quds an Islamic city, are concerned today,
and they number over a billion.
Christians throughout the world are also deeply
concerned. The Muslims of the world also respect the
holy places of Jews and Christians.
These facts are well known throughout the world.
The problem under discussion is not at all local, but is
important for a broad sector of humanity. Spiritual and
religious rights are the most fundamental of human rights,
even if they have been passed over in silence in the
statements, conventions and other legal instruments
internationally issued or adopted in the past half century.
About two years ago the Security Council debated
this same subject. We have already recalled that
resolution 465 (1980) of 1 March 1980 stated, over 17
years ago, that such measures taken by Israel Ied to a
change in the physical character, demographic nature and
institutional structures in the territories occupied by Israel
in 1967, including East Jerusalem. These measures
therefore have no legal validity and constitute a serious
obstacle to the establishment of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East.
It is certain, as the experience of peoples has shown,
that anyone who creates mistrust by building in the
occupied territories is not building confidence, and that
anyone who exploits its power as an occupier and tries to
draw advantage from it jeopardizes the precarious
stability of the peace process. At the same time, it moves
towards the point of no return on the path of conflict and
condemns its army to being for ever an army of
intervention.
Anyone who confiscates the territories of the citizens
of an occupied territory only stokes the victims’ resolve
to resist. Anyone who builds settlements in’ occupied’
territories is destroying at the same time any chance of
reaching a period of lasting settlement, peace and
tranquillity. Anyone who thinks of extending settlements
in the occupied territories is further aggravating the
situation for years to come. Anyone who insists on
committing a series of actions that cause widespread
upheaval and poison the atmosphere of the peace process
is only choosing a policy of long-term confrontation.

15

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The vital duty of the Security Council is to strengthen
the foundations of the peace process. This duty is becoming
very urgent at a time when the derailment of the peace
process can be seen coming from miles away. The
Council’s action would not be valid if it were to end this
debate in silence. There is immense and almost total
agreement around this table. Delegations agree on almost
all points. This enables the Council to take a stand while at
the same time reconfirming its previous resolutions. Such
an action would be useful for future efforts to renew the
atmosphere of hope for peace, which is so important for the
peoples of the Middle East.
In conclusion, the world impatiently awaits, at the end
of this meeting, a firm and unequivocal resolution from the
Council denouncing any action taken by the occupying
Power that creates mistrust and confrontation, and clearly
denouncing anything that creates an obstacle to the peace
process or that might destroy the chances of viable
coexistence between neighbouring peoples in the Holy
Land. This would be the denunciation of an action that has
already been condemned on many occasions, and the
affirmation of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of land
by force.
The President:
I thank the representative
Afghanistan for the kind words he addressed to me.

of

The next speaker is the representative of Malaysia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Let me congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. I wish also to commend
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Kenya,
for his able stewardship last month.
The convening of this meeting is most timely in the
wake of the decision of the Israeli Government to press
ahead with its policy of expanding Jewish settlements in
East Jerusalem. The decision to build yet another new
illegal Jewish settlement, in Jabal Abu Ghneim, is a highly
provocative - indeed, a highly irresponsible - act which
could have serious negative repercussions on the current
Arab-Israeli peace process.
Malaysia has followed the peace process with cautious
optimism and was encouraged by the progress that had
been made recently with the signing of the Hebron
protocol. The signing of the protocol, which has led to the
redeployment of Israeli forces from most parts of Hebron,

16

has been widely regarded as a positive step towards the
full realization of the long-awaited comprehensive and
just settlement in the region based on relevant Security
Council resolutions. It was the hope of the international
community that the parties concerned would honour their
commitments, show good faith and refrain from taking
any measure which could undermine the process which
had been so assiduously put together.
Regrettably, instead of building confidence and
understanding, the Israeli Government has chosen to build
new settlements in defiance of the Palestinian sentiments
which have been clearly expressed on this issue. This
controversial decision cannot but be seen as a brazenly
provocative act. It is a flagrant violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention. It is a blatant contravention of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, including the ones adopted during the
fifty-first session of the General Assembly. It is also a
departure from the principle of land for peace as agreed
to by the parties involved in the peace process, including
Israel. Instead of strengthening the peace process and
taking it forward, the Israeli decision can only undermine
it and take it backward.
This is not the first time that the Israeli Government
has resorted to such actions and tactics in pursuance of its
own narrow political and strategic objectives. My
delegation strongly condemns this latest Israeli measure
and calls on the Israeli Government to rescind its decision
and to desist in the future from taking any such unilateral
actions which could undermine the still fragile peace
process. My delegation would therefore urge the Council
to pronounce itself in clear and unambiguous language on
this important issue and to denounce the Israeli decision
forcefully through a strongly worded resolution. Anything
less than this would send the wrong message to the Israeli
Government, which would be unfortunate indeed. In the
view of my delegation, a strong resolution from the
Council would not amount to interfering in the peace
process; rather it would help ensure that the process is not
derailed as a result of the irresponsible act of one of the
parties.
My delegation cannot accept the policies and illegal
measures taken by Israel in occupied East Jerusalem
aimed at judaizing the city and changing its legal status
and demographic composition to advance Israel’s own
political agenda. Jerusalem is of great spiritual importance
not only to the Jews but also to the entire Islamic
community throughout the world, and to Christians
everywhere.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Clearly, by embarking on the expansion of Jewish
settlements on Arab lands, the Israeli Government is
pursuing a well calculated political outcome, oblivious to
the views, sentiments and aspirations of the other, equally
important, party to the negotiations, the Palestinians. By
relentlessly pursuing its settlements policy, Israel intends to
create a fait accompli and in doing so shows its arrogant
take-it-or-leave-it attitude towards the peace process. The
recent statement of Prime Minister Netanyahu reiterating
Israel’s absolute sovereignty over all of Jerusalem as the
“eternal capital of the Jewish people which will never again
be divided” typifies the uncompromising and brazen attitude
of the present Israeli leadership, not the statesmanship that
would have been more appropriate, and that is expected of
it in the current delicate situation. This is a transparent and
unambiguous attempt by Israel to preempt the outcome of
the negotiations on the final status of Jerusalem by
changing the legal status and demographic characteristics of
that city. Clearly, this is against the letter and the spirit of
the peace accords concluded between the two sides. Peacebuilding is an enterprise based on mutual trust, cooperation
and partnership between the parties concerned. A
partnership is not healthy and will not endure if one of the
parties acts irresponsibly and tramples underfoot those
things that are held dear by the other party. Unilateral acts
of the kind pursued by Israel will not promote or sustain
the peace process. Indeed, they raise questions about
Israel’s real commitment to peace.
In the face of this latest provocation by Israel, the
Palestinian Authority should be commended for its exercise
of self-restraint in avoiding untoward incidents, which could
have easily broken out, and which still could. The Council
should encourage this great exercise of self-restraint on the
part of the Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian people
by coming out with a clear resolution condemning, not
condoning, the decision of the Israeli Government. At the
same time, my delegation would urge the influential
countries that brokered the peace agreement to exert every
effort to ensure that the peace process stays on course.
The President: I thank the representative of Malaysia
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Bahrain. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation wishes at the outset to congratulate you
sincerely, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We are confident that your

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
experience and skill will guarantee the success of the
Council’s work. My delegation must also thank His
Excellency the Permanent Representative of Kenya for his
exemplary work in guiding the work of the Council last
month.
It was with grave concern that my country noted the
decision of the Israeli authorities to build a 6,500-unit
settlement in the Jabal Abu Ghneim area of south-east AlQuds, with the objective of completing the ring of
settlements encircling Arab Jerusalem.
The fact that Israel has taken a step of this nature is
but a continuation of the illegal policies it pursues in the
occupied Arab territories. These policies are in violation
of all internationally binding resolutions and conventions
pertaining to the demand that no settlements be
constructed in these territories and that Israel should
respect the legal status and the demographic composition
of the city of Jerusalem.
It is noteworthy in this regard to recall the Hague
Convention of 1907 and the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, as well as the General
Assembly resolutions that are relevant to the question of
the Middle East and of Palestine. The fact that Israel has
insisted on keeping the tunnel in Al-Haram Al-Sharif
open is yet another clear example of its disregard for
Security Council resolution 1073 (1996).
The city of Jerusalem has a very special character
that distinguishes it from all other places in the world: its
spiritual importance for all divinely revealed religions.
The policy pursued by the Government of Tel-Aviv in
altering the character of the city and its legal status is
proof of the total disregard of the occupying Israeli
authorities for the feelings of those who live in the city.
With this policy, these authorities are attempting to
complicate the legal status of the city in order to impose
afair acco&i that would benefit them in the final-status
negotiations on the city. One of the means of imposing
such a fnit accompli is through the establishment and
expansion of settlements.
My delegation believes that any attempt by Israel to
provide pretexts that would justify its measures will not
affect the will of the international community nor its
demand that Israel reverse these measures, which
contravene the rules of international law and violate the
relevant international resolutions. These resolutions
explicitly proscribe the construction of settlements,

17

Security Council
Fifty-second year
because this constitutes an alteration to the character of the
city.
The other important consideration is the fact that these
settlements are built on expropriated Palestinian lands. The
pretext put forward by the Government of Tel-Aviv that
such measures do not fall geographically within the city of
Jerusalem is hardly convincing, because it is incompatible
with the tangible geographical facts. To say that the Arabs
in the area in which Israeli settlements are to be built will
benefit as well is an unacceptable justification. A benefit
cannot flow from an unjust and erroneous measure.
It is high time for Israel to honour its obligations
under internationally binding instruments and under the
relevant United Nations resolutions. Its Government must
deal wisely and with clearsightedness with matters
pertaining to the occupied Arab territories.
The Security Council must take a clear stance on the
question of the continued establishment by Israel of
settlements in the occupied Arab territories in general and
in the city of Jerusalem in particular. The Council should
demand that Israel reverse its recent decision to construct
more settlements, in view of the fact that the establishment
of such settlements is a threat to international peace and
security because it hinders the achievement of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.
We call upon the sponsors of the peace process to act
so as to bring Israel to put an end to its settlement activities
in the occupied Arab territories in general and Jerusalem in
particular. Needless to say, the establishment of settlements
directly and adversely affects the peace process in the
Middle East. At a time when the Palestinian National
Authority is called upon to show restraint and to stop all
acts of violence in order to safeguard the peace process, the
entire world is shocked by Israel’s intention to build new
settlements in the Holy City, thus provoking negative
feelings and causing violence.
The negotiations continue to be frozen on both the
Lebanese and the Syrian tracks with the continued
occupation by Israel of the Lebanese and Syrian Arab
lands. In view of the continuation of this unnatural
situation, it is inexplicable that the Palestinian side should
be called upon to show restraint while the Israeli side
continues its provocations, which do not at all encourage
such restraint. Furthermore, this is setting back peaceful
negotiations, if not bringing them to a complete standstill.

18

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
All these considerations make it necessary to call
upon Israel to rescind its decision to establish a settlement
in Jabal Abu Ghneim and to desist from building further
settlements, if the peace process is to regain its vitality.
The Security Council bears a special responsibility in all
this because it is the source of the internationally binding
resolutions that have formed the basis for the peace talks,
starting with the Madrid Conference and ending with the
redeployment in Hebron and all actions that remain to be
taken, foremost among which are the negotiations on the
status of the city of Jerusalem -the city that is the focus
of today’s attempts to stop the construction of any further
Israeli settlements.
The President: I thank the representative of Bahrain
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): At ‘the outset, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I am confident that
under your talented and able guidance, the Council will
be able successfully to fulfil its responsibilities during the
current month. I should like also to take this opportunity
to express my admiration for your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Kenya, for the excellent
manner in which he conducted the &fairs of the Council.
It is with a sense of utmost concern that the
Government of Pakistan views the recent decision by
Israel to build a new settlement consisting of 600 housing
units in the Jabal Abu Ghneim area of East Jerusalem.
Israel has also kept open the tunnel extending under the
Western Wall of the Al-Aqsa mosque, Al-Haram AlSharif. We were equally disturbed to learn that Israel has
continued to isolate East Jerusalem from the rest of the
West Bank by declaring it off-limits to Palestinians and
withdrawing residence permits for the city’s original Arab
inhabitants. Pakistan strongly condemns all these actions,
which constitute a blatant violation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and General
Assembly, the Declaration of Principles and subsequent
agreements.
The special significance of the Holy City of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif for the international community in general and
the Islamic Ummah in particular requires no elaboration.
Israeli measures that are aimed at altering the legal status

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997

and demographic composition of Jerusalem are illegal and
invalid.

The President: I thank the representative of
Pakistan for his kind words addressed to me.

Israeli acts of provocation have once again shattered
hopes that the peace process would lead to the early
exercise by the Palestinian people of their right to selfdetermination through the establishment of an independent
homeland. This would require the complete withdrawal by
the Israeli authorities from all the occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories, including the Holy City of Al-Quds AlSharif. Pakistan’s support for the just struggle for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people is well known.
We have consistently stated that Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) continue to provide
a viable and just framework for a durable and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question.

The next speaker is the representative of the
Netherlands. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

It is imperative that the peace process, arrived at
through bold and courageous initiatives, not collapse. We
fully share the expectations of the international community
that there will be no attempt to derail the implementation of
the agreements and accords concluded so far. The
provisions of these agreements and accords must be
sincerely complied with in both letter and spirit. We hope
that the Israeli leadership will concede the realities on the
ground and resolve all pending issues - including the
immediate reversal of their alarming actions - with the
Palestinian National Authority. We strongly urge the
demonstration
of the requisite
flexibility
and
accommodation, as well as a sincere commitment to the
achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace that
will ensure security and stability for all in the Middle East.
The Government and the people of Pakistan are deeply
concerned at these latest actions by the Israeli authorities,
which are seriously undermining the peace process.
Pakistan urges the Security Council to uphold the just
position taken by the Palestinians on the issue of Jerusalem,
a position which is based on international law and justice.
We also call upon the Council not only to take urgent
measures to redress the current grave situation; which
imperils the peace of the Holy City of Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
but to prevent the further deterioration of the situation. We
firmly believe that the Council has the duty to call upon the
Israeli authorities immediately to end these unjust actions
and to desist from uaking similar actions in the future.
We are confident that the Security Council is
conscious of the importance that is attached to Al-Quds AlSharif by the entire Muslim world and to the dangers
inherent in allowing the prevailing resentment to fester.

Mr. Berteiing (Netherlands): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The following associated countries Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia have aligned themselves with this statement. Liechtenstein
has also aligned itself with it.
The European Union believes that there is no
alternative to the peace process. The past year has
witnessed many difficult moments in the implementation
of the peace process, but also some positive
developments. The European Union was pleased when, in
January last, after long and arduous negotiations, an
agreement was reached on the redeployment of Israeli
troops from Hebron. The European Union hoped that the
Hebron protocol marked one more important step on the
road towards a just and stable peace in the Middle East
and could provide the necessary momentum to
reinvigorate the peace process. The European Union
expressed the hope that the Hebron protocol would
strengthen the atmosphere of mutual confidence, which is
indispensable for the further implementation of the Oslo
agreements.
The European Union remains deeply committed to
the peace process. Peace in the Middle East is a
fundamental interest of the Union. With a view to
promoting and assisting the search for peace, the
European Union has appointed Ambassador Moratinos as
its special envoy to the peace process. Frequent visits by
representatives of the European Union to the Middle East
are a further indication of our interest in securing a
peaceful settlement. The negotiations on Hebron were
laborious, but their successoffered hope for a renewal of
the Israeli-Palestinian partnership for peace.
The European Union deeply deplores the decision of
the Israeli Government to approve construction plans for
Jabal Abu Ghneim/Har Homa on the West Bank in the
Jerusalem area. This decision poses a threat to these

19

Security Council
Fifty-second year
positive developments. The European Union has repeatedly
stated that settlements in the occupiec! territories contravene
international law and pose a major obstacle to peace.
The European Union pgain reaffirms its policy on the
status of Jerusalem. East Jerusalem is subject to the
principles set out in Security Council resolution 242 (1967),
notably the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
force, and is therefore not under Israeli sovereignty. The
European Union considers that the Fourth Geneva
Convention is fully applicable to East Jerusalem, as it is to
other territories under occupation.
The Har Homa construction plans contain the building
of a settlement on the West Bank within the municipal
boundaries of Jerusalem, unilaterally expanded by Israel.
The call by Prime Minister Netanyahu for the
“new construction initiative throughout the Arab
neighborhoods of Jerusalem, which will entail the
building of 3,015 new housing units for Arab residents
of the city”
does not change the European Union’s rejection of the
decision on Har Homa.
We note that the building of houses for the Palestinian
population of the city since 1967 has remained far behind
housing projects for the Jewish population. The European
Union has stated repeatedly its concern that the Palestinians
of East Jerusalem continue to be subject to several
unacceptable restrictions.
In the interests of the peace process, the European
Union calls upon all parties to observe the utmost restraint
regarding issues that could prejudge the outcome of the
final status negotiations. We therefore greatly regret actions
taken by the Government of Israel, such as the annexation
of land, the demolition of houses, new settlement
construction and the expansion of settlements.
The European Union believes that the upcoming
redeployment must be credible in terms of territory handed
over to the Palestinian National Authority. Anything else
might have serious implications for the peace process.
The European Union remains firmly of the view that
the peace process is the only path to security and peace for
the Palestinians as well as for Israel and the neighbouring
States. The European Union calls upon Israel to respect its
obligations under international law and once again appeals
to the Israeli Government to refrain from building the new

20

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
settlement in Ha.r Homa and to respect the rights of the
Palestinians. To do otherwise would not be conducive to
a climate in which rapid and substantial progress in the
peace process can be achieved.
The European Union confirms its attachment to such
a process and its readiness to participate and assist in
every way possible in order to achieve the long-awaited
objective of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Netherlands for his kind words addressed to me.

The next speaker is the representative of the Oman.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Allow me at the outset
to seize this opportunity to extend to you, Sir, and to your
friendly country, Poland, our sincere congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month and to express our confidence in
your diplomatic skills, which will lead the deliberations of
this body to a successful outcome. May I also avail
myself of this opportunity to pay a special tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya, for the
kxemplary manner in which he steered the work of the
Council in the month of February.

After the signing of the historic peace agreements
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, a new hope
touched the hearts of millions of people in the Middle
East: a hope for peace, tranquillity, stability, harmony and
coexistence, marking a new beginning for this warravaged region.
My country, along with many other peace-loving
nations such as your own, Sir, spared no effort to
strengthen the foundation of this peaceful trend in order
to make it more solid and sustainable. Unfortunately,
sweet hopes are never lasting and we are here once again
resorting to the Security Council for guidance and action
to salvage what might be damaged by one of the parties
to and partners of the peace process.
It is quite comforting at times to listen to some of
the statements issued by the Israeli Government
concerning how peace ought to be articulated and
agreement implemented. But at the same time, it is
shocking to view the record of this Government in
translating its words into actions. In fact, the latest
decision of the Government of Israel to built new

Security Council
Fifty-second year
settlements in East Jerusalem in the area of Jabal Abu
Ghneim is not only cotinter-productive, but a flagrant
breach of the agreed principles of the peace process and of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 242 (1967), 252 (1968) and 338 (1973), which
reaffirmed the illegality of all measures taken by Israel
aimed at changing the demographic composition of the
Holy City and its status.
Without a doubt, the question of Jerusalem is of
particular importance and sensitivity to the overall
settlement of the Middle East crisis, which is one of the
major reasons why this whole question of determining the
final status of Jerusalem was left aside for a while. Taking
this decision now, in our opinion, will not only create a
volatile situation, endangering the peace process, but will
likely give extremist elements from both sides the
opportunity to jeopardize it.
It is our view that this record needs to be straightened
out once and for all with a clear, united message from this
Council that would reaffirm its unreserved support for the
peace process in accordance with the principle of land for
peace and relevant Security Council resolutions. In our
view, the latest decision of the Israeli Government is illegal
and ought to be rejected categorically.
It was very encouraging to note that all the statements
of the members of the Security Council expressed the view
that settlements were dangerous to the peace process.
Peace is a two-way track and it is a contract that has
been accepted and signed by the parties concerned. The
least to be expected is the full implementation of ‘and
adherence to what has been agreed upon. If the Israeli
Government believes that only the Palestinians should be
expected to live up to Israeli expectations, then it is
mistaken. It is about time, in our opinion, for this Israeli
Government to live up to its commitment by refraining
from such acts and to move forward in the peace process
on all tracks.
Finally, I would like to conclude my intervention by
reiterating my Government’s support for the peace process
and for a durable peace in the Middle East that will
alleviate the suffering of the people of the region - a
peace that will minimize the risk of confrontation and move
beyond lip service to concrete steps.
We firmly believe that the Israeli Government’s
decision to build new settlements in East Jerusalem is, to
say the least, wrong, illegal and above all, inconsistent with

3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
6 March 1997
the spirit and objectives of the peace process. Therefore,
once again, we call on the Israeli Government seriously
to reconsider its decision and to act in a more responsible
manner. If Israel truly believes in peace, this is the right
time to prove and demonstrate it to the entire international
community.
The Israeli policy on settlements in the occupied
territories is a means of wasting time and prolonging the
implementation of the principles of the peace process.
This should not be allowed to happen. We appeal to you,
Sir, and to the members of the Council to demonstrate
your firm positions and to send a strong, collective
message to the Israeli Government to reverse its latest
decision.
The President: I thank the representative of Oman
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Canada. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Karsgaard (Canada): Canada believes that only
through negotiation can a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace be achieved, based on Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The agreement signed
between the Government of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) on 15 January, leading to
the redeployment of Israeli forces from Hebron, was
welcomed by Canada as an important step towards
restoring momentum and confidence in the peace process.
Canada believes that the construction of a lasting
peace requires that all parties refrain from unilateral
actions that would prejudge the outcome of final status
negotiations. In this regard, it is Canada’s view that the
recent decision of the Government of Israel to proceed
with the construction of an Israeli settlement in Har Homa
undermines the trust that is the very foundation of the
peace process. While we acknowledge the stated
commitment of the Israeli Government to issue new
building permits for Arabs in East Jerusalem, this neither
justifies the construction of an Israeli settlement in
occupied territories nor lessens its impact on the peace
process.
Canada views settlement activity as a violation of
international law and harmful to the peace process. We
call upon the Government of Israel to reconsider its
decision to resume settlement activity in the West Bank

21

Security Council
Fifty-second year
and East Jerusalem and to refrain from building housing for
Israelis in Har Homa and elsewhere in the occupied
territories.
On 27 September, Canada’s Foreign Minister
addressed the Security Council during its debate on

22

3745th meeting (Resumption 1.)
6 March 1997
resolution 1073 (1996). As we consider the issue before
us today, Minister Axworthy’s comments then bear
repeating now: Building lasting peace requires building
trust.
The President: There are a number of speakers
remaining. In view of the lateness of the hour, and with
the consent of the Council, I intend to suspend the
meeting now.
