Reeolations adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

( c) The development of national institutions for
training in regional and physical planning, housing and
building;
(d) The acceleration of domestic savings through
the establishment of appropriate financial practices and
specialized institutions, including co-operatives, for
financing the housing and construction sector;
( e) Measures for environmental improvement, particularly those that shape the future structure of human
settlements;
(f) The expansion of low-cost housing, through
both public and private programmes and on a self-help
basis, including co-operatives, and the advancement of
pilot and demonstration projects on such housing;
3. Invites developed countries and the international
organizations concerned, especially the financial institutions, to provide during the 1970s increased assistance-technical as well as financial-to the developing
countries for the purposes enumerated in paragraph 2
above, in accordance with the priorities they have
determined for their development;
4. Further invites the Economic and Social Council
and the Committee on Housing, Building and Planning
to consider additional innovative approaches for the
improvement of housing and human settlements;
5. Recommends that, in the elaboration of the work
programmes in the field of housing, building and planning within the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, particular attention should be paid to programmes and projects of interest to the developing
countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General also to make
available to the Preparatory Committee for the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment his
report on the problems and priorities in human settlements;
1. Considers that the Centre for Housing, Building and Planning should play a major role in the
formulation and co-ordination of the United Nations
programmes and projects relating to the problems of
housing and human settlements as well as a catalytic
role in their implementation and that, as such, it should
be strengthened as a matter of high priority both by a
greater allocation of resources and by additional personnel;
8. Further considers that it is desirable to strengthen
regional co-operation in the field of housing, building
and planning;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit as
soon as possible to the General Assembly, through the
Economic and Social Council, an analytical review and
progress report on the implementation of the present
resolution, taking full advantage of the preparatory
work for the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.

2719 (XXV). Technical assistance in the field of
drug abuse control

The General Assembly,
Noting with grave concern the spread of drug abuse
in many parts of the world and its disastrous impact
on individuals and nations,
1. Strongly endorses the decisions taken by the
Economic and Social Council in its resolutions 1532

as

(XLIX) of 24 July 1970 and 1559 (XLIX) of 11
November 1970, which provide, inter alia, for the
establishment of a programme of action aiming at the
implementation of short-term and long-term policy
recommendations to deal with drug abuse, as proposed
by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs;
2. Welcomes the establishment, as an initial measure
and as a matter of urgency, of a United Nations Fund
for Drug Abuse Control, to be made up of voluntary
contributions;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to proceed immediately towards the implementation of the above
decisions;
4. Appeals to Governments, organizations and programmes within the United Nations system, and to
foundations as well as to the public in general, to lend
their full support to the above-mentioned efforts.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2720 (XXV). Technical assistance in the field of
narcotic drugs

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1559 (XLIX) of 11 November 1970,
Considering that addiction to narcotic drugs is becoming an alarming problem in many countries of the
world,
Considering that the measures that have been taken
against illicit trade and traffic in narcotic drugs have
not been successful in arresting widespread addiction,
Noting that the term "drug abuse" has been defined
in paragraph 20 of the report of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs on its second special session, 49
Taking into account that on the whole addicts in all
countries constitute a danger to society at large,
Calls upon Member States and appeals to non-member States to consider seriously the possibility of enacting adequate legislation providing severe penalties
for those engaged in illicit trade and trafficking of
narcotic drugs.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2721 (XXV). Human rights and scientific and
technological developments

The General Assembly,
Believing that a proper balance should be established
between scientific and technological progress and the
intellectual, spiritual, cultural and moral advancement
of humanity, as well as improvement in the general
conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 2450 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 on human rights and scientific and technological developments,
, Noting Commission on Human Rights resolution 14
(XXVI) of 26 March 1970,50
4 9 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 12 (E/4931).
w Ibid., Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 5 (E/4816),
chapter XXIII.

________________ _ _________________

;_
86

...;':.__
__;:.__
General Anembl-Twenty-fifth
Sea.ion

Havlng received the preliminary report on human
ripts and scientific and technological developments&i
prepared by the Secretary-General in accordance with
paragraph 2 of resolution 2450 (XXIII),
Noitng also the preliminary memorandum of the
World Health Organization,112
Noting with regret that it has been unable to examine
this question at the present session,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
study the problems relating to human rights as they
arise from developments in science and technology, as
~ e d in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 2450 (XXIII);
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at
its twenty-seventh session to give priority to the examination of the preliminary report on human rights
and scientific and technological developments, as supplemented by such further information as may be made
available to it, including the preliminary memorandum
submitted by the World Health Organization, and to
transmit to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council, its suggestions and recommendations for the attainment of the objectives of
resolution 2450 (XXIII);
3. Decides to give priority to the consideration of
this item at its twenty-sixth session.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
llB/CN.4/1028 and Add.I and 2, Add.3 and Corr.I, Add.4
and s.
UA/80SS/Add.1.

•

2722 (XXV). Freedom of information
The General Assembly,
Recalllng its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20 December
1965 in which, inter alla, it decided to hasten the conclusion, among other instruments, of a convention on
freedoru of information,

Recalling further its resolution 2448 (XXIII) of
19 December 1968 by which it decided, pending tbo
completion of the draft Convention on Freedom of
Information, to give priority at its twenty-fourth aession to the consideration and adoption of the draft
Declaration on Freedom of Information,
Regretting that, despite this decision, it has not been
possible to do so owmg to the heavy programme of
work at the current session,
Decuus to give priority to the consideration of this
item at its twenty-sixth session, taking into account
that the consideration of the draft Declaration on Freedom of Information, which was submitted by the Economic and Social Council, has been deferred for tbo
last decade, that the preamble and articles 1 to 4 of
the draft Convention on Freedom of lnform.ation11
have been adopted by the Third Committee and that
the draft Convention has been before the General Assembly for eighteen years.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
II A/8036, annex ID .

• •

Other dechion•
Creedon of the poet of United Nations High Commie1ioner
for Human Rights
(Item 46)
At its 1929th plenary meeting, on 14 December 1970, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Third Committee, If decided to defer until its twentysixth session consideration of the item entitled "Creation of the post of United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights".
Question of the elderly and the aged

(Item 52)

At its 1930th plenary meeting, on 15 December 1970, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Third Committee, 111 decided to defer until its twentysixth session consideration of the item entitled "Question of the elderly and the
aged" and to give it priority so as to ensure adequate time for its consideration
at that session.

Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance
(Item 54)

At its 1930th plenary meeting, on 15 December 1970, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Third Committee, 58 decided to defer until its
twenty-sixth session consideration of the item entitled "Elimination of all forms of
religious intolerance".
15' 01/icial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item
46, document A/8231, para. 24.
111 Jbid., qenda item 52, document A/8254, para. 4.
H Ibid., agenda item 54, document A/8255, para. 3.
