S/PV.8896

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8896th meeting

Wednesday, 3 November 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Mathur
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Cherif
Ms. Farrey
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-31868 (E)
*2131868*

S/PV.8896

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2604 (2021).

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Martin Kimani,
Permanent Representative of Kenya, for his service as
President of the Council for the month of October. I
am sure I speak for all the members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Kimani
and his team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2021/913, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya,
Mexico, Niger, Norway, Russian Federation, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Viet Nam
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
2/19

03/11/2021

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to thank Kenya, its Permanent
Representative and its team for the outstanding work
during the month of October. Allow me as well, Sir,
to commend your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. You have the full support of my
delegation in the coming weeks.
Since the conflict of the 1990s, with the continued
support of the European Union, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has made resolute progress on the path towards peace
and stabilization. Today, while political tensions are
high, France reaffirms its commitment to the European
perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as of the
entire Western Balkans. The European Union, an agent
of peace and stability on the European continent since
its establishment, is determined to continue to play that
role in the Balkans, in the dialogue with all its partners.
With the European Union Military Operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European Union has
played the main role in stabilizing peace and security
in the country since 2004. It does so on behalf of the
international community, in accordance with the
Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement and by decision of the
Security Council. We welcome the adoption today of
resolution 2604 (2021), which renews the mandate.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European path includes
implementing an ambitious agenda of reforms for the
benefit of all of the country’s inhabitants, who have
a right to effective democratic institutions, especially
when it comes to justice and combating corruption
and organized crime, in accordance with the highest
European standards. We call on the political leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to overcome their divisions
and work for the benefit of all its people so as to move
the country forward along that path.
We also call for an electoral reform that guarantees
the principle of non-discrimination and the equality
of all citizens, in accordance with the rulings of the
European Court of Human Rights.
Women’s full and effective participation in political
life must also be a priority.
21-31868

03/11/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

We also continue to call for the formation
of Governments in the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as in all the cantons that still do
not have one.
The High Representative plays an essential role in
support of Bosnia and Herzegovina as the guarantor of
the implementation of the Dayton-Paris Accord. France
supports his work and takes careful note of his report.
We are convinced that, through his contacts with all
the actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina and with all the
members of the international community, he will be
able to contribute usefully to the country’s stability. We
call on all stakeholders to engage in good faith towards
that goal.
France condemns all forms of calling into question
the territorial integrity and existence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a State. We also deeply regret the
decision by certain political representatives to block
the functioning of central State institutions. We call on
leaders to work within the framework of the country’s
institutions. France reiterates its unwavering support
for the unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina within the
framework established by the Dayton-Paris Accord. We
call on all the witnessed to the Accord to continue to act
as guarantors.
Finally, France condemns in the strongest way
possible the glorification of convicted war criminals
and the denial of genocide. That is incompatible
with the values of the European Union. We reaffirm
the importance of justice, reparation and guarantees
of non-repetition for crimes committed during the
conflicts of the 1990s, especially sexual violence.
Transitional justice and reconciliation processes remain
the only solid basis for the future of the country.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming your
important functions as our President for this month.
I thank your predecessor Ambassador Kimani for his
deft handling of the presidency in the month of October.
I also thank his team.
I would like to begin by emphasizing our strong
support for a single, sovereign, united and multi-ethnic
Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the Office of the
High Representative and the European Union Military
Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea).
We are pleased that resolution 2604 (2021) authorizing
EUFOR-Althea, in which Ireland is proud to participate,
was adopted this afternoon.

S/PV. 8896

I would like to thank High Representative
Schmidt for his report. The High Representative
has provided a clear and detailed assessment of the
deeply concerning political deadlock and blockages
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Ireland remains fully
supportive of the Office of the High Representative
and encourages all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina
both to respect and engage, to the fullest extent, with
the High Representative and his Office. We would
particularly encourage greater progress in fulfilling the
5+2 agenda. The delivery of that agenda remains the
agreed prerequisite for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative.
We remain greatly concerned about the divisive,
negative rhetoric, which only deepens existing divisions
and diminishes the prospects for reconciliation. We call
on all parties to repudiate such rhetoric and refrain from
any further unilateral actions that seek to undermine
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are concerned in particular about the
glorification of war criminals. There can be no place in
the modern Bosnia and Herzegovina for the glorification
of war criminals and the denial of genocide.
Like all of us, Bosnia and Herzegovina has faced
serious problems as a result of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, but the political deadlock
and paralysis of State institutions is compounding
the frustration of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s citizens
and is a factor driving so many young people to leave
the country.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been able to make
significant achievements over the past quarter of a
century in building up its institutions of Government
and developing its economy and society. It has shown
that the political path can work for all people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That must continue. Elected
representatives, working together with the national
leadership, must cooperate to address the needs
of citizens.
Ireland fully supports Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European Union (EU) perspective. We call on all
parties to work towards common goals, to address the
challenges created by COVID-19 and to step up the pace
on implementing the reforms needed for EU accession.
That means addressing the needs of all citizens. We call
on all parties to uphold and respect equality and inclusion
as key principles that will underpin a stable prosperous
future for Bosnia and Herzegovina and enable women

21-318683/19

S/PV.8896

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

to rightfully participate in decision-making in all its
dimensions. Despite existing legislation, we know that
the participation of women in politics remains low.
We urge the authorities to ensure the development of
effective mechanisms for the implementation of quotas
to enhance women’s political representation. We call
once again on the High Representative to focus on that
important issue of gender equality and for reporting on
the issue to be included in future reports of the Office
of the High Representative.
Progress is needed on the reform of the electoral
framework to meet European standards and guarantee
that all citizens can exercise their political rights. We
regret the fact that there has been no move towards an
agreement on those issues before the country moves
into full election mode in 2022. Achieving those much
needed reforms will require all sides to show leadership
and engage in a sincere and constructive way. In
addition, progress is required on the 14 key reform
priorities, set out in the European Commission opinion,
in particular on the rule of law. That is essential for
restoring citizens’ trust in the judicial system. Bosnia
and Herzegovina will move forward on its EU path only
when it delivers on that critical mass of reforms.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has much challenging
work ahead of it, but we hope that its leaders will
resume the dialogue needed to tackle, step by step in a
pragmatic way, the issues facing the country. That will
enable Bosnia and Herzegovina to take a decisive step
towards overcoming the dismal legacy of the past and
realize its full potential as a sovereign State within the
European family of nations.

03/11/2021

We are concerned about the recent political
developments that threaten the stability of the country
and undermine the progress achieved over the past 26
years. All political leaders must actively endeavour
to leverage common opportunities and engage in
constructive dialogue to implement much-needed
reforms, including the political, socioeconomic and
electoral reforms, for the benefit of its citizens. Our
delegation therefore encourages the leaders to uphold
their commitments pursuant to the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
is a fundamental pillar for building lasting peace and
stability in the country.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders must also strive
to act hand in hand with each other to help mitigate the
consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
It is concerning that the most recent report on
the implementation of the Peace Agreement includes
an escalation of divisive rhetoric, the glorification of
war criminals and actions targeted at the country’s
Constitution. Those actions serve only to erode the
otherwise significant steps that have been made in
nation-building. Above all, we encourage the parties to
improve the rule of law, tackle corruption and improve
the overall political environment in the country so that
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina can enjoy peace
and be treated with respect and dignity.

Ms. Deshong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Let me also join others in wishing you, Mr. President,
every success as Mexico steers us this month in the work
of the Security Council. I also take the opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Kimani and his very dynamic
team on a wonderful and successful presidency in the
month of October.

In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
reaffirms its support for the stability, political
independence and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We encourage the leaders to put aside their
differences and work together with the members of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
to fully implement the Dayton Peace Agreement and
the objectives and conditions of the 5+2 agenda. We
also encourage all parties to continue engaging with
the international community, particularly the Security
Council, for the stability and long-term security of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We begin by expressing thanks to the Office of the
High Representative for its commitment to help promote
the political process and the full implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also take this opportunity to recognize the continued
work of the European Union Military Operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as it plays a key role in
supporting the efforts to maintain a safe and secure
environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I would like to join other Council members in
welcoming the adoption just now of resolution 2604
(2021), which renews the authorization for the European
Union Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

4/19

Ms. Farrey (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by congratulating you, Mr. President, on Mexico’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month and wish you all the best. I also congratulate
Kenya for a very successful presidency in October.

21-31868

03/11/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

(EUFOR-Althea) for a further 12 months. As the High
Representative states in his recent report, the present
turbulent environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina
highlights the vital role of EUFOR-Althea in
safeguarding peace and security, thereby enabling the
High Representative to fulfil his mandate and provide
reassurance to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Although this is by necessity a simple resolution, it
rests on the great body of existing resolutions and other
documents of the Council that set out the Council’s
position in full.
Although
the
new
High
Representative,
Mr. Christian Schmidt, is not with us today, we would
like to thank him for his candid and thorough report
on the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which was circulated to
Council members pursuant to the requirements of the
Peace Agreement and the relevant Council resolutions.
We look forward to welcoming him to the Council in
upcoming meetings.
The High Representative’s report paints a
worrisome picture. We note his view that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is facing the greatest existential threat of
the post-war period and heed his warning on the real
prospects for further division and conflict.
In particular, we share the deep concern of other
Council members about the divisive rhetoric and actions
pursued in some quarters of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
notably by representatives of the Republika Srpska
entity. Although those activities predate the 22 July
amendment of the Bosnia and Herzegovina criminal
code by the former High Representative to sanction the
denial of genocide, war crimes and the glorification of
war criminals, the amendment appears to have provided
a pretext for an escalation since then.
As the High Representative points out, those
activities, including threats to re-establish a Republika
Srpska army and to pull out of other established
State-level institutions, represent an attempt to
withdraw the Republika Srpska from the constitutional
order established under the Dayton Agreement.
These moves seek to undo 26 years of hard-won
peace and progress. As such, we agree with the High
Representative’s assessment that those actions amount
to an attempt to engineer secession from Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That puts at risk not only the peace and
stability of the country and the region, but the Dayton
Agreement itself.

S/PV. 8896

In the light of the political situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it is more vital than ever that the Security
Council make clear its ongoing support for the full
implementation of the Dayton Agreement. In addition
to the military role of the European Union Military
Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, that includes the
civilian role of the High Representative.
We would like to join others in expressing our full
support for the new High Representative, Mr. Schmidt,
and for the use of executive powers should the
situation require it. We reject attempts to undermine
his appointment and to close his Office prematurely.
That is not in the interests of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but undermines regional security and
the country’s objective of Euro-Atlantic integration.
As agreed by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council for Bosnia and Herzegovina
and repeatedly reaffirmed by Council members, the
completion of the 5+2 agenda remains necessary for the
closure of the Office. We urge the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to recommit to achieving progress
and welcome Mr. Schmidt’s proposed initiative to
reinvigorate the process.
Moreover, we urge the entities and all citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to harness the spirit of the
positive developments in the High Representative’s
report, such as the mutual visits between the city
mayors of Sarajevo, Mostar, Banja Luka and Tuzla.
As a member of the Security Council and the
Peace Implementation Council, the United Kingdom
remains committed to supporting the security, stability,
democracy, prosperity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We stand with the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and their hopes for a
peaceful and bright future.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Let me, like
others, thank Kenya and the Kenyan team for their
excellent presidency. We also wish to convey to you,
Mr. President, and your team our best wishes for the
month of November.
The contribution of the European Union Military
Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to maintaining
stability and a safe and secure environment in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is vital and, unfortunately, still
necessary to ensure sustainable peace. We therefore
voted in favour of resolution 2604 (2021) and welcome
the continued work of the Operation.

21-318685/19

S/PV.8896

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

While it is important that we were able adopt a
resolution, we regret that it was not possible to proceed
with the more substantial text, which would have
sent a signal to the actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to stay committed to the process of transition
towards a peaceful, reform-oriented and prosperous
European country.
Let me thank the Secretary-General and High
Representative Schmidt for the report. It outlines
serious challenges to the fundamental elements of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Norway supports the Office of the
High Representative and believes it continues to have
an important role in overseeing the implementation of
the civilian aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina must
take the necessary actions to fulfil the conditions
under the 5+2 agenda. We believe that is possible and
within reach if all actors, including the international
community, work together constructively and in the
best interests of all people in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Only then could the Office of the High Representative
be closed and the international supervision of Bosnia
and Herzegovina phased out. However, we are not there
yet. Progress has been made, but more needs to be done.
We remain concerned about the current political
crisis in the country. More than 25 years after the war,
it is in everyone’s interest to pursue a peaceful and
constructive path that leads to lasting reconciliation.
That is a prerequisite for development and prosperity.
Yet the current political impasse is destructive.
Energy should be spent on meeting the needs of the
people and focusing on comprehensive reforms to
further develop Bosnia and Herzegovina, and efforts
must be made to enhance the implementation of
reforms, including on the rule of law and rulings by
the European Court of Human Rights. It is time for all
parties to play a constructive role in ending the impasse
and, through dialogue, resolve the current crisis and
help build a better tomorrow for the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
We know that women are key to lasting and
sustainable peace. We therefore call on all parties to
ensure women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
in all aspects of dialogue and peacebuilding. Let me end
by once again confirming that Norway fully supports
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and fundamental
structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single
6/19

03/11/2021

sovereign State comprising two entities. Norway will
continue to listen to, and engage with, one and all.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me join others in welcoming you,
Mr. President, to your new role as President of the
Security Council. I would also like to thank Kenya for
its extraordinary effort during the previous month.
We are very pleased that the Security Council
once again reauthorized European Union Military
Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and sent a clear
message of support for the vitally important mission of
maintaining peace and security. We are also grateful for
High Representative Christian Schmidt’s recent report,
which the Secretary-General shared with the Security
Council. In line with precedent and the requirements of
resolution 1031 (1995) , the report is crucial for keeping
the international community informed about the ongoing
efforts to ensure enduring stability and prosperity in
the region. Although the High Representative is not
here with us today, we appreciate his hard work and
look forward to welcoming him to brief the Council on
developments in future.
Right now, Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing a
critical juncture in its post-war history. Today I would
like to address three aspects of this situation — the
dangerous rhetoric we have been hearing, the need to
protect and fund the Office of the High Representative
and how electoral reform and combating corruption are
necessary for progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
First, the heated rhetoric must stop. Mr. Milorad
Dodik has called for the Republika Srpska’s withdrawal
from the armed forces and from State-level institutions
in the judiciary, law enforcement and intelligence
agencies. With increasing frequency, Dodik has
been talking about the Republika Srpska’s possible
full withdrawal from Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
United States agrees with the High Representative’s
assessment — this is a dangerous path both for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the wider Western
Balkans regions. We are especially concerned by
Dodik’s claim that he is leading an effort to draft a new
constitution for the Republika Srpska. This would pose
a serious threat to the Dayton architecture, which is
an architecture that has so far successfully preserved
peace.
As we have maintained since the signing of
the Dayton Accords in 1995, the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
21-31868

03/11/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

paramount. Unfortunately, in the past few months, all
sides have made heated claims. We call for calm and
for de-escalation by all parties. It is time for elected
officials at all levels of government to get back to
governing and serving the citizens of the country. That
means the Presidency must meet on a regular basis.
State-level institutions must be fully operational and
have the full participation of the constituent peoples,
and, after three years, the Federation’s Government
must be finally and fully formed.
Secondly, we must protect the role of the High
Representative, whose office serves as a foundation of
stability for the country. High Representative Schmidt
has our utmost support as the final authority charged
with implementing the civilian aspects of the Dayton
Accords. That will remain the case until the 5+2
agenda is met. Only then can the Office of the High
Representative close, and only then can Bosnia and
Herzegovina graduate from international supervision.
We also urge all non-payers to contribute to the
Office’s budget. As the High Representative mentioned
in his report, operating expenses for his Office
declined about 7 per cent per year entirely because of
non-payment. This imperils the Office’s functioning
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and it threatens peace
and undermines progress. Members of the Peace
Implementation Council must fund the Office of the
High Representative so that it can do its job.
Thirdly, and finally, for the country to move forward
on its European Union path, it needs electoral and
limited constitutional reform, and it needs to combat
corruption. The authorities must heed and implement
the recommendations made by the Office of Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights and the Group of States
against Corruption to strengthen election integrity for
the equal benefit of all citizens. Now is the moment
to pass legislation and improve election integrity
leading up to the 2022 elections. Both Governments
need to weed out corruption in all its forms. Corruption
is unlawful. It is anti-democratic, and it is the spark
that sets off instability. The people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina deserve better from their Government.
Corrupt officials must be held accountable.
This is a delicate moment for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Let us ensure for the country’s people that
all parties involved choose the path of peace, progress
and prosperity.

S/PV. 8896

Mr. Mathur (India): We wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. We also wish to congratulate
Kenya for a successful presidency in the month
of October.
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Christian Schmidt
for his first report, covering the period from 16 April
to 15 October 2021, which has been shared with the
Security Council.
The recent political developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina have the potential to undermine
the progress made in the last two decades. It is
important that all parties are encouraged to adopt a
conciliatory approach and work closely to address all
contentious issues.
We believe the General Framework Agreement
for Peace provides the basis to find solutions related
to interethnic-conflict settlement through dialogue
among the parties based on equality and mutual respect,
compromise and consensus. The Agreement remains
important for building enduring peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As an ad hoc international institutional mechanism,
the Office of the High Representative has been
overseeing the implementation of the civilian aspects
of the Agreement. We believe it is incumbent on the
Office to continue to work with all parties objectively
to build trust and overcome the impediments.
The Office is an interim mechanism, and expeditious
implementation of the 5+2 agenda should remain the top
priority. The new High Representative has before him
an emerging political situation that, if not addressed
diligently, could adversely affect the Peace Agreement.
Therefore, the new High Representative needs to
promote cohesion and mutual understanding among all
parties. We hope that disagreement among members
of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council over the Office of the High Representative
will be resolved through consensus and constructive
engagement in line with the peace agreement.
Owing
to
its
multi-ethnic,
multilingual,
multicultural and multireligious nature, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been facing challenges on its path
towards sustainable peace. We believe these challenges
could be overcome by its leaders through dialogue,
mutual understanding and empathy towards each
other’s positions. It is important that all sides shun

21-318687/19

S/PV.8896

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

divisive rhetoric in their statements that may be used to
stoke tensions between different communities. Towards
this end, we hope that the new High Representative will
play an objective role in line with the provisions of the
Peace Agreement.
Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it is my pleasure to once again congratulate
Kenya on its successful presidency of the Security
Council during the month of October. I also wish all
the best to Mexico on assuming the presidency of the
Council this month. I would like as well to welcome
the representatives of the European Union, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia.
The report that we have before us shows the persistent
and large-scale challenges that the Dayton Agreement
is facing. In this context, my delegation expresses its
concern as regards the political developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina since July, especially those which
lead to obstructing the work of institutions. As for the
elections of 2022, I recall the difficulties that have
arisen since the elections of 2018 and the impossibility
since then of forming a new federal Government.

03/11/2021

agenda so that the Office of the High Representative
may be closed and international supervision ended.
Despite the fact that it has been 25 years since the
signing of the Dayton Agreement, periodic reports
explicitly describe a persistent standstill and growing
challenges at various levels. We would like to remind
all the parties concerned to avoid disagreements that
lead to constant crises and tensions. Priority should be
given to the national interest of all citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, paving the way for the younger
generation to build a better future based on ethnic and
cultural unity.
In conclusion, Tunisia reiterates its full support
to all efforts that promote stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and achieve reconciliation among its
various ethnic groups. We stand ready with various
partners to support lasting peace and security and
sustainable development, as well as to achieve the
aspirations of its people for a better future.

My country’s delegation expresses its concern
once again as regards the continued negative ethnic
rhetoric that can only deepen the existing divisions
and affect the reconciliation process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this regard, we reiterate Tunisia’s full
support for the prosperity, stability and peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and emphasize the need to preserve
its sovereignty, territorial integrity and constitutional
order. We also call for the need to refrain from any
behaviour that would undermine reforms and jeopardize
the unity and stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
also call on all parties to forgo divisive rhetoric, which
can only deepen the national and ethnic divisions and
dangerously threaten stability and the peacebuilding
process.

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
For some time now, Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
facing growing challenges. The election law reform
is beset with difficulties. The formation of a new
Government shows little progress, and the parties
increasingly disagree over national governance models.
China is of the view that the issues facing Bosnia and
Herzegovina should ultimately be resolved by its people.
We encourage all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to put the interests of the country and its people first,
step up dialogue and consultations, accommodate each
other’s concerns, fully implement the spirit and letter
of the Dayton Peace Agreement and, in the context of
the Constitution, properly address relevant differences,
promote the country’s development and achieve
national reconciliation. China calls on the international
community to take an impartial, balanced and prudent
approach, fully take into account the views of all parties
and avoid imposing external solutions.

My delegation reiterates once again its support for
the efforts made by the Office of the High Representative
in line with the Dayton Peace Agreement and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We stress the
important role of the European Union military mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to promote the efforts
aimed at creating a safe environment. We therefore
encourage all parties to honour their commitments
aimed at ensuring that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
its full independence within the framework of the 5+2

With regard to the issue of the High Representative,
views differ among the parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the High Representative system.
China reiterates that, according to the Dayton Peace
Agreement, the Security Council has a clear role to play
in the appointment of the High Representative. That has
long been an established practice and should be fully
respected. The system of the High Representative and
the Bonn powers thereof were special arrangements of
a particular time. The international community should

8/19

21-31868

03/11/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

provide help to Bosnia and Herzegovina in ways that
adapt to the evolving situation.
China welcomes the efforts of the European
Union in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina to maintain
peace and stability. We hope that the European Union
Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to play a positive role in maintaining security
and stability in the country, assisting its armed forces
with the disposal of weapons and ammunition and
demining and helping the country to combat terrorism
and organized crime.
China has always respected the sovereignty,
independence, national unity and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the choice of its people
regarding the country’s future. We believe that the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have the ability and
wisdom to resolve the problems facing them. China has
always been a good partner of Bosnia and Herzegovina
for peace and development. Since the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19), we have donated
multiple batches of medical supplies to the country,
organized virtual exchanges between medical experts
of the two countries and exported and donated
COVID-19 vaccines to Bosnia and Herzegovina. China
stands ready to work with the international community
and continuously contribute to the promotion of
national reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
helping it to achieve lasting stability and development
and maintain peace and stability in the country and the
Western Balkans.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow me
to extend my sincere congratulations to the delegation
of Kenya on its excellent presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. I also congratulate
you, Mr. President, on Mexico’s assumption of the
presidency for the month of November. I assure you of
the Niger’s full support.
My delegation deplores the negative political
climate in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which, if prolonged,
will pose a serious threat not only to the basis of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina but also to institutional stability.
I therefore urge the parties to strictly respect the
General Framework Agreement, the constitutional
order and all relevant Security Council resolutions,
as well as to show political will to create conditions
for a de-escalation of tensions. Furthermore, the issue
of electoral reforms is a matter on which all parties

S/PV. 8896

should demonstrate exemplary conduct in order to
avoid undermining electoral processes before elections
take place.
My delegation expresses its deep concern about
the stalled implementation of the 5+2 agenda, whose
fulfilment remains the essential condition for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I encourage the parties to
comply with their obligations in that regard and to
work to ensure that significant progress is made in
implementing the agenda.
The efforts to strengthen the rule of law, which I
welcome, must be accompanied by appropriate measures
for the voluntary return of refugees and displaced
persons. To that end, it is necessary, in accordance
with the principles of international humanitarian law,
to maintain a sociopolitical climate favourable to the
voluntary return of returnees and their integration into
their respective communities.
In conclusion, my delegation urges the parties to
give priority to dialogue and to refrain from any rhetoric
or conduct that could jeopardize peace and stability.
In addition, given the vital role of European Union
Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
safeguarding peace and security in the country, the
Niger voted in favour of the extension of its mandate
for an additional period of 12 months.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, let me congratulate Mexico
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for November and wish them a successful month. We
also thank Kenya, its Permanent Representative and his
team for their able leadership in October.
We are concerned over yet further worsening of the
internal political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
unprecedented in the post-war period. The situation
has been exacerbated by the irresponsible actions
of a number of external forces. As a result, all the
achievements of the complex and long process of
inter-ethnic reconciliation are now seriously threatened.
As a guarantor of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Russia cannot remain complacent. We will not tolerate
the disdain shown by some of our colleagues for the
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is
explained by their unwillingness to relinquish the role
of guardian of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the right

21-318689/19

S/PV.8896

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

03/11/2021

to dictate to Bosnians how they should build their
statehood and govern their country.

Ambassador Alkalaj, did not receive the support of all
entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The quintessentially protectionist attitude of our
Western colleagues has been the unseemly fuss around
the Office of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The actions of those who hold or aspire
to that post speak for themselves.

If anyone still doubts that the Office of the High
Representative long ago ceased to serve the cause of
national reconciliation, the circulated document will
dispel those doubts for good. It is obvious that the
Office of the High Representative has become a source
of colossal problems that jeopardizes the entire Dayton
structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have some
questions for our colleagues who promote illegitimate
schemes aimed at preserving the Office and its dictatorlike functions. What is their goal? What are they doing?
How does it relate to the principles of democracy and
independence that they ardently promote in other
situations? Where do those double standards for Bosnia
and Herzegovina come from?

First, at the end of his mandate, former High
Representative Inzko imagined that, like a selfappointed Bosnian autocrat, he had the right to make
certain amendments to the criminal code of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, contrary to the views of the Bosnian
parties. Of course, such blatant arbitrariness poured fuel
on the fire, provoking another round of disagreement
and harmful rhetoric among the peoples of the country,
who have not yet fully recovered from the conflict.
Colleagues tried to appoint Mr. Christian Schmidt
as the new High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in circumvention of the Security Council.
They did that unapologetically, in violation of
international law and the existing practice of making
such appointments by consensus. To avoid any
misconceptions, we stress that the Office of the High
Representative remains vacant. As of today, there is no
High Representative, or any eligible candidate.
By the way, the rightness of our principled stance
was confirmed by a document submitted to the Council
on 30 October, which was entitled — apparently by
inertia — “Report of the High Representative”. We
would like to draw members’ attention to the fact that
the Security Council has no grounds to accept and
consider correspondence from private individuals.
Otherwise, the authority of the Security Council and of
the United Nations at large may be seriously damaged.
We do not intend to discuss that “report”. I can only
say that we have not seen a more prejudiced and Serbphobic document for quite some time. It pursues but
one goal, namely, eradicating any seeds of mutual
understanding, peace and cooperation among the
peoples living in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This product
builds upon the most destructive and irresponsible
statements and initiatives of Valentin Inzko. As
an alternative, we suggest studying a report by the
Republika Srpska about the situation in the country
that was circulated as a Security Council document
S/2021/910. We regret that the statement today by the
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
10/19

A number of Bosnian actors and external forces
insistently promote the concept of the unitarization of
the country, which contradicts the Dayton-envisaged
principles of the equality of the three constituent peoples
and two entities with broad constitutional authorities.
Pressure on representatives of the Serb entity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina is intensifying rapidly. We would
like to warn against substituting notions whereby only
Serbs are blamed for what is going on in the country.
We note with regret that demonizing everything that is
Bosnian Serb has become almost the central element
of the policies of some internal Bosnian and external
forces. The goal of those policies leaves no doubt: a
revision of the Dayton architecture. To achieve that
goal, they openly threaten to use unilateral — and
therefore illegitimate — sanctions.
We are convinced — and we have been saying
this year after year — that equitable internal Bosnian
dialogue, free from external interference, is a
prerequisite for successful inter-ethnic reconciliation.
Full responsibility for the developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its future must rest upon the legally
elected bodies of authority, in accordance with their
respective powers. As we all see, striving to provide
“good offices” without the consent of the sides has the
opposite effect. That is also true with regard to such a
pressing issue for Bosnia and Herzegovina as electoral
reform. The peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina must
find a solution themselves, only then it will be reliable
and realistic. We see that the task of ensuring adequate
and legitimate representation in power structures at all
levels remains very urgent. Attempts to impose external
solutions and appoint Special Representatives on those
21-31868

03/11/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV. 8896

matters are counterproductive and fraught with making
things more complicated.

support and cooperation extended to Kenya during its
presidency of the Council in the month of October.

The Security Council has been addressing the issue
of Bosnia and Herzegovina for 26 years already. The
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
has been active in Sarajevo for exactly the same time.
However, discords in those bodies have never been as
grave as they are now, and we have never seen such
an outspoken stance towards playing a zero-sum game.
That inflicts irreparable damage on the authority of the
Steering Board and of the Security Council.

Kenya welcomes the adoption of resolution 2604
(2021), which extends the mandate of the European
Union Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At this point, a rapprochement of international
approaches to the issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
a responsible approach by the main actors would be very
useful. In that regard, we appreciate the efforts made
by France this month in its capacity as penholder on
the Bosnia and Herzegovina file. Our appreciation also
goes to the Mexican presidency. These two countries
have been able to lead the Council towards finding the
only possible common ground and ensure unanimous
renewal of the mandate of the European Union Military
Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We believe that, whether it be in Sarajevo, New
York or in capitals, we need a concrete and equal
conversation based on the interests of the entire
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region,
which should address practical ways of dismantling the
harmful mechanism of external patronage over Bosnia
and Herzegovina as soon as possible and rendering
constructive assistance on national reconciliation.
As a Dayton guarantor State, Russia is convinced
that there is no alternative to the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
that its proposed balance among the interests of the
three peoples is rather efficient. Attempts to ruin it may
entail serious consequences for the Balkans and Europe
at large. We fully support the fundamental principles of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the equality of the three constituent
peoples and two entities with broad authorities and will
continue to do so.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of November and
to assure you of the support of Kenya’s delegation.
On behalf of my delegation, allow me also to most
sincerely thank all the members of the Council both
for their compliments this afternoon and for the critical

The primary responsibility for the successful
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina lies with all of the
country’s authorities. We urge them to work together
not only to ensure compliance with the Agreement but
also to make progress on the five objectives and two
conditions that are preconditions for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative.
Kenya is concerned by the continuing polarizing and
unconstructive rhetoric, including threats of secession
through withdrawal from key joint institutions. We
recall that, during the recently held high-level debate
on diversity, State-building and the search for peace,
hosted by Kenya on 12 October, President Uhuru
Kenyatta said in his statement that “poor management
of diversity is leading to grave threats to international
peace and security.” (S/PV.8877, p. 7)
In the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is critical
that leaders avoid any actions that cause division and
erode trust among and between the people they represent.
They should lead the way towards constructive dialogue
based on trust, respect and dignity and refocus their
efforts on unifying actions that build trust for all its
people regardless of identity.
Political leaders need to join together in efforts
that will lead to the resumption of the functioning of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s institutions and to advance
reconciliation and mutual understanding. Authorities
at all levels should also coordinate and implement
socioeconomic reforms that will address structural
weaknesses in the economy to the benefit of all citizens,
including vulnerable members of society, particularly
women and children.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s support for the
stability, political independence and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and reiterate our call on all
parties to recommit to the full implementation of their
obligations under the Peace Agreement.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I join others in thanking
Kenya for an excellent presidency during the month of
October and congratulating you, Sir, on assuming that
role for November. I wish you every success.

21-3186811/19

S/PV.8896

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Estonia just supported the operational rollover
of the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea) for 12 months, as
Operation Althea is a strong contributor to the country’s
efforts in maintaining a safe and secure environment,
which is particularly crucial considering the current
political crises in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, we
would have liked to have seen references in resolution
2604 (2021) to the Office of the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, previous resolutions and Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s European perspective. We regret that the
Security Council was unable to reiterate its positions on
those important elements.
Let me make it clear. The work of the High
Representative is extremely necessary in order to
mitigate risks to stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We strongly support the continuation of the effective
Office of the High Representative. We thank the High
Representative, Mr. Schmidt, for his comprehensive
and sincere report on the developments in the country.
With regard to the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we would like to express our concern
about the prolonged political crisis, and we condemn
the blockage of State institutions. We urge the leaders
of the political parties to refrain from any political steps
that would lead to further divisions and destabilization
of the country. We believe that the solutions are possible
through dialogue and the full return to institutions.
Estonia strongly supports Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and the aspiration of
its citizens to advance towards the European Union (EU).
The leaders must always put the interests of the people
first. Therefore, we encourage the leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to jointly continue to take forward the
implementation of the 14 key priorities of the European
Commission opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
application for EU membership — reaffirmed recently
at the EU-Western Balkans Summit. The country
should show commitment, most of all to sustainable
peace, stability and meaningful reconciliation.
We call on the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to focus on the electoral and constitutional reform
to ensure the implementation of important judicial
decisions of the European Court of Human Rights
and take into consideration the decisions of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
12/19

03/11/2021

of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe; the Council of Europe’s Group of States against
Corruption; and Venice Commission recommendations
on election integrity. Keeping that in focus would also
help to improve the rule of law. We are pleased that
several positive changes have taken place in Brčko
district, in particular towards the implementation of the
reform-related laws and their harmonization with the
EU standards.
We encourage the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to implement the revised National War
Crimes Processing Strategy, adopted by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers, especially as the
nationalistic and divisive rhetoric in the country has
continued. We would like to reiterate that spreading
provocative rhetoric, denying war crimes, glorifying
convicted war criminals and downplaying the
Srebrenica genocide in any way are unacceptable.
We also encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina to
invest in combating violence against women and
implement the women and peace and security agenda
in an inclusive manner.
People in Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially
young people, deserve a greener and more sustainable,
digital and prosperous future. We should work towards
that goal. We are pleased that the United Nations is
implementing Dialogue for the Future project, which
seeks to enhance the local dialogue platforms for civil
society, youth and women’s organizations.
Unfortunately, the fight against the coronavirus
disease pandemic is not over. It is important to speed
up vaccinations and to boost the economic recovery.
We commend United Nations bodies for providing
assistance during the pandemic and highlight the EU’s
donation of more than 1.3 million vaccine doses for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Lastly, let me reiterate our call on the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to work in solidarity and
unity. We encourage them to work closely with the
Office of the High Representative and implement all
the necessary reforms.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like to
wish you, Sir, and your team all the best for the month
ahead under the Mexican presidency. You can count
on our support and cooperation. I would also like to
congratulate Kenya for its very successful presidency
last month.
21-31868

03/11/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Viet Nam remains concerned about the volatile
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past
years. Inter-ethnic and intercommunal tensions and the
lack of dialogue, trust and reconciliation have affected
the lives of people, which consequently could lead to
greater and long-term challenges if not managed and
addressed in a timely manner.
We believe that it is crucial to adhere to the principle
of respect for the interests and aspirations of the people.
When the people’s interests are at the heart of policies,
prospects for political stability, economic development
and social cohesion in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well
as those of the region, could be better ensured. In that
connection, efforts should also be made to refrain from
divisive rhetoric that could exacerbate tensions and
further complicate the current situation.
Along the same lines, we urge all parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to work together to overcome
their differences, including on the interpretation and
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
domestic legislation to rebuild trust and confidence and
promote the consolidation of peace and reconciliation.
The international community should engage in
constructive support aimed at fostering dialogue,
mutual understanding and trust towards national
reconciliation with regard to the legitimate interests
and aspirations of the people and communities.
Viet Nam reiterates the importance of respect
for the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including in the
implementation of relevant treaties, such as the Dayton
Peace Agreement and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Support from the Security Council, the
international community and regional organizations
remains essential in finding a common approach
to tackling the situation and assisting Bosnia and
Herzegovina in realizing its people’s aspirations for
sustainable peace, stability and development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Mexico.
I welcome the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia, as well as the observer
of the European Union, to the Council.
I would like to focus my statement on three points.
First, we welcome the Council’s decision to
unanimously adopt the renewal of the mandate for

S/PV. 8896

the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (resolution 2604 (2021)). Mexico
recognizes the stabilizing role played by that mission
on the ground and we hope that it will continue working
towards peace and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Secondly, Mexico remains concerned by the
institutional deadlock in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Cooperation and dialogue are the pillars of coexistence
and of the functioning of a State with the ethnic,
linguistic and religious richness that Bosnia and
Herzegovina enjoys. The constitutional framework,
which has been strengthened over the course of more
than two decades, should serve as a guide for the parties
in their common project. Progress must be made on the
5+2 agenda and constitutional and electoral reforms
must be conducted in order to promote cohesion,
exchanges and cooperation between communities.
We are concerned that the Parliamentary Assembly
has not fully exercised its legislative functions due to
internal tensions and we call on all parties to commit
to participating in a constructive way in order to
consolidate democracy and sustainable development
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope that the new
Government of the Federation will soon be appointed,
as that task has remained outstanding since the elections
held in 2018. The functioning and operation of State
institutions cannot be held hostage to objectives that run
counter to the project of coexistence and national unity.
Thirdly, Bosnia and Herzegovina has taken decisive
steps over the past two decades towards reconciliation,
reconstructing the social fabric and achieving peaceful
coexistence. That is why we deplore any initiatives or
attempts to revive hate speech, to deny war crimes or
to try to exonerate those who have been sentenced as
war criminals.
We underscore the important role that women and
young people have played and should continue to play
in reconciliation and social inclusion processes.
I conclude by highlighting that the implementation
of the 5+2 agenda is the most desirable path for
creating the conditions that will eventually make it
possible to conclude the work of the Office of the High
Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Attempts to
halt or delay compliance in relation to matters covered
by the Office are not conducive to that end.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.

21-3186813/19

S/PV.8896

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

I now give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November and to wish you and your
delegation every success.
We have taken note of the report on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the period
16 April to 15 October 2021, by the Office of the
High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
also welcome the Security Council’s adoption of the
resolution extending the mandate of the European
Union Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR-Althea), which has been present in the country
for many years (resolution 2604 (2021)).
It is important to emphasize that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as a host country, has enjoyed respectable
and fruitful cooperation with Operation EUFORAlthea, particularly in the areas of capacity-building
and the training of its armed forces. The mandate of
EUFOR-Althea is to support the implementation of the
military aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
to ensure compliance with annexes 1 (a) and 2 of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
It would take too long to describe what is currently
happening in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I think that
High Representative Christian Schmidt realistically
presented the situation in his report; therefore, I will
limit my remarks to a summary of the broader picture.
Currently, Bosnia and Herzegovina faces the
greatest existential threat of the post-war period.
Persistent grave challenges to the fundamentals of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace by
Republika Srpska entity authorities, led by the biggest
Republika Srpska party — the Alliance of Independent
Social Democrats, headed by the current member of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Milorad
Dodik — are endangering peace and stability in the
country and throughout the region. If left unchecked
by the international community, that could lead to the
undoing of the Agreement itself.
In the climax of the escalating series of crises
throughout 2021, Mr. Dodik — the de facto leader of
the Republika Srpska, despite the entity having an
elected President — has called for the entity’s unilateral
14/19

03/11/2021

withdrawal from agreements reached a long time ago
on the transfer of entity competencies to the State in the
areas of defence, indirect taxes and the High Judicial
and Prosecutorial Council. He has called for the entity
to reclaim what he asserts were usurped constitutional
competencies in the field of State judiciary, law
enforcement and intelligence. He further announced
the drafting of a new Republika Srpska constitution
and the rejection of all illegally imposed decisions and
laws by the High Representative.
According to the announced plans, that would
mean the withdrawal of the members of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina armed forces residing in Republika
Srpska, the takeover of the armed forces’ facilities in
Republika Srpska country and the re-establishment of
a Republika Srpska army, ostensibly with personnel
withdrawing from Federation armed forces. That move
would turn back the clock 15 years in the field of defence
reform alone, and even further in terms of confidenceand security-building. It would also mean the entity’s
withdrawal from the State-level indirect tax institution
and the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council. Those
measures would also prevent the State Investigation
and Protection Agency and the Intelligence-Security
Agency from operating in Republika Srpska country.
Mr. Dodik refers to undertaking a return to the socalled original Dayton, which is a political misnomer
based on an erroneous interpretation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s Constitution. In practice, the policy
aims to undo many of the hard-won reforms from
over the past 26 years, not in order to strictly adhere
to the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement
but rather to revert the situation. Mr. Dodik seeks to
withdraw Republika Srpska from the constitutional
order established under annex 4 of the Dayton Peace
Agreement and to opt out of the Agreement on Civilian
Implementation of the Peace Settlement set forth under
annex 10.
That is tantamount to secession without proclaiming
it. The unilateral withdrawal of the entity from established
State institutions — which is not legally possible under
the current constitutional framework — would lead
to the collapse of those institutions and ultimately
undermine the State’s ability to function and carry out
its constitutional responsibility.
Recently, Mr. Dodik revealed his goal of Republika
Srpska’s independence from Bosnia and Herzegovina,
supposedly within the Dayton Agreement. As
21-31868

03/11/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Republika Srpska opposition parties have noted, that is
a dangerous path not only for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
but also for Republika Srpska, bearing in mind that
entities exist legally only by virtue of the Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and that they have no right
to secede from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
State institutions have already been paralysed since
July, when Mr. Dodik, in agreement with Republika
Srpska opposition parties announced the withdrawal of
Republika Srpska representatives from the institutional
decision-making process, in response to the 22 July
decision of High Representative Valentin Inzko to
introduce amendments to the criminal code of Bosnia
and Herzegovina criminalizing the denial of genocide
and war crimes and the glorification war criminals. He
demanded an annulment of the decision. To provide
another example, Mr. Dodik even prevented the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina from engaging
the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina to assist in
firefighting efforts in the southern part of the country,
thereby allowing lives to be lost.
As part of the orchestrated response, the
authorities of the Republika Srpska adopted the Law
on Non-Implementation of the Decision of the High
Representative enacting the Law on Amendments to
the Criminal Code of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
entered into force in early October. That law rejects the
High Representative’s 22 July decision and prescribes
that State-level legislation should not be applicable
in Republika Srpska. It obliges the authorities of the
Republika Srpska not to cooperate with Bosnian
institutions attempting to implement State-level law.
Although Mr. Dodik has recently stated that
his actions are not aimed at inciting conflict, he has
also warned that any attempt by State-level judicial
institutions or law enforcement agencies to intercede
would be met with force. He further added, unprovoked,
that were NATO to intervene in the Republika Srpska,
he would seek assistance from unnamed “friends”, who
he claimed has given him assurance of their readiness
to provide such assistance.
We find that very problematic. We should be
working on that issue, as many of the parties expressed
today. There is a problem not only in the Republika
Srpska; there is a problem in the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, where for the past three years, we were
unable to form a Government or implement the reforms
necessary to embark on the path to the European Union.

S/PV. 8896

Regrettably, for the first time, the High Representative
is not with us today, but my statement represents the
summary of the report of High Representative Christian
Schmidt, who was not permitted to appear before the
Security Council today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the European Union, in its
capacity as observer.
Mr. Skoog (European Union) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
country on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council.
(spoke in English)
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union and its 27 member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic
of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union (EU) is pleased that the
mandate of the European Union Military Operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been renewed by the
Council, given its importance in maintaining security
and a stable environment. We regret that we cannot
listen to the usual briefing of the High Representative
today. Nevertheless, we welcome his report, which was
circulated among the Security Council members, and we
would like to reiterate our strong support for his work
and the work of his Office in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In December 2019, the Council of the European
Union urged executive and legislative bodies at all
levels of Government to start addressing the 14 key
priorities identified in the Commission Opinion on
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application for membership
of the European Union, in line with the interests of all
citizens to advance towards the European Union.
In 2020, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities took
some steps to address the Opinion’s key priorities,
including with the holding of local elections in Mostar,
for the first time since 2008. However, regrettably,
our call for Bosnia and Herzegovina to build on that
momentum and use 2021 as a non-election year to
continue to engage on reforms, has not been translated
into concrete actions. Instead, Bosnian leaders returned
to divisive nationalistic rhetoric and obstruction,
resulting in a serious political crisis. Recurrent political

21-3186815/19

S/PV.8896

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

crisis and a persistent lack of dialogue hampered any
progress on the implementation of the 14 priorities.
The recent blockage of State institutions is
unacceptable and holds back the overall reform process.
Political leaders need to overcome the stalemate as a
matter of priority and refocus on reforms, which will
enable Bosnia and Herzegovina to advance on its
EU path.
We expect Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure
that the next elections are conducted in line with
European standards by implementing the standards set
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights and relevant recommendations of the Venice
Commission of the Council of Europe, and ensure
transparency of political party financing.
Taking into account the institutional mechanisms,
which were set by the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to undertake further
constitutional and electoral reforms to ensure equality
and non-discrimination of citizens, notably by
addressing Sejdić-Finci case law of the European Court
of Human Rights. The EU regrets the fact that Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s Constitution remains non-compliant
with the European Convention on Human Rights, as per
the ruling in the Sejdić-Finci and related cases.
We underline that a number of Constitutional Court
decisions have yet to be fully enforced. The EU expects
the inter-agency working group to resume its work as
a matter of priority and calls for an inclusive process
of electoral reform, through genuine dialogue and in
line with European standards that would eliminate all
forms of inequality and discrimination in the electoral
process. In that regard, we underline that no legislative
or political steps should be taken that would make the
implementation of the Sejdić-Finci and related European
Court of Human Rights rulings more challenging.
We also urge Bosnia and Herzegovina to work with
determination on the implementation of the other 14 key
priorities, in particular towards strengthening the rule
of law, the independence and integrity of the judiciary,
fighting corruption and organized crime, countering
radicalization as well as guaranteeing the independence
of the media and safety of journalists, promoting
youth employment and education, gender equality and
renewing their efforts towards socioeconomic reforms.
16/19

03/11/2021

(spoke in French)
The European Union firmly condemns rhetoric that
attempts to call into question the territorial integrity of
the country and its State institutions. We expect that
the country’s political leaders will put an end to such
rhetoric and actions that serve only to stoke the political
crisis and, through specific and robust actions, seek to
promote reconciliation within the country. Revisionism,
in particular minimizing or negating the Srebrenica
genocide and the glorification of war criminals are
contrary to European Union values and incompatible
with the prospect of European Union integration.
We welcome the tangible measures that were
taken by the authorities to improve migration and
asylum management in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
with our support. Such efforts should continue and be
strengthened, while also taking into consideration the
need for fair burden-sharing among the entities and the
cantons, with regard to hosting capacity and capacitybuilding efforts in the area of border management.
We expect that the authorities will guarantee the
proper conditions for comfortably hosting migrants
and refugees in Bosnia Herzegovina during winter
and beyond.
(spoke in English)
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to be severely
impacted by the global coronavirus disease pandemic.
In these difficult times, the EU remains firmly engaged
in assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina in addressing
immediate health needs, as well as the long-term social
and economic impact resulting from the pandemic.
The Economic and Investment Plan and the delivery
of more than 1.3 million doses of vaccines, donated
by Team Europe, once again demonstrate the EU’s
strong commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
EU stands ready to provide further support, including
strengthening Bosnia and Herzegovina’s resilience to
future health crises.
Lastly, the EU urges all political actors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to abandon the divisive and
secessionist rhetoric rooted in the past. We also wish
to reiterate the EU’s unequivocal commitment to the
sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and multi-ethnic
diversity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is our firm
and unchanged position. The European Union and its
member States fully and firmly support Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s European Union perspective as a single,
united and sovereignty country.
21-31868

03/11/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV. 8896

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.

Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially the Ljubić case.

Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I wish to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and extend our best wishes for your
presidency. I would also like to congratulate Kenya on
its successful performance.

Changes to electoral law and the constitutional
setup of the country should be an outcome of
democratic dialogue within Bosnia and Herzegovina
that fully respects the rights of all of its constituent
peoples and other citizens. Only then can Bosnia and
Herzegovina, its peoples and all citizens get what they
really need — legitimate, functioning institutions that
will neither be manipulated or blocked. In order to
ensure the legitimacy of the 2022 general elections,
consensus on the electoral reform should be reached as
soon as possible. Successful electoral reforms would
ease political tensions and help to shift the country’s
focus on priorities such as fighting corruption and
implementing other reforms consistent with the 14
priorities of the EU accession agenda. Otherwise, the
young and educated will continue to leave because of
political insecurity, a poor economic situation and the
overall lack of prospects, as the High Representative
stresses in his report.

Croatia associates itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union (EU) its members and
other aligned States. I would like to add some remarks
in my national capacity.
Croatia reiterates its support for the extension
of the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as to High Representative
Christian Schmidt. We remain committed to working
closely with the mission as well as with the Office of
the High Representative.
Since our previous debate (see S/PV.8810), tensions
in and about Bosnia and Herzegovina have further
increased. It is therefore critical that this discussion
help to ease tensions and not add fuel to the fire.
The current defiance of its Constitution, divisive
rhetoric, glorification of war criminals, blockade of its
institutions and lack of progress on electoral and other
necessary reforms is extremely worrisome. Overcoming
those challenges is important for the country and for the
stability of the increasingly turbulent Western Balkans.
Croatia supports a stable, peaceful and prosperous
Bosnia and Herzegovina, its EU integration, the rule
of law and human rights. As a signatory to the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia remains a staunch supporter of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its territorial integrity
as a sovereign State, based on the equality of its three
constituent peoples and all citizens.
Unfortunately, current electoral law and practice
do not provide for such equality. For example, the
existing electoral framework deprives Croats in Bosnia
and Herzegovina of their right to elect their legitimate
representative in the State Presidency, because it allows
for electoral engineering. That and other shortcomings
are unacceptable, and electoral law needs to be
changed. In its current form, electoral law weakens
and delegitimizes key State institutions and negatively
affects their functioning. We therefore strongly support
the legislative changes necessary for the electoral law
to comply with the rulings of the European Court
of Human Rights and the relevant decisions of the

In conclusion, Croatia continues its political
and practical support to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Croatia provided help to mitigate the consequences
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, including
through the donation of vaccines. Croatia has been
assisting in addressing natural disasters, participating
in joint infrastructure projects and sharing EU
integration experiences.
We call on international partners to join us in
contributing to the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and promoting the necessary reforms, especially
of the electoral system. We encourage its political
leaders to assume responsibility for the future of the
country and navigate through the present impasse.
What the country needs is much more transparency,
cooperation, democratic dialogue and compromises,
and far less political and electoral manipulation,
division and unilateral decision-making. That is the
only way to overcome mutual fears and suspicions, curb
unconstitutional unitarist and secessionist tendencies
and promote democracy, development and human
rights for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Stevanović (Serbia): I am grateful for the
opportunity to address the Security Council today
on behalf of the Republic of Serbia and to present my

21-3186817/19

S/PV.8896

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

country’s position on the current situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in the Western Balkans region.
This meeting is being held at a very delicate
moment not, only for Bosnia and Herzegovina but for
the whole region. Recently, my country has been the
victim of unilateral actions taken by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina — actions
that pose a direct threat to the peace and stability that
we have been building together in the region over the
past couple of decades. In that context, Serbia once
again calls upon all sides in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
lower tensions and rationally, through dialogue, address
open issues. Above all, Serbia wants peace and stability
in the region. We believe that all citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina want the same.
We call on all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to act responsibly and in accordance with the Dayton
Peace Agreement, the only legal framework for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is of the utmost importance that
the key actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina — both
domestic and international — exhibit restraint and
assume responsibility for the situation in the country.
The mechanism for changing the Dayton Agreement is
clearly defined and well known. It requires the consent
of both entities and the three constituent peoples. Any
attempt by any other party to impose a solution is
therefore unacceptable for Serbia.
The Republic of Serbia expects the international
community to take an unbiased and balanced approach
to this issue. We believe that dialogue within the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the only way to
build trust and reach a compromise solution on the issues
important for the future development of the country
and the stability of the wider region. Furthermore,
in the interest of peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we believe that decisions related to the
work of the Office of the High Representative should
be reached in the spirit of cooperation, mutual respect
among all actors and with the consensus of the members
of the Security Council, in line with the long-standing
rules and practices. For its part, Serbia will continue to
engage constructively.
As a guarantor of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Serbia supports the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In accordance with the
Agreement, we seek good and productive cooperation
with both the central Government and the authorities
of the two entities. We support any agreement reached
18/19

03/11/2021

among the two entities and the three constituent peoples.
We are strongly against the imposition of decisions that
have not been reached by consensus. We believe that
such actions pose a threat to the stability of not only
Bosnia and Herzegovina but of the wider region as well.
For Serbia, the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina
is of the utmost importance. We are convinced that
balanced relations between its central Government and
its entities is the precondition for such stability. In that
respect, besides its good relations with Sarajevo, Serbia
maintains harmonious relations and good cooperation
with Republika Srpska, in accordance with the 2006
Agreement on Special Parallel Relations, which
provides a basis for a dynamic high-level political
dialogue and active cooperation between Serbia and
Republika Srpska. Allow me to reiterate — the road
to the future we want is paved with good-neighbourly
relations and active regional cooperation in various
areas of mutual interest. Serbia will continue to call on
all political actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina to further
engage in that direction.
Serbia strongly supports all countries of the
Western Balkans in their efforts to join the European
Union (EU). We are especially interested in expediting
the process of European integration for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and we stand ready to offer our maximal
contribution.
We are convinced that the Open Balkans initiative
is the prime example of successful regional cooperation
and joint efforts towards common goals. As such, it
represents the best way for our countries to prepare for
EU membership.
Serbia fully respects the right of every country to
have an independent foreign policy, including its right
to join military-political alliances, as well as to take
concrete individual steps that may or may not lead
towards membership in those alliances. As one of the
guarantors of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Serbia will
support any agreement or arrangement reached by the
two entities and three constituent peoples in a legal and
legitimate way.
We are strongly convinced that, together, we can
prosper if there is mutual trust and respect for diversity,
the lack of which has too often been a stumbling block
in our history. Today, we have the historic opportunity
to bridge our differences and to build lasting peace
and prosperity for our citizens, which all of us in the
region deserve.
21-31868

03/11/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

In closing, allow me to make a brief remark on
resolution 2604 (2021), on the renewal of the mandate of
the EU Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which was just adopted by the Council.
My Government notes new language introduced in
the first preambular paragraph of the resolution — a
reference to the “situation in the region of the Former
Yugoslavia”. We believe that this language is not

S/PV. 8896

appropriate in the current context, since it was used
in the 1990s and contains negative connotations. War
and conflicts are long behind us; that chapter of our
history is closed and all countries have moved forward.
Therefore, we believe that this new language should not
be used in relation to the current security situation in
the region.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

21-3186819/19
