S/2021/426

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 May 2021
Original: English

Implementation of resolution 2522 (2020)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2522
(2020), in which the Secretary-General was requested to report every three months
on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The report covers key developments relating to Iraq and
provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since my previous
report of 8 February 2021 (S/2021/120) and the briefing to the Security Council by
the Special Representative for Iraq and Head of UNAMI on 16 February 2021.

II. Summary of key political developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The Government of Iraq continued preparations to hold legislative elections
scheduled for 10 October 2021. On 18 March, the Council of Representatives passed
the First Amendment Law to Federal Supreme Court Law No. 30 of 2005. Dur ing
legislative sessions in March, the Council of Representatives debated and voted on
elements of a new and expanded Federal Supreme Court Law which was intended to
strengthen compliance with constitutional principles. However, parliament did not
reach consensus on issues including the role of Islamic jurisprudence experts in the
court. Instead, it adopted the First Amendment Law, which enables the membership
of the Federal Supreme Court to be completed, which is necessary for the certification
of electoral results. The addition of an upper age limit for judges, now set at 72 years,
required the selection of a new court. On 29 March, the judges charged with the
selection announced the completion of the selection of the new Federal Supreme
Court judges and that a list of the nominees had been sent to the President, Barham
Salih, for his approval. On 10 April, President Salih issued a presidential decree
appointing the President and members of the Federal Supreme Court. The amendment
law requires representation of the regions and of the “components of the Iraqi people”
in the Federal Supreme Court. To date, minority components and women have not
been represented. On 31 March, the Council of Representatives also voted to dissolve
itself on 7 October ahead of the elections scheduled for 10 October.
3.
On 2 March, the General Secretariat of the Council of Ministers established a
higher committee to promote and monitor women’s electoral participation and propose

21-05519 (E)

060521

*2105519*

S/2021/426

measures to prevent and address violence against women candidates. Committee
members will represent the Ministry of Interior, the Independent High Electoral
Commission, other governmental bodies, professional bodies, academia and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women).
4.
Following lengthy negotiations between political parties and the federal and
Kurdistan Regional Governments, the Council of Representatives approved the 2021
Federal Budget Law on 31 March during a legislative session attended by 215 out of
329 members. The 2021 budget was approved at 129 trillion Iraqi dinars,
approximately $89 billion, with a deficit estimated at 28.7 trillion Iraqi dinars,
approximately $19.79 billion, with an oil price of $45 per barrel. Article 11 of the
budget law, which governs the share of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, was passed,
setting its share at 12.67 per cent. Under article 11, the Kurdistan Region of Iraq will
receive this share in monthly increments, inter alia in return for submitting 250,000
barrels of crude oil per day, or their monetary equivalent, to the State Oil Marketing
Organization. On 31 March, the Prime Minister, Mustafa al-Kadhimi, and President
Salih welcomed the approval of the 2021 budget via their social media accounts.
5.
On 15 February, the Government announced its preparations to implement the
white paper for economic and financial reform. Planned reforms include: the
establishment of government oversight and monitoring mechanisms to ensure the
effectiveness of the reform process; and coordination between government
institutions. To fulfil this objective, the Council of Ministers decided on 10 February
to form a Higher Committee for Reform, chaired by the Prime Minister, which would
oversee the reform programme. In its statement of 15 February, the Government also
noted the international community’s support for reforms, reflecting on the assistance
of the Iraq Economic Contact Group in the process. On 2 March, a Director-level
meeting was held between the Government of Iraq and Contact Group partners to
review reform progress, to begin outlining and aligning international support for the
process and to prepare for a high-level Contact Group meeting in late spring 2021.
6.
The Government also continued its anti-corruption efforts. The e-Governance
Committee met on 22 February to assess ongoing progress on electronic services to
modernize government administration and aid anti-corruption efforts. Chairing the
meeting, the Prime Minister stressed the importance of automating electronic
governance procedures in all State departments and institutions. He also briefed the
participants on electronic mechanisms implemented by the Border Ports Authority,
which he stated had helped reduce smuggling and corruption, maximized government
revenues and protected local producers and consumer rights.
7.
Further measures were taken by the Government to address a rise in coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) cases. Public health directives issued on 13 February reimposed
a full curfew during weekends and a partial curfew on the remaining weekdays from
18 February to 8 March. Other measures included the closing of public facilities and
halving civil servants’ working hours, except for those working at the Ministry of
Health. The curfew order was later extended until 22 March. During Ramadan, the
Iraqi authorities extended a partial curfew from Sundays to Thursdays and a full
curfew on Fridays and Saturdays. On 9 March, the President ratified the Law on the
Provision and Use of Corona Pandemic Vaccines, aimed at accelerating vac cine
acquisition. The same day, the cabinet spokesperson announced that procedures had
been completed for Iraq to receive 20 million doses of different vaccines and
encouraged Iraqis to register online for vaccination. On 25 March, 336,000 doses of
the COVID-19 vaccines were delivered to Iraq through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access (COVAX) Facility programme. Iraq has also received donated vaccines from
COVAX partners.

2/15

21-05519

S/2021/426

8.
On 1 March, the Council of Representatives passed the Yazidi Female Survivors
Law. The legislation constitutes the first legal recognition by the Government of Iraq
of the crimes committed by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) against the
Christians, Shabaks, Turkmens and Yazidis as genocide and crimes against humanity.
The law provides for assistance and reparations for survivors and excludes future
amnesty for perpetrators of the listed crimes. The law places Iraq among the first
countries in the Arab world to recognize women survivors of conflict -related sexual
violence. The three presidencies and the President of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq,
Nechirvan Barzani, welcomed the adoption of the law. President Salih hailed it as “a
victory for the victims…who have been subjected to the most heinous violations and
crimes of ISIL genocide”. The Prime Minister described the law as “a step to achieve
justice [which] reflects the values of equality and citizenship”. He pledged that the
Government of Iraq will “use all its efforts to implement the law, provide a decent
life for all survivors, free the remaining prisoners, and restore life to the liberated
areas and return internally displaced persons to their home areas”.
9.
Demonstrations took place in Nasiriyah, Dhi Qar Governorate, from 22 to
27 February, during which protesters called for the resignation of Governor Nadhim
al-Waeli. Clashes occurred between protesters and security forces. On 26 February,
Governor Waeli resigned and was temporarily replaced by the head of the National
Security Service, Abdul Ghani al-Asadi, pursuant to an order by the Prime Minister.
On 27 February, the Prime Minister announced further measures for the Governorate,
including the establishment of an advisory council for provincial reconstruction and
the formation of a committee to investigate recent viole nce. Protesters subsequently
announced a suspension of demonstrations to allow time for the Government to
implement their demands. During the Council of Ministers session on 9 March, the
Prime Minister affirmed that progress had been made to identify perpe trators of
violence and announced that ministers would travel to Nasiriyah weekly to supervise
relevant departments within the Governorate. On 6 April, at the Council of Ministers
session, the Prime Minister formally appointed Dr. Ahmad al-Khafaji as Governor of
Dhi Qar.
10. From 5 to 8 March, Pope Francis conducted a historic visit to Iraq devoted to
promoting interfaith dialogue and peaceful coexistence. During his visit, he met
government officials, religious leaders and Iraqis of all faiths. On 6 March, he met
with Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani in Najaf. The two religious leaders discussed
global and regional conflicts and the role of religious and spiritual authorities in
curbing oppression, poverty, religious and ideological persecution, and the
suppression of basic freedoms. To mark the occasion, the Prime Minister announced
that 6 March would henceforth be observed as “National Day of Tolerance and
Coexistence”.
11. Pope Francis also visited religious and symbolic sites, including the ancient city
of Ur, considered to be the birthplace of the Prophet Abraham in Christian, Islamic
and Judaic traditions, where he hosted an interfaith service with Christians, Muslims,
Sabeans, Yazidis and other Iraqi religious groups and minorities. In Mosul, he prayed
at the ruins of churches destroyed by ISIL. He also travelled to Erbil, where he was
received by officials from the Kurdistan Region of Iraq and held an open -air mass.
12. Following the Pope’s visit, the Prime Minister addressed the nation on 8 March,
calling for an inclusive national dialogue to restore Iraqi unity. He highlighted early
elections, security and sovereignty and relations between Baghdad and Erbil as key
issues to be addressed through this dialogue. The following day, in the regular session
of the Council of Ministers, the Prime Minister stressed that his Government was
prepared to start a dialogue with “political forces, social and civil society activists,
protesters and opponents of the Government” for the future of Iraq.

21-05519

3/15

S/2021/426

13. The implementation of the Sinjar agreement has continued. Representatives of
the federal and Kurdistan Regional Governments continued to engage on the security
provisions of the agreement, and a joint committee has been formed to identify
potential recruits for the local police. However, provisions of the agreement, such as
the full withdrawal of all armed actors and their replacement with Iraqi federal forces
and local police, have not yet been fully implemented. Additionally, progress on
administrative and reconstruction provisions has also been limited.

B.

Relations between Baghdad and Erbil
14. Prior to the approval by the Council of Representatives of the 2021 federal
budget on 31 March, Kurdistan Regional Government delegations, led by its Deputy
Prime Minister, Qubad Talabani, visited Baghdad from 1 to 3 February, 14 and
15 February, 15 to 21 March and on 27 March, in an attempt to resolve differences
between Baghdad and Erbil over resource- and revenue-sharing in the Budget Law.
The Kurdistan Regional Government delegations met with President Salih, the
Speaker, Mohammed al-Halbousi, and other officials in Baghdad.
15. In a statement on 31 March, the President of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq,
Nechirvan Barzani, described the passage of the Budget Law as a “ positive beginning
that paves the way for a resolution of differences” between Baghdad and Erbil. He
also stressed the importance of the implementation of the agreement and improved
coordination between both sides, highlighted Prime Minister Kadhimi’s effo rts to ease
political tensions ahead of the legislative vote and thanked the Kurdistan Regional
Government negotiating team.
16. The Prime Minister’s call of 8 March for an inclusive national dialogue,
including on relations between Baghdad and Erbil, was positively received by the
Kurdistan Regional Government. The President and the Prime Minister of the
Kurdistan Regional Government issued supportive statements that called,
respectively, for dialogue to “develop radical solutions” to outstanding issues a nd to
“solve all problems and conflicts”.

C.

Security situation
17. Attacks by ISIL continued, primarily in Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk,
Ninawa and Salah al-Din Governorates. In response, the Iraqi security forces
continued their counter-terrorism operations.
18. On 15 February, rockets landed in the vicinity of Erbil international airport,
where international counter-ISIL coalition troops are co-located. The coalition’s
spokesperson subsequently reported that 14 rockets had been launched and that three
had struck the base, killing one civilian contractor. A further eig ht contractors and one
United States of America service member were reported injured. A group calling itself
the “Guardians of Blood Brigades” claimed responsibility for the attack.
19. On 16 February, the Prime Minister established a joint investigation committee
with the authorities of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq to identify the perpetrators of the
Erbil attack. The President, the Speaker and the President and the Prime Minister of
the Kurdistan Region of Iraq condemned the incident, describing it as a “terrorist
attack”. On 3 March, security authorities in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq announced
the arrest of one suspected perpetrator and stated that further suspects remained at
large. The attack was broadly condemned by the international community.
20. On 20 February, rockets struck Balad airbase, north of Baghdad. On
22 February, the Security Media Cell under the Office of the Prime Minister reported

4/15

21-05519

S/2021/426

that two rockets had landed within the former International Zone in Baghdad, without
casualties. From 17 February to 21 March, reportedly, more than 30 attacks with
improvised explosive devices targeted trucks contracted to carry supplies for the
international counter-ISIL coalition, in Anbar, Babil, Baghdad, Basrah, Dhi Qar,
Muthanna, Qadisiyah and Salah al-Din Governorates. On 15 March, the Security
Media Cell reported that two rockets had fallen outside of Balad airbase, causing
damage to nearby houses.
21. On 3 March, the United States Department of Defense issued a statement
reporting that approximately 10 missiles had been launched against the Ayn al-Asad
airbase and that an American contractor “had suffered a cardiac episode while
sheltering from the attack and … passed away”. The base, in the west of Anbar
Governorate, hosts forces from the international counter-ISIL coalition. The
spokesperson for the coalition noted the same day that Iraqi security forces were
investigating the incident. No claims of responsibility were made.
22. On 3 March, the Prime Minister chaired a meeting of the National Securi ty
Council, during which he stated that such attacks were conducted “by groups that
have no true affiliation with Iraq” and that there was “no justification for targeting
military bases”. He ordered security forces to “take decisive action against these
groups”. The Prime Minister also referred to the ongoing strategic dialogue with the
United States and the resulting reduction by 60 per cent of troops in the country. He
noted that “it is imperative for Iraq to extricate itself from regional and internation al
conflicts” and called “on all political forces to take declared and clear positions to
support the Government’s approach in this regard and to protect the people and the
State”.
23. The Ministry of National Defence of Turkey reported continued operatio ns
against Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) targets in northern Iraq. On 10, the Ministry
of National Defence of Turkey issued a statement that “Operation Claw -Eagle 2” had
been conducted in the Garah Mountain area of Dahuk Governorate. The Ministry
stated that the operation was consistent with the “right of self-defence arising from
international law” of Turkey. In a speech on 11 February, the Minister of National
Defence of Turkey, Hulusi Akar, stressed respect for “Iraq’s territorial integrity and
political unity”. On 14 February, Mr. Akar announced the conclusion of the operation.
On 16 February, he informed the Grand National Assembly of Turkey that Turkish
armed forces had found the bodies of 12 Turkish citizens and 1 Iraqi national who
had been detained by PKK and, according to captured PKK members, had been killed
by PKK. In a statement published on 14 February, PKK denied responsibility for the
incident.

D.

Regional and international developments
24. Security and economic cooperation were a focus of regional and international
engagement by the Government of Iraq. On 16 February, the Prime Minister spoke
with the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Jens
Stoltenberg, prior to the meeting of NATO Ministers of Defence on 17 and
18 February. According to a readout from the Prime Minister’s Office, their
discussions focused on NATO “support to Iraqi security and military institutions”. In
a press conference after the ministerial meeting, Mr. Stoltenberg announced that,
following a request by the Government of Iraq, the defence ministers had agreed to
expand the NATO training mission in Iraq to “support the Iraqi forces as they fight
terrorism and ensure that ISIL does not return”. He stated that this would include an
“incremental” expansion of the NATO mission in Iraq “from 500 personnel to around
4,000”, and a broadening of training activities to “more Iraqi security institutions, and
areas beyond Baghdad”. In response, on 19 February, the National Security Adviser,

21-05519

5/15

S/2021/426

Qasim al-Araji, confirmed in a statement that NATO was present in Iraq with the
approval of the Government, with an advisory and training, rather than combat, role.
A NATO press statement, issued after a workshop attended by Government
representatives and the Commander of NATO Mission Iraq on 26 February, noted that
the mission aimed to increase its current strength by “a few hundred support staff and
advisers” during 2021.
25. On 23 February, the President of the United States, Joseph Biden, spoke to the
Prime Minister. According to a White House press statement, President Biden
affirmed “United States support for Iraq’s sovereignty and independence” and
discussed with the Prime Minister the recent rocket attacks against Iraqi and
international coalition personnel. Both leaders agreed on the need to hold “those
responsible for such attacks … to account”, according to the statement.
26. A strategic dialogue between Iraq and the United States was launched virtually
on 7 April. On the same day, the United States and the Government of Iraq issued a
joint statement, noting that “discussions covered security and counterterrorism,
economics and energy and the environment, political issues and cultural relations.”
In the statement, the United States “reaffirmed its respe ct for Iraq’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and relevant decisions of the Iraqi legislative and executive
authorities”. Both parties also reiterated their “strong economic partnership”, “greater
cooperation to combat the COVID-19 pandemic” and “mutual intent to address the
climate emergency”. Iraq also welcomed the support of the Government of the United
States for parliamentary elections through funding for UNAMI. On security issues,
both countries reaffirmed that “United States forces are in Iraq at the invitation of
[the] Iraqi Government to support the Iraqi Security Forces … in their fight against
ISIS” and that the mission of United States and the international counter-ISIL
coalition forces has now transitioned to one focused on “training and advi sory tasks,
thereby allowing for the redeployment of any remaining combat forces from Iraq,
with the timing to be established in upcoming technical talks”. The Government of
Iraq reaffirmed its commitment to protect the international counter-ISIL coalition
personnel, convoys and diplomatic facilities.
27. On 24 February, the Prime Minister received a Jordanian delegation headed by
Yahya Musa Kisbi, the Minister of Public Works and Housing. The parties
emphasized their shared desire to expand bilateral relations on political, economic
and security issues, while the Prime Minister also highlighted the importance of
tripartite cooperation with Egypt, Iraq and Jordan on these matters.
28. On 6 March, the Prime Minister spoke by telephone with the President of t he
Islamic Republic of Iran, Hassan Rouhani. The Prime Minister’s Office stated that
bilateral relations and regional security were discussed, with both parties agreeing on
the need for regional actors to maintain calm in addressing challenges. An Iranian
presidential statement on the same day noted that both sides emphasized the
importance of developing “economic cooperation alongside political relations” .
29. Prime Minister Kadhimi undertook official visits to Gulf countries to further
deepen the bilateral ties of Iraq with its Arab neighbours, including to strengthen
economic cooperation. On 31 March, he led a ministerial delegation to Riyadh, where
he met, among others, with Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman to discuss the
strengthening of bilateral cooperation. According to a joint statement, the two sides
concluded five agreements covering economic and cultural fields, including the
establishment of an Iraqi-Saudi investment fund, with capital of approximately
$3 billion to promote investment in Iraq, with the participation of both countries’
private sectors. Both sides further emphasized their willingness to enhance
cooperation in the energy domain and to implement the joint action plan within the
framework of the Saudi-Iraqi Coordination Council. Prior to the visit, the Prime
6/15

21-05519

S/2021/426

Minister and King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud met virtually on 25 March. In a
joint statement, they praised bilateral ties and emphasized the importance of the
Coordination Council.
30. On 4 April, the Prime Minister paid an official visit to Abu Dhabi, where he met
the Vice-President and Prime Minister of the United Arab Emirates, Sheikh
Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, and the Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi and Deputy
Supreme Commander of the United Arab Emirates Armed Forces, Sheikh Mohammed
bin Zayed Al Nahyan. According to a joint statement, the two sides agreed to establish
the Iraqi-Emirati Business Council. The United Arab Emirates also announced the
investment of $3 billion in Iraq “to strengthen economic and investment relation s and
advance economic growth to support the Iraqi people”. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs also embarked on official visits to neighbouring countries. He met with his
Saudi counterpart, Prince Faisal bin Farhan Al-Saud, in Saudi Arabia on 22 February.
They reviewed regional security developments and discussed bilateral relations and
means of activating existing memorandums of understanding and facilitating the work
of the Saudi-Iraqi Coordination Council. The Minister for Foreign Affairs also visited
the Islamic Republic of Iran on 27 February, meeting separately with his counterpart,
Javad Zarif, and the Secretary of the Supreme National Security Council, Ali
Shamkhani. According to a statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq
published on 27 February, in-depth talks were held on bilateral issues. According to
the statement, in both meetings, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq thanked the
Foreign Ministry of Iran for its “position in condemning the strikes that affected
multiple sites in Iraq”.
31. On 3 March, the Minister of Defence received a delegation from NATO Mission
Iraq, including its advisers on training and on women and peace and security. During
the meeting, the Minister of Defence pledged to improve the placement of women in
higher-ranking posts. Discussion also covered training programmes for women
ministerial staff and the second national plan for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000).
32. During a video address at the opening of the first Baghdad International Water
Conference on 13 March, the Turkish presidential envoy for Iraqi water issues, Veysel
Eroğlu, noted that the Parliament of Turkey had recently approved a memorandum of
understanding on bilateral water cooperation (signed in December 2014). The
Minister of Water Resources of Iraq stated that Iraq welcomed the approval of the
memorandum and cooperation in this field. The Ambassador of Turkey to Iraq
informed the media that the memorandum would soon enter into force.
33. On 24 March, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
State of Qatar, Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al -Thani, visited
Baghdad, where he met separately with the President, the Pr ime Minister and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs. Discussions focused on strengthening bilateral
cooperation, including activation of the joint Iraqi-Qatari committee. On the same
day, Sheikh Al-Thani visited Erbil, where he met separately with the President of the
Kurdistan Region of Iraq and the leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, Masoud
Barzani, to discuss strengthening relations between Qatar and the Kurdistan Region
of Iraq and the planned opening of a Qatari consulate in Erbil.
34. On 31 March, the United States granted Iraq a 120-day extension of its energy
waiver, to allow Iraq to continue importing electricity and gas from the Islamic
Republic of Iran, critical to meeting the country’s energy needs.

21-05519

7/15

S/2021/426

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the United Nations
country team
A.

Political activities
35. The Special Representative continued regular engagement with the three
presidencies, political party leaders, parliamentarians, the Independent High Electoral
Commission and religious and community leaders, with particular focus on electoral
preparations. She stressed the importance of creating a conducive environment for
technical preparations to proceed effectively and without delay. She also reiterated
the need to hold elections in a free and safe environment away from threats and
intimidation.
36. The Special Representative closely followed the demonstrations and related
violence in southern Iraq, deploring the loss of innocent lives. She cautioned that
continued impunity feeds public anger and encouraged the Government to
transparently take the necessary measures to ensure accountability for violations.
37. The Special Representative continued to engage with and support the
Government of Iraq on anti-corruption efforts. While acknowledging the importance
of these efforts and the associated challenges, she underlined the need for strict
adherence to criminal procedures, with due process, fairness and transparency, as
essential requirements in a just and democratic system.
38. During her visits to Erbil, the Special Representative met with the President and
the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, among others, to discuss the
political situation in the region, as well as the outstanding issues between the federal
and the Kurdistan Regional Governments, in particular, budget negotiations. She also
urged all relevant authorities of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq to ensure the protection
of fundamental rights such as freedom of expression and the rule of law.
39. On International Women’s Day, the Special Representative attended a
commemorative event at the Council of Representatives organized by the Iraqi
Women Parliamentarians Caucus under the auspices of the Speaker. In a speech
broadcast at the event, she stressed that “strong women make a strong society” and
that greater political participation, including in elections, empowers women to reach
their full potential, leading their communities to peace and prosperity.
40. On 15 March, the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance, Ingibjörg Sólrún Gísladóttir, who assumed
her official functions on 7 March 2021, represented UNAMI at an online International
Women’s Day event, which drew on the findings and recommendations of research
undertaken in 2020 on the needs and challenges facing Iraqi women entering politics.
She emphasized that the next elections were an important opportunity to promote
women’s participation in public life. She also highlighted the challenges f aced by
women candidates and noted the support of UNAMI for a gender-responsive electoral
process.
41. The Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance
met with the Chair of the Board of Commissioners of the Independent Hig h Electoral
Commission on 17 March. She also continued her engagement with the international
community in the context of enhanced electoral technical assistance to the
Commission.

8/15

21-05519

S/2021/426

B.

Electoral assistance
42. UNAMI continued to provide advice, technical support and assistance to the
Independent High Electoral Commission as it prepares for the early Council of
Representatives elections scheduled for 10 October 2021. Twenty -five United Nations
international electoral advisers have arrived in Iraq, while the recruitment of national
electoral officers is on schedule. These electoral advisers provide technical support
to electoral commission counterparts in Baghdad. Electoral teams have also been
deployed to all UNAMI regional hubs (Basrah, Erbil, Kirkuk and Mosul), where they
have commenced visits to governorate electoral offices to assess their readiness for
the elections.
43. UNAMI provided support to the Independent High Electoral Commission in the
review of electoral regulations and procedures, including for the process and
adjudication of electoral complaints and appeals, and the nomination and registration
of candidates. On 21 February, UNAMI shared an advisory paper with the
Commission containing recommendations for processing elec tion-related complaints
and appeals. UNAMI continued to support the Commission in identifying the
governorates that have historically had the highest incidence of election -related
complaints to anticipate and proactively address potential cases that may ar ise during
the electoral process. Pursuant to UNAMI technical advice, the Commission adopted
recommendations on 24 February to biometrically register internally displaced
persons in their current locations and to reduce the registration fee for candidates
from 2 million to 1 million Iraqi dinars. Additionally, the Commission decided on
25 February to further extend the deadline for the registration of candidates and
political coalitions until 17 April and 1 May, respectively.
44. The voter registration update period was extended until 31 March. As at
24 March, the Independent High Electoral Commission’s biometric registration
coverage has reached 63 per cent, with biometric data collected for 15,729,394 out of
a total of 25,139,375 voters. A total of 13,425,781 voter cards have been distributed.
COVID-19 restrictions continued to have an impact on the Commission’s voter
registration drive and the distribution of cards. Relatively low registration turnout
remains a concern. UNAMI continued to support the Comm ission in improving its
public outreach and engagement with media and national leaders to raise the level of
overall awareness and interest in the election. UNAMI continued to support the
Commission in updating the voter registry database and in developing appropriate
procedures, in line with the electoral law, to ensure that all eligible Iraqis, including
internally displaced persons, can cast their ballots.
45. On 17 February, the Independent High Electoral Commission organized a
meeting with representatives of political parties to update them on the mechanisms
for the registration of alliances, parties and candidates. UNAMI also supported efforts
to strengthen interaction between the Commission and political parties, academia,
media and civil society organizations aimed at enhancing engagement with electoral
stakeholders, increasing the participation of women and promoting initiatives to
counter hate speech during the electoral period.
46. UNAMI continued to advise the Independent High Electoral Commission on the
results management system (including the transmission and communication of
results), audit of information technology systems and on the feasibility of
implementing decentralized publication of results, starting from the polling station
level. UNAMI encouraged further discussions within the Commission on measures to
mitigate the impact of COVID-19 at all stages of the electoral process, supporting its
engagements with national authorities for the provision of COVID -19 protective
items to polling staff and the sanitation of polling facilities.

21-05519

9/15

S/2021/426

C.

Human rights and rule of law developments and activities
47. UNAMI continued to document concerns about the rights of freedom of
expression and to peaceful assembly, protection of journalists and the lack of fair trial
guarantees. From 22 to 27 February, the use of live ammunition by security forces
against protesters in Nasiriyah resulted in the deaths of six male protesters, including
a 16-year-old boy, and injuries to over 130 other males, according to information
verified by UNAMI. In response, the Prime Minister established an investigative
committee, reportedly leading to the arrest of nine police officers and a senior
commander. On 2 and 3 March, according to information verified by UNAMI, 17
demonstrators and 5 members of the security forces were injured during clashes in
Diwaniyah, Qadisiyah Governorate.
48. Activists, anti-Government protesters and persons who openly express criticism
of armed groups operating outside of State control continued to face violence,
intimidation and harassment. Amid increasing calls for criminal accountability for
violations linked to the demonstrations of October 2019 and violence targeting
activists, journalists and protesters, on 13 February, security forces in Basra h arrested
four persons accused of several targeted killings in the Governorate. There has been
no official confirmation of their affiliation with any political parties or armed groups.
49. In the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, following a two-day trial, on 15 and
16 February, an Erbil court convicted three journalists and two activists of threatening
State security and sentenced each to six years’ imprisonment. The trial raised serious
concerns regarding procedural guarantees, in particular on the right to ade quate time
and facilities in the preparation of a defence. On 16 February, the Appeals Court in
Erbil issued an arrest warrant against a journalist for criticizing these convictions and
sentences. A group of approximately 100 journalists, activists and mem bers of the
public held a peaceful gathering in front of the court in Sulaymaniyah on 17 February.
They protested the sentences, described the trial as unfair and demanded the release
of those convicted. In an apparent attempt to influence the appeal heari ng, on 4 March,
a television channel screened a video showing the five defendants apparently
confessing to committing the crimes for which they were convicted.
50. On 3 March, prison authorities executed three male adult prisoners in the central
prison of Nasiriyah. They had been sentenced to death after conviction for terrorism related offences. UNAMI has documented at least 12 executions since the beginning
of 2021.
51. With a reported increase in COVID-19 infections in Iraq and the announcement
of new preventive measures by the Government, UNAMI continued its social media
awareness campaign illustrating the human rights impact of COVID -19 and conveys
instructions by health authorities to increase compliance with the measures to contain
its spread.
52. On 2 March, UNAMI launched a short film entitled Breaking the Silence, an
advocacy initiative to encourage efforts to criminalize domestic violence in Iraq,
formalize an effective support system for survivors and hold perpetrators accountable
for crimes committed inside the home. The film was launched in a joint virtual event
with the Iraqi High Commission for Human Rights, with 32 attendees, including
senior Government representatives, parliamentarians and members of civil society
organizations.
53. To mark the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, and
the 2021 theme “Youth standing up against racism”, on 21 March UNAMI and the
Iraqi High Commission for Human Rights co-facilitated a virtual meeting of 50 youth
activists from across Iraq. Four short films produced by UNAMI were screened to

10/15

21-05519

S/2021/426

frame the discussion on youth initiatives against discrimination in Iraq. On
10 February, UNAMI facilitated a virtual meeting of the Minority Rights Working
Group in Iraq.
54. The ongoing insecurity continued to impact civilians. From 1 January to
31 March, UNAMI documented 66 incidents involving body-borne and roadside
improvised explosive devices, indirect fire (rockets and mortar rounds), small arms
fire, explosive remnants of war, and unexploded ordnance, which resulted in at least
247 civilian casualties (78 deaths, including 12 children and 3 women, and 169
injured, including 15 children and 20 women). A total of 147 civilian casualties (52
deaths and 95 injuries) were attributed to ISIL and 91 civilian casualties (25 deaths
and 66 injuries) to unidentified armed groups operating outside State control. Attacks
claimed by ISIL included a twin suicide bomber attack on 21 January at a marketplace
in Tayran Square, Baghdad, which resulted in at least 31 civilian deaths and 110
injured (all men) and the killing of eight members of an extended family in Tikrit
District, Salah al-Din Governorate, on 12 March. Operations by Turkish forces
targeting PKK locations continued.

D.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
55. During 2020, the humanitarian community in Iraq reached 1.4 million people
with some form of humanitarian assistance. This represents 81 per cent of the
1.8 million people targeted for assistance in the 2020 Iraq Hum anitarian Response
Plan. In the 2021 Iraq Humanitarian Response Plan $607 million will be sought to
address the needs of 1.5 million internally displaced persons both in camps and in
out-of-camp locations, as well as acutely vulnerable returnees. In early March 2021,
the International Organization for Migration (IOM) Displacement Tracking Matrix
recorded that 1.2 million people are still living in displacement in Iraq; 4.9 million
have returned home since the first wave of displacement in 2014.
56. The Government of Iraq has paused the closure of camps for internally displaced
persons, which had started in October 2020. Between October 2020 and March 2021,
the cumulative number of departures from camps to non-camp settings in federal Iraq
was 9,443 households (46,940 individuals). Twenty-five camps now remain open in
the Kurdistan Region of Iraq and four camps remain open in other governorates.
57. On 16 March, the Government’s national plan for the return of displaced people
and reconstruction was endorsed by the Council of Ministers. It was developed jointly
by the United Nations Durable Solutions Task Force, the Ministry of Migration and
Displacement and the Ministry of Planning. An area-based coordination mechanism
is being piloted in seven target areas through the collaboration of humanitarian,
stabilization and development agencies. This multisectoral assistance is based on
location, rather than on the objectives of a specific cluster or sector.
58. The United Nations in Iraq continued to provide essential humanitarian
assistance, including mental health and psychosocial support services, to internally
displaced persons in and out of camps. IOM tracked internally displaced persons in
secondary displacement, while supporting them through the provision of
infrastructure, awareness-related activities and emergency cash assistance.
59. The World Food Programme continued to provide aid to 195,287 internally
displaced persons and 71,582 Syrian refugees in camps in Iraq and the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq. An initial rapid assessment of internally displaced persons who have
returned, relocated or are secondarily displaced revealed that 41 per cent of out -ofcamp households had poor and borderline food consumption, while 33 per cent of
households who left camps were food insecure, and 48 per cent were vulnerable to
food insecurity.

21-05519

11/15

S/2021/426

60. Facilitating returns to areas of origins, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) Funding Facility for Stabilization continued to implement
infrastructure rehabilitation and livelihood projects in Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninawa
and Salah al-Din. UNDP continued to work on community readiness and reintegration
to facilitate the return of internally displaced persons, including more than 2,000
families perceived as affiliated with ISIL, by supporting community dialogue and
through an action plan for sustainable reintegration. The United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) rehabilitated houses damaged from the conflict
with ISIL, completing rehabilitation of 473 houses in Dahuk, Erbil, Mosul, Sinjar and
Sumil. In Sinjar, it issued occupancy certificates to Yazidi returnees, allowing Yazidis
to officially claim and register land rights for the first time.
61. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) provided gender-based violence
services to 183,469 women and girls in Iraq and continued to support 70 safe spaces
for women, 14 mobile teams and five shelters for women.
62. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, UNDP completed rehabilitation of 11
health-care facilities in 10 governorates, creating space for 220 isolation rooms, with
work ongoing in four additional health-care facilities in other governorates. To
strengthen hygiene in urban settings, UN-Habitat connected 218 houses to water in
Anbar Governorate and 315 houses in Dahuk Governorate. Since 15 February, IOM
has reached a total of 2,764 households in Anbar, Kirkuk and Salah al -Din
Governorates with COVID-19 prevention kits.
63. The World Health Organization (WHO) continued to work with the Ministry of
Health to ensure that COVID-19 risk-mitigation measures are in place. WHO and the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), in collaboration with the Ministry of
Health, will be instrumental in the immediate roll-out of the Government of Iraq selffinanced COVAX vaccine programme.
64. The United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) continued to run the
Iraq Information Centre, which provided critical information to beneficiaries to help
address basic needs on behalf of the humanitarian country team. During the reporting
period, the Centre received 11,000 calls (82 per cent male callers and 18 per cent
female callers, with over 50 per cent of calls from those in the 26 –35 age group). The
majority sought assistance on protection (53 per cent), mainly refugees with concerns
over registration and residency renewal, resettlement and cash assistance. Other
concerns included financial insecurity (31 per cent), food insecurity (9 per cent) and
COVID-19 (7.7 per cent).
65. Addressing the urgent need to create youth employment opportunities in Iraq,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
completed the distribution of school furniture and supplies, including COVID -19
risk-mitigation items, for 10 rehabilitated schools in Erbil. UNESCO further
supported the Ministry of Education by providing interactive online training for
trainers in distance learning and e-learning methods to 34 teachers selected from
Basrah, Qadisiyah and Dhi Qar Governorates. They will train approximately 4,000
teachers in their respective governorates. Additionally, UNESCO produced 284
lessons covering all grades and subjects for the Ministry of Education television
channel, provided technical and vocational education and training courses in
construction to 150 young people in Ninawa Governerate and 50 in Basrah
Governorate and supported the enrolment of 1,298 students in catch -up classes,
transportation support for 80 students, psychosocial support for 8,437 students and
case management for 471 students. In collaboration with the Ministry of Planning and
the Ministry of Youth and Sports, UNFPA conducted an adolescent and youth
qualitative survey in Iraq, the results of which informed development of the nation al
youth vision 2030. For its part, the International Labour Organization (ILO), through
12/15

21-05519

S/2021/426

its Start and Improve Your Business programme, targeted youth and women
entrepreneurs with assistance and training courses.
66. As part of efforts to help the Government of Iraq boost private sector
employment, IOM continued to support the private sector through its Enterprise
Development Fund, which as at 7 March has supported 753 small and medium -sized
businesses, creating an estimated 4,097 new jobs. ILO recently in troduced its
Employment Intensive Investment Programme in public works to support immediate
job creation while investing in infrastructure rehabilitation. The Programme assists in
moving from emergency, cash-based activities towards more productive and
sustainable job creation.
67. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) launched
a project to enable poor smallholder farmers and landless, rural households in Basrah,
Dhi Qar and Maysan Governorates to improve agricultural productivity and
livelihoods, while maintaining or improving natural resources (land and water) and
biodiversity. The project targets youth, women and female-headed households.
Additionally, FAO has supported governmental land degradation reversal processes
by restoring at least 6,000 hectares of degraded agricultural lands and 4,000 hectares
of wetlands, directly benefiting an estimated 2,500 smallholders (50 per cent women).
68. Under its Security Sector programme, UNDP conducted specialized virtual
courses to improve the effectiveness of local policing for a total of 40 police officers.
In addition, the Ministry of Interior and UNDP launched an e -learning platform for
Iraqi police to facilitate easy access and enrolment of police officers, the first of its
kind for the Ministry.
69. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) conducted a series
of training courses and workshops in February and March on psychological recovery
for a group of victims of terrorism in Iraq. The training introduced best practice s for
supporting victims and strengthened the capabilities of criminal justice and law
enforcement officials who are in direct contact with victims of terrorism. UNODC
also delivered training courses on the inspection of shipping containers and
combating corruption for officials in Baghdad and in Anbar Governorate.
70. The Mine Action Service cleared more than 110,000 m 2 of agricultural land in
areas of Anbar and Ninawa Governorates that had been contaminated with improvised
explosive devices during the ISIL occupation. The Mine Action Service provided
explosive ordnance risk education to 1,377 individuals, including 1,051 children.
Additionally, 35 police officers (10 women) from the Ministry of Interior were trained
as explosive hazard first responders.
71. Under its Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, the Office of CounterTerrorism held an initial coordination meeting with the Government of Iraq on
4 March to identify national needs and priorities to support the country’s readiness
and capability to use passenger data in preventing, detecting, investigating and
prosecuting terrorist offences and other serious crimes, in line with Security Council
resolutions 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017) and 2482 (2019). As part of the project to
enhance preparedness and response against chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear terrorism, the Office conducted virtual training from 5 to 8 April on “Outbreak
containment for law enforcement”, which was focused on the bioterrorism threat and
the role of law enforcement in responding to related public health emergencies.
72. The UNESCO “Revive the spirit of Mosul” initiative, a project to rebuild
historical landmarks, was spotlighted by the visit of Pope Francis to Al -Tahera
Church, one of three sites covered by the project.

21-05519

13/15

S/2021/426

IV. Security and operational issues
A.

Update on security arrangements
73. The Department of Safety and Security monitored developments throughout
Iraq and implemented risk management measures to enable United Nations
operations. Regular security advisories and alerts, including broadcasts related to
COVID-19, continued to be disseminated to keep United Nations personnel informed
of the precautionary measures in place.
74. The Department of Safety and Security supported an average of 26 field
missions per day across the country, with assessed risk levels ranging from medium
to high. Its close coordination and engagement with the host Government continued
to ensure the proper flow of information and the necessary security support for United
Nations operations, in particular movements and access authorizations to regions still
affected by COVID-19 containment restrictions.

B.

Mission facilities, logistics, aviation, financial and legal issues
75. The Mission was able to resume construction and refurbishment projects in the
United Nations Integrated Compound in Baghdad while maintaining strict health and
safety protocols. This included office development and security enhancement due to
be completed on 1 May 2021.
76. UNAMI continued to provide logistical and administrative support to the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the delivery of its mandate.

V. Observations
77. I welcome Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi’s call for a comprehensive national
dialogue. Open discourse and mutual understanding among all Iraqi communities are
vital for building a resilient society. The recent visit of Pope Francis to Iraq, which
sought to promote religious tolerance and peaceful coexistence, highlighted the
strength of Iraqi diversity. It is my hope that Iraq will capitalize on this historic visit
to promote reconciliation and healing among its diverse communities towards a stable
and unified Iraq.
78. Thorough and effective preparations are essential for the success of the planned
parliamentary elections on 10 October 2021. I encourage all stakeholders to play their
part by ensuring that the legislative process and technical preparations can proceed
methodically and without delay. The passage of an amendment to the Federal
Supreme Court law that allows for the membership of the court to be completed,
which is necessary for the certification of election results, is a welcome development.
It is equally important that stakeholders also ensure a safe environment for voters,
candidates, campaigners and electoral officials. I call upon all political parties to
come together and agree on a code of conduct to allow a credible, inclusive and
peaceful democratic contest in an atmosphere free from intimidation and harassment.
The establishment of a higher committee to promote and monitor women’s
participation and propose measures to prevent and address violence against women
candidates is a welcome first step.
79. The passage of the 2021 Federal Budget Law is a testament to the importance
of political compromise through dialogue at times of severe economic hardship. It is
my sincere hope that the federal and Kurdistan Regional Governments will build on
14/15

21-05519

S/2021/426

this positive development to faithfully implement the budget agreement and to
continue discussions in earnest to reach a durable agreement on outstanding issues
between them.
80. International cooperation remains key to addressing the challenges posed by the
COVID-19 pandemic, regional instability, climate change and other issues. Joint
challenges are an opportunity to put differences aside and to focus on the way forward
towards a stable and secure future, with full respect for the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-interference.
81. I welcome the engagement of the Government of Iraq with its international and
regional partners and call upon actors concerned to implement partnership agreements
aimed at bringing peace and prosperity to Iraq and stability in the region. However,
continued security challenges threaten the stability of Iraq and weaken State control.
I therefore call upon all parties concerned to exercise restraint and take concrete
measures towards de-escalating tensions.
82. The Government’s response to calls for accountability for demonstration -related
violations, including the prosecution of those responsible for the killing, serious
injury, abduction and disappearance of demonstrators, has produced limited results to
date, with the majority of investigations failing to move beyond the investigation
phase. While some cases are technically challenging, State institutions should
redouble efforts to pursue criminal accountability for these acts.
83. I emphasize the importance of respecting the lawful and legitimate exercise of
the right to freedom of expression and of observing fair trial standards for all accused.
84. The enactment of the Yazidi Female Survivors Law is a major step towards
addressing the needs of survivors of atrocities committed by ISIL. The Law’s
recognition of crimes committed by ISIL against the Christians, Shabaks, Turkmens
and Yazidis as crimes against humanity and genocide also underscores the need to
hold perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence accountable and to provide
reparations and redress measures for survivors.
85. The dedicated collective efforts of the health-care workers and government
officials of Iraq to address the COVID-19 pandemic are commendable. Against the
backdrop of the continuing pandemic, vulnerabilities have increased. I therefore call
upon Member States to ensure that the 2021 Iraq Humanitarian Response Plan is
funded so that the needs of 1.5 million internally displaced persons both in camp and
in out-of-camp settings, as well as acutely vulnerable returnees, can be met.
86. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, and the United Nations staff in Iraq for their continued dedication to
implementing the Organization’s mandate during extraordinary times and under
challenging circumstances.

21-05519

15/15
