General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

122

3. Also requests the Secretary-General to refer to
the executive heads of the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency the observations
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions contained in chapter III of its
report on the administrative budgets of the agencies
for 1972;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to
transmit the report on the review of the administrative
and management procedures concerning the programme
and budget of the International Atomic Energy Agency
to the Director-General of that organization so that
the report may be brought to the attention of the Board
of Governors of the Agency.

2030th plenary meeting,
21 December 1971.
2885 (XXVI). Standardization of the financial
regulations governing external audit and
amendments to the Financial Regulations
of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the standardization of the financial regulations
governing external audit24 and the recommendations of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions211 thereon,
Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1972, article
XII of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations,
dealing with external audit, as well as the annex to the
Financial Regulations, containing the principles to
govern the audit procedures of the United Nations, shall
be amended as set forth in the annex to the present
resolution.
2030th plenary meeting,
21 December 1971.
ANNEX
Amendments to the Financial Regulations of the United
Nations

1. Article XIl of the Financial Regulations of the United
Nations shall be amended to read as follows:
"ARTICLE XII. EXTERNAL AUDIT

"Appointment of a Board of Auditors
"Regulation 12.1: The General Assembly shall appoint a
Board of Auditors to perform the audit of the accounts of
the United Nations. This Board shall consist of three members, each of whom shall be the Auditor-General ( or officer
holding the equivalent title) of a Member State.
"Tenure of office of the members of the Board of Auditors
"Regulation 12.2: The members of the Board of Auditors
shall be elected for a three-year term of office. The term of
office shall commence on 1 July and expire on 30 June three
years subsequent thereto. The term of office of one of the
members shall expire each year. Consequently, the General
Assembly shall elect each year a member to take office
from 1 July of the following year.
"Regulation 12.3: If a member of the Board of Auditors
ceases to hold office as Auditor-General (or equivalent title)
in his own country, his tenure of office shall thereupon be
terminated and he shall be succeeded as a member of the
24 A/C.5/1375.
25 A/8482.

Board by his successor as Auditor-General. A Board member
may not otherwise be removed during his tenure of office
except by the General Assembly.

"Scope of audit
"Regulation 12.4: The audit shall be conducted in conformity with generally accepted common auditing standards
and, subject to any special directions of the General Assembly, in accordance with the additional terms of reference
set out in the annex to the present Regulations.
"Regulation 12.5: The Board of Auditors may make observations with respect to the efficiency of the financial procedures,
the accounting system, the internal financial controls and,
in general, the administration and management of the
Organization.
"Regulation 12.6: The Board of Auditors shall be completely independent and solely responsible for the conduct
of the audit.
"Regulation 12.7: The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions may request the Board
of Auditors to perform certain specific examinations and
issue separate reports on the results.
"Facilities
"Regulation 12.8: The Secretary-General shall provide
the Board of Auditors with the facilities it may require in
the performance of the audit.
"Regulation 12.9: For the purpose of making a local or
special examination or of effecting economies in the audit
cost, the Board of Auditors may engage the services of
any national Auditor-General (or equivalent title) or commercial public auditors of known repute, or any other
person or firm who, in the opinion of the Board, is technically qualified.
"Reporting
"Regulation 12.10: The Board of Auditors shall issue a
report on the audit of the financial statements and relevant
schedules, which shall include such information as the Board
deems necessary with regard to matters referred to in
regulation 12.5 and in the additional terms of reference.
"Regulation 12 .11: The reports of the Board of Auditors
shall be transmitted to the General Assembly through the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, together with the audited financial statements, in
accordance with any directions given by the Assembly.
The Advisory Committee shall examine the financial statements and the audit reports and shall forward them to the
Assembly with such comments as it deems appropriate.
"Audit assignment allocation
"Regulation 12 .12: The Board of Auditors shall, subject
to the concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, allocate and rotate
the audit work among the members of the Board."
2. The annex to the Financial Regulations of the United
Nations shall be amended to read as follows:
"ANNEX TO THE FINANCIAL REGULATIONS

"Additional terms of reference governing the audit
of the United Nations
"1. The Board of Auditors shall perform jointly and
severally such audit of the accounts of the United Nations,
including all trust funds and special accounts, as it deems
necessary in order to satisfy itself:
"(a) That the financial statements are in accord with the
books and records of the Organization;
" ( b) That the financial transactions reflected in the statements have been in accordance with the Rules and Regulations, the budgetary provisions and other applicable directives;
"(c) That the securities and moneys on deposit and on
hand have been verified by certificate received direct from
the Organization's depositaries or by actual count;

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
"(d) That the internal controls, including the internal
audit, are adequate in the light of the extent of reliance
placed thereupon;
"(e) That procedures satisfactory to the Board of Auditors have been applied to the recording of all assets,
liabilities, surpluses and deficits.
"2. The Board of Auditors shall be the sole judge as
to the acceptance in whole or in part of certifications and
representations by the Secretary-General and may proceed
to such detailed examination and verification as it chooses
of all financial records, including those relating to supplies
and equipment.
"3. The Board of Auditors and its staff shall have free
access at all convenient times to all books, records and
other documentation which are, in the opinion of the Board
of Auditors, necessary for the performance of the audit.
Information which is classified as privileged and which the
Secretary-General ( or his designated senior official) agrees is
required by the Board for the purposes of the audit and
information classified as confidential shall be made available
on application. The Board of Auditors and its staff shall
respect the privileged and confidential nature of any information so classified which has been made available and shall
not make use of it except in direct connexion with the
performance of tht: audit. The Board may draw the attention of the General Assembly to any denial of information
classified as privileged which, in its opinion, was required
for the purpose of the audit.
"4. The Board of Auditors shall have no power to
disallow items in the accounts but shall draw to the attention
of the Secretary-General for appropriate action any transaction concerning which it entertains doubt as to legality or
propriety. Audit objections, to these or any other transactions,
arising during the examination of the accounts shall be
communicated immediately to the Secretiiry-General.
"5. The Board of Auditors (or such of its officers as
it may designate) shall express and sign an opinion in the
following terms:
"We have examined the following appended financial
statements, numbered
to
properly identified, and relevant schedules of
[name of the body] for the year ended 31 December
19.
. Our examination included a general review of
the accounting procedures and such tests of the accounting
records and other supporting evidence as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. As a result of our examination, we are of the opinion that the financial statements
properly reflect the recorded financial transactions for the
year, which transactions were in accordance with the
Financial Regulations and legislative authority, and present fairly the financial position as at
19.
"
adding, should it be necessary:
"subject to the observations in our foregoing report".
"6. The report of the Board of Auditors on the financial
statements should mention:
"(a) The type and scope of its examination;
"(b) Matters affecting the completeness or accuracy of
the accounts, including where appropriate:
"(i) Information necessary to the correct interpretation
of the accounts;
"(ii) Any amounts which ought to have been received
but which have not been brought to account;
"(iii) Any amounts for which a legal or contingent
obligation exists and which have not been recorded
or reflected in the financial statements;
"(iv) Expenditures not properly substantiated;
"(v) Whether proper books of accounts have been keptwhere in the presentation of statements there are
deviations of a material nature from the generally
accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis, these should be disclosed;
"(c) Other matters which should be brought to the notice
of the General Assembly, such as:

123

"(i) Cases of fraud or presumptive fraud;
"(ii) Wasteful or improper expenditure of the Organiza-

tion's money or other assets ( notwithstanding
that the accounting for the transaction may be
correct);
"(iii) Expenditure likely to commit the Organization to

further outlay on a large scale;
"(iv) Any defect in the general system or detailed regulations governing the control of receipts and disbursements or of supplies and equipment;
"(v) Expenditure not in accordance with the intention
of the General Assembly after making allowance
for duly authorized transfers within the budget;
"(vi) Expediture in excess of appropriations as amended
by duly authorized transfers within the budget;
"(vii) Expenditure not in conformity with the authority
which governs it;
"(d) The accuracy or otherwise of the supplies and equipment records as determined by stock-taking and examination of the records;
"(e) If appropriate, transactions accounted for in a previous year concerning which further information has been
obtained or transactions in a later year concerning which
it seems desirable that the General Assembly should have
early knowledge.

"7. The Board of Auditors may make such observations
with respect to its findings resulting from the audit and
such comments on the Secretary-General's financial report
as it deems appropriate to the General Assembly or to
the Secretary-General.
"8. Whenever the scope of audit of the Board of Auditors
is restricted, or whenever the Board is unable to obtain
sufficient evidence, it shall refer to the matter in its report,
making clear the reasons for its comments, and the effect
on the financial position and the financial transactions as
recorded.
"9. In no case shall the Board of Auditors include
criticism in its report without first affording the SecretaryGeneral an adequate opportunity of explanation on the
matter under observation."

2886 (XXVI). Programme of recurrent publications of the United Nations

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on the programme of recurrent publications of
the United Nations, 26 and of the preliminary observations thereon by the Secretary-General27 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions;28
2. Requests the intergovernmental bodies concerned
to consider the specific rec0mmendations contained in
the report of the Joint Inspection Unit and to transmit
their observations, through the Economic and Social
Council where appropriate, to the General Assembly
in time for consideration at its twenty-seventh session;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions to submit their observations and recommendations to the General Assembly at its twentyseventh session.
2030th plenary meeting,
21 December 1971.
2G

See A/8362.

27 See A/8540.

28 A/8624.
