The Special Comniittee is therefore composed ojtlw aboveme1ftioned eiaht ./lfembers, 11nd of the .following Members
1rans111itli11g injormation under Article 73 e ofthe Charter:
AusTRALIA, BELGIUM, DENMARK, FRANCE, NETHERLANDS,

Nn ZuuND, UNITED KINGDOM,

UNITED

SnrEs OF

Le Com1te se compose rlo11c des huil Msmbres c1-dusus
et des Membres auivanfs gni euvoient drs ,e,ueignm,en"
en application de l' Article i. 3 e dr la Charle :
AusTRALIE, BELGIQUE, D~EMARi, FRANC!!,

PAYs-Il1s,

NouvELLE-ZEuNDF, RonuME-UNI et Eurs-UNIS u'AME-

AMERICA.

RIQUE.

220 (III). Liaison between the Eco•

220 (III). Liaison eutre le Conseil eco-

nomic and Social Council and the
Special Committee on Information
transmitted under Article 73 e of
the Charter

nomique et social et le Comite
special pour l'exameu des renseignements transmis en vertu de
I'Article 73 e de la Charle

The General Assembly,

L 'AssembM6 cenerale

Having consi.dered the report of the Special
Committee on Information transmitted under
Article 7 3 e of the Charter which was constituted
by resolution 146 (II) adopted by the General
Assembly on 3 November 1947, and which was
authorized to establish liaison with the Economic
and Social Council,

Ayant examine le rapport du Comite special
pour l'examen des renseignements transmis en
vertu de !'Article 7 3 e de la Charte, cree par la
resolution 14 6 (11) de l' Assernblee generale en
date du 3 novembre 194 7, et autorise a etahlir
la liaison avec le Conseil ernnomique et social,

1. Invites the Secretary-General to :
(a) Inform any special committee which the
General Assembly may appoint of decisions taken
by the Economic and Social Council and of studies
undertaken under its auspices which include
within their scope economic and social conditions
affecting Non-Self-Governing Territories;

1. /nvi.te lf.l Secretaire general a :
a) Mettre tout comite special que l'Assernblee
generale pourrait designer au courant des decisions prises par le Conseil economique et social
et des etudes entreprises sous les auspices de ce
Conseii, lorsqur ces etudes ont trait aux
'conditions economiques et sociales dans les territoires non autonomes;
b) Mettre a la disposition du Conseil eeonomique et social tous les renseignements appropries
transmis en vertu de l'Article 7 3 e et toute la
documentation supplementaire appropriee necessaire aux: travaux du Conseil economique et
social;

(b) Place at the disposal of the Economic and
Social Council all relevant information transmitted under Article 7 3 e and all relevant supplemental information required for the work of the
Economic and Social Council ;
2. Draw, the attention of the Members responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories to the arrangements for technical
assistance approved by the Economic and Social
Council, and invites the Secretary-General to
inform any special committee which the General
Assembly may appoint of the extent and nature
of any such technical assistance rendered to
Non-Self-Governing Territories at the request of
Administering Members.

Hundred and fifty-fifth pknary meeting,
3 November 1948.

221 (III). Collaboration of the specialized agencies in regard to Article 73 e of the Charter
The GeMral Assembly,
Having conMeTed the report of the SpPcial
Col!lmittee on Information transmitted under
Article 7 3 e of the Charter which was constituted
by resolutior._ 146 (11) adopted by the General
Assembly on 3 November 1947, and which was

2. Attire l'attention des Membres qui administrent des territoires non autonomes sur le11
dispositions en matiere d'assistance technique
approuvees par le Conseil economique et social,
et invite le Secretaire general a informer tout
comite special que l'Assemblee generaie pourrait
designer de la portee et de la nature de toute
assistance technique donnee aux territoires non
autonomes a la demande des Mernbres qui ont
charge de !'administration.

Cent-dnquante-cinquieme seanu pMniere,
le 3 ,wvembre 1948.
221 (111). Collaboration des institu•
tion.s specialisees en ee qui concerne l' Article 73 e de la Charle

L 'Assemb/Je generale,

Ayant examine le rapport du Comite special
pour l'examen des renseignements transmis en
vertu de l'Article 7 3 e de la Charte, cree par la
resolution 146 (11) de l'Assemblee generale en
date du 3 novernbre 194 7, et autorise a recourir

authorized to avail itself of the counsel and
assistance of the specialized agencies,

aux conseils et al'assistance des institutions specialisees,

1. Has noted the resolution adopted by the
World Health AssPrnbly 1 and welcomes the measures being taken by the World Health Organization to examine the section of the Standard Form
relating to public health and sanitation, and in
other ways to provide technical assistance in the
preparation and consideration of information
transmitted under Article 7 3 e of the Charter;

Has also noted the information supplied by the
International Labour Office2 with particular reference to the ratification and application of international labour conventions concerning Non-SelfGoverning Territories and to the study which is
being undertaken in regard to migrant labour
problems;
Has also noted the explanations furnished by
the representative of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 3 -on
the services which that organization is providing
in Non-Self-Governing Territories with the consent of the Members responsible for the administration of these territories ;

1. Prend note de la resolution adoptee par
l'Assemblee mondiale de la sante 1 ; accueille
avec satisfaction les mesures prises par l'Organisation mondiale de la sante en vue d'examiner la
section du Schema relative a l'hygiene et a la
sante publique, ainsi que les autres mesures
prises en vue d'apporter une aide technique dans
la preparation et l'examen des renseignements
transmis en vertu de l' Article 7 3 e de la Charte;
Prend note egalement des renseignements
fournis par le Bureau international du Travail2
qui concernent plus specialement la ratification
et l'application des conventions internationales
du travail relatives aux territoires non autonomes,
et l'etude entreprise sur les problemes de la
main-d 'ceuvre migrante ;
Prend note egalement de l'expose fait par le
representant de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
pour l'education, la science et la culture 5 au
sujet de l'aide que cette organisation fournit dans
les territoires non autonomes avec l'assentiment
des Mernhres responsables de !'administration de
ces territoires;

2. Invites the Secretary-General to keep in
close touch with the secretariats of the specialized
agencies with a view to seeking their counsel and
assistance in the preparation of his analyses of
information transmitted under Article 7 3 e of
the Charter;

2. Invite le Secretaire general a maintenir un
contact etroit avec les secretariats des institutions
specialisees en vue de rechercher leurs conseils
et leur assistance, lorsqu'il prepare les analysrs
des renseignements transmis en vertu de l' Article 73 e de la Charte;

3. Invites the specialized agencies to examine
the relevant sections of the Standard Form with
which they are specially concerned, with a view
to the revision of this Form;

3. Invite les institutions specialisees a examiner
les sections du Schema qui reUivent de leur competence pour en permettre la revision ;

4. Invites the specialized agencies to inform
any special committee which the General Assembly may appoint of the progress of any work

4. /nv,:te les institutions specialisees ainformer
tout comite special que l'Assemhlee generale
·pourrait designer de l'etat d'avancement des travaux qu'elles ont entrepris, lorsque ces travaux
ont trait aui conditions economiques, sociales et
de !'instruction dans les territoires non autonomes;

undertaken by them which includes within its
scope economic, social and educational conditions
affecting Non-Self-Governing Territories;
5. Further invites the appropriate specialized
agencies to make such comments on the analyses
prepared by the Secretary-General as they may
feel will be helpful to the consideration of these
analyses.

5. Invite en outre les institutions specialisees
competentes a presenter les commentaires
qu'elles estiment utiles a l'examen des analyses
preparees par le Secretaire general.

Cent-dnquante-cinquibne seance pleniere,
k 3 novembn 19 48.

Hundred and fifty-filth plenary meeting,

3 November 1948.
222 (III). Cessation of the transmission
af information under Article 73 e
of the Charter

222 (III). Cessation de la transmission
des renseignements en wrtu de
I' Article 73 e de la Charte

Whereas, by Article 7 3 e of the Charter,
Members of the United Nations which have or

Attendu que les Membres des Nations Unies qui
ont ou assument la responsabilite d'administrer

1
See document A/592, page 37.
' See document A/AC.17 /W. 8.
a See document A/AC. 1 7/SR. 11, page 2.

1
Voir le document A/592, page 44.
• Voir le document A/AC.17 /W. 8.
• Voir le document A/AC. 17JSR. H, pase 2.

84
