V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee___ _

operational costs of the unit and for implementing the
projects and programmes in the countries members of the
Intergovernmental Authority, and requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to
intensify his efforts in this regard;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to
the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of l 986 on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/222. Special economic assistance to Benin
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/88 of 5 December 1980, 36/
208 of 17 December 1981, 37/151 of 17 December 1982,
38/210 of 20 December 1983 and 39/ l 85 of l 7 December
1984, in which it appealed to the international community
to provide effective and continuous financial, material and
technical assistance to Benin so as to help that country
overcome its financial and economic difficulties,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 419 ( 1977) of
24 November I 977, in which the Council appealed to all
States and all appropriate international organizations,
including the United Nations and its specialized agencies,
to assist Benin,
Having heard the statement made by the representative
of Benin on 12 November 1985, 149 in which he described
the serious economic and financial situation of his country
and the action taken by his Government to tackle these
difficulties,
Deeply concerned, nevertheless, by the fact that Benin
continues to experience serious economic and financial
difficulties, characterized by a marked balance-of-payments disequilibrium, heavy burdens of i!'.: ..:xternal debt
and a lack of the resources neces~r, for the implementation of its planned economic and social development programme,
Having considerer/ ,i,~ summary report of the SecretaryGeneral, 150
Noting that the persisting unfavourable climatic conditions in the coastal and northern regions of Benin are still
leading to losses in agriculture and livestock production,
and threatening the lives of the population,
Considering that Benin is one of the least developed
countries,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to organize and mobilize support
for the international programme of economic assistance to
Benin;
2. Takes note of the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance already
provided or pledged to Benin by Member States, United
Nations bodies and regional, interregional and intergovernmental organizations;
4. Notes with satisfaction the efforts undertaken by the
Government of Benin to make structural adjustments in
the economy of the country and to take other measures
designed to help it to overcome its economic and financial
difficulties;
5. Notes with concern that the assistance given to
Benin has not been sufficient to cover all the country's
pressing needs and that additional resources are still essen149 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Second
Commillee. 32nd meeting, paras. 7 l and 22.

179

tial for the implementation of its recovery, reconstruction
and development programme;
6. Appeals to Member States, international financial
institutions, the specialized agencies and other United
Nations bodies to respond generously and urgently to the
needs of Benin;
7. Urges donor countries to provide financial assistance to help Benin to bear the counterpart costs of projects
receiving external assistance, bearing in mind that it is one
of the least developed countries;
8. Appeals to the international community to make
contributions to the special account for Benin opened by
the Secretary-General at United Nations Headquarters, for
subsequent transfer to Benin;
9. Invites the programmes, specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system - in
particular the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Health Organization, the
World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development:
(a) To maintain and expand their programmes of
assistance to Benin;
(b) To co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in
organizing and promoting the special programme of economic assistance to Benin;
(c) To bring to the attention of their governing bodies,
for their urgent consideration, the special needs of Benin;
(d) To report to the Secretary-General by l 5 July l 986
on the measures they have taken and the resources they
have made available, as well as the decisions of their governing bodies on assistance to Benin;
l0. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for implementing the projects of the special programme of economic assistance to Benin;
(b) To evaluate, in consultation with the Government,
the economic situation in Benin, the most urgent needs of
the country and the implementation of the special programme of economic assistance;
(c) To keep the situation in Benin under constant
review, in close collaboration with the Government of
Benin, the specialized agencies, regional and intergovernmental organizations and international financial institutions, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at
its second regular session of 1986, of the status of assistance to Benin;
(d) To report on the implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
I 20th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/223. Assistance to the Comoros
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/193 of 17 December 1984
and its previous resolutions on assistance to the Comoros,
in which it appealed to the international community to
provide effective and continuous financial, material and
technical assistance to the Comoros in order to help that
country overcome its financial and economic difficulties,
Taking note of the special problems confronting the
Comoros as an island developing country and as one of the
least developed countries
150 ,\/40/441, sect. Ii
