Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Requests those States offering scholarships to inform the Secretary-General of the details of the offers
made and the scholarships granted under this programme and. whenever possible, rto provide travel funds
to prospective students;
5. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
intensify widespread and continuous dissemination in
the Territories under their administration of information
relating to offers of study and training facilities made
by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to
enable s,tudents to avail ,themselves of such offers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973

3155 (XXVIII). Question of Niue

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Niue,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 48
Having heard the statement of the Leader of Government of Niue, 0
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resoJutions 2868 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 and 2986 (XXVII) of 14 December
1972,
Recalling the report of the United Nations Visiting
Mission to Niue, 1972,50
Noting with satisfaction the outcome of the constitutional talks between the administering Power and a
Niuean Government delegation which was embodied in
a joint communique issued at Wellington on 2 March
1973, 51
Noting further that a time-table has been established
for the completion in 1974 of the final steps which will
enable Niue to achieve self-government,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all help to the people of Niue in their efforts
freely to decide their own future,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Niue to self-determination in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
• 8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/9023/Rev.l ), chaps. III
and XVI.
4 9 lbid., Twenty-eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 2067th
meeting.
IIO Ibid., Twenty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 23 (Al
8723/Rev.1), chap. XVI, annex J.
51 Jbid., Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/
Rev.1), chap. XVI, annex, para. 19.

105

2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Niue 52 and endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Committee on the question;
3. Notes with approval that, during the period since
the United Nations Mission visited Niue in June 1972,
the Government and people of Niue resolved to achieve
self-government in 1974 and that agreement has been
reached with the Government of New Zealand, as the
administering Power, on a specific time-table for the
free exercise by the people of Niue of their right to
self-determination;
4. Welcomes the invitation extended by the administering Power to the Secretary-General for the
United Nations to observe the act of self-determination
in Niue in 1974;
5. Requests ·the Special Committee, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Government of
Niue, to appoint a special mission to Niue in 1974
which will observe the proceedings relating to the act
of self-determination by the people of Niue and to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
6. Requests the administering Power and the Government of Niue, as well as the Secretary-General, to
provide all the necessary assistance and facilities to
the special mission in the discharge of its task;
7. Requests the Special Committee to report on this
question to the General Assembly at its twenty~ninth
session.
2202nd plenary meetinf?
14 December 1973
3156 (XXVIII). Question of American Samoa,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Guam, New
Hehrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles
and Solomon Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Gi_lbert and Ellice Islands, Guam, New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles and Solomon Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 53
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
!ndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the programme of action for the full impl~mentation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its previous resolutions relating to the
Territories listed above, in particular resolution 2984
(XXVII) of 14 December 1972,
Noting with concern that many of the provisions of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, as
weU as the related recommendations of the Special
Committee, remain largely unimplemented as regards
those Territories, in particular with respect to the
establishment of a specific time-table for the exercise
52 fbid., chap. XVI.
~;i !bid

char,. IH, V, X, XV. XVH :nd .XVI.H
