S/PV.8475

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8475th meeting

Thursday, 28 February 2019, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndong Mba. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-05856 (E)
*1905856*

S/PV.8475

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.

owned political process, which is key, because I am
convinced that a real peace process in Syria needs
to be owned by the Syrians, including over half the
population — Syrian women — for it to be sustainable.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: It is a pleasure to see so many old
friends around the table. I am also looking forward to
developing new friendships. It is a real honour for me
to be here.
It is also an honour for me to brief the Security
Council for the first time in my capacity as the Special
Envoy for Syria some eight weeks into my mandate. I
have taken up this task with all humility, conscious of
the profound grief and suffering of the Syrian people
everywhere. I am also aware of the need to end this
conflict for the sake of Syria, the region and the world.
I know Council members all understand the scale
and difficulty of my task. It is not for lack of talent that
my predecessors did not achieve more, and it will, of
course, not be possible to satisfy every party on every
issue. But I can promise the Security Council that I
will work impartially and diligently to discharge the
mandate given in resolution 2254 (2015) to facilitate the
political process. To achieve that end, the cooperation of
all Syrian and international parties will be required. It
will require the readiness of everyone to deal seriously
with the realities of the conflict and work together to
move things step by step in a positive direction.
In my initial engagements, I have reminded
all parties that resolution 2254 (2015) contains all
the elements required for a political solution. The
resolution begins by respecting the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria and
provides a road map for a truly Syrian-led and Syrian2/21

28/02/2019

Resolution 2254 (2015) demands compliance
with international law, stresses protection of civilians
and unfettered humanitarian access, cessation of
hostilities, addressing terrorism, implementing
confidence-building measures, and releasing detainees
and abductees. All of these are vital if we are to see
Syrians moving out of conflict. It further addresses
the issues of governance, a constitutional process and
United Nations-supervised elections. These are the
means by which the Syrians, and no one else, should
determine their future. It speaks of safe and voluntary
refugee returns and of reconstruction, which are issues
that present themselves on a major scale and require
serious discussion. In short, resolution 2254 (2015)
takes a comprehensive view of the issues that need to
be addressed to end the conflict and bring stability and
genuine peace.
My first and most important priority has been to
engage with the Syrian Government and the Syrian
Negotiation Commission and seek their views and
cooperation. In Damascus, I was received very well by
Foreign Minister Al-Moualem. He responded positively
to my core message, expressed interest in the success
of my mission and welcomed my intention to return.
Last week, Deputy Special Envoy Ramzy returned
to Damascus and held good discussions with Deputy
Foreign Minister Mekdad, reaffirming an agreement to
keep up a sustained dialogue on peace in Syria, on the
basis of resolution 2254 (2015), with the aim of building
confidence and a view towards a Syrian-led and Syrianowned and United Nations-facilitated political process.
I visited the Syrian Negotiation Commission, led
by Coordinator Naser Al-Hariri, at its office in Riyadh
and met with all components. I greatly appreciated their
positive response to my message and their commitment
to engaging and seeking dialogue and negotiations
towards implementing resolution 2254 (2015). My
senior advisers had follow-up discussions with them
a few days ago. They affirmed their readiness for a
sustained dialogue on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015) towards a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process under United Nations facilitation.
I have also appreciated the frank, practical and
constructive engagements with all international
19-05856

28/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

stakeholders, including visits to Moscow, Cairo, Ankara,
Tehran, Paris, Berlin and Brussels, and meetings with
senior officials of key countries in Geneva, at Davos,
and recently in Munich. I will be in Washington, D.C.,
on Tuesday, and other capitals in due course, including
London, Beirut, Amman and Beijing.
I have recalled to all my interlocutors — and I
remind you, Mr. President, we are not starting from
scratch — that we have 12 living principles developed
by the Syrians in Geneva and affirmed in Sochi,
and baskets that have formed an agreed agenda of
intra-Syrian talks under United Nations facilitation.
But beyond that, let me share five core thoughts with
Council members on the way ahead.
First, it is essential for me as a United Nations
mediator and facilitator to have a direct and effective
engagement with the Government of Syria, and,
of course, the opposition. This is needed to build
confidence and trust and to develop sustained dialogue
with the parties. It is needed to bring the Syrians to a
real negotiation under United Nations auspices to end
the devastating conflict in the country and to make a
new beginning so that Syrians can together win the
peace — a peace for all Syrians. I welcome the readiness
of the parties to engage with me in this regard. And I
look forward to returning to Damascus in a few weeks
and to seeing the Syrian Negotiation Commission again
after that.
It is not for me here to prejudge what can be built
in a deeper dialogue. But I believe that there is a shared
sense that battlefield developments might be winding
down. Nevertheless, the conflict is far from over. And
the challenges of winning the peace are staggering in
scale and complexity. Large tracts of territory remain
outside of Government hands. The Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant is nearly defeated territorially but
experience suggests that it can re-emerge. Syrians yearn
to see the issue of detainees, abductees and missing
persons meaningfully addressed. Around half of
Syria’s pre-war population has been displaced. Council
members know the figures: 5.6 million refugees,
6.6 million internally displaced persons, 80 per cent
of Syrians living below the poverty line, and half of
the population unemployed. Some 11.7 million Syrians
need humanitarian assistance. I was pleased that,
with the engagement of the United States and Russian
Chairs of the International Syria Support Group and the
facilitation of the Syrian Government, we recently saw
the largest, single humanitarian convoy of the conflict

S/PV. 8475

reach 40,000 internally displaced persons in Rukban.
Let me emphasize that the United Nations stands
ready to support a durable solution for the people of
Rukban — one that abides by core protection standards
and that must be coordinated with all relevant partners.
Socioeconomic challenges are acute, with major
challenges in service delivery, including gas shortages.
After eight years of war, Syrian society has
undergone a profound transformation that has
also dramatically impacted Syrian women. Many
have assumed new responsibilities as the primary
breadwinners of their families. Others have faced
increased forms of violence specifically targeting
women. Syrians — men, women and children — are
suffering enormously. Part of my mandate is to try to
find ways to address that issue. Syria remains volatile
for those who remain in the country and for those who
wish to return.
Secondly, I was encouraged by the recent release
of 42 detainees/abductees. This was the second release
operation conducted by the Russian Federation and
Turkey within the framework of the Working Group on
the release of detainees/abductees and handover of the
bodies as well as the identification of missing persons.
At the same time, we need to scale up and prioritize
action on that issue, which is of immense humanitarian
importance and is also an essential part of building
confidence. We are intensively engaging on that issue
with the parties and in key capitals. We are eager to
see more meaningful progress unlocked in the period
ahead, and we are in concrete discussions on how to
do so.
Thirdly, the full spectrum of the Syrian people — not
just the formal parties — needs to be engaged and
involved in the effort to build confidence and trust,
and search for peace. Engaging Syrians from different
walks of life reminds me of what is at stake for civilians
in this conflict. It reminds me of Syrians’ resilience in
responding to the overwhelming needs generated by
this conflict and of their stake in the political process.
Over the past two months, my team has consulted with
more than 200 Syrian civil society actors inside Syria
and in the diaspora. I have been carefully studying the
insights and reflections of those Syrians to inform my
thinking, and I remain committed to ensuring that a
broad spectrum of Syrian civic actors are heard and
included in our efforts to promote sustainable peace.

19-058563/21

S/PV.8475

The situation in the Middle East

Next week, the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board
will be in Geneva. Its members have already been in
touch to convey that there will be no sustainable peace
in Syria unless all Syrians are included in shaping the
future of their country. I look forward to hearing their
views on how to advance the women’s rights agenda
and strengthen the meaningful participation of women
in the political process.
That brings me to my fourth point. As I have
deepened the dialogue with the parties, I have sensed
broad acceptance of the notion that convening a
credible, balanced, inclusive and viable Syrian-led
and -owned constitutional committee, under United
Nations auspices in Geneva, can be important for
revitalizing the political process. It can open doors
to deeper dialogue and genuine negotiations. I also
believe that it is now well understood that a package
of understandings is needed to ensure that the Syrian
Government and opposition are on board on essential
principles of procedure to guide the work of the
constitutional committee. It is my hope we will be able
to finalize the rules of procedure and the composition
of the committee in the near future. I will do everything
possible to facilitate its credible composition, including
a minimum 30 per cent female representation.
As we focus on developing a real Syrian-led process,
we must all acknowledge that external intervention has
been a significant factor in the conflict. Five national
armies operate across Syria’s land and airspace, in
tension or even conflict, generating daily risks of
international escalation. That involvement, of course,
clearly extends beyond the military sphere to a range of
other spheres as well.
That brings me to my fifth point — the need to focus
on improving international dialogue and cooperation.
Some challenges must be addressed urgently. Otherwise,
Syria will be engulfed in renewed escalations that
would have immense human costs, derail any progress
on the political front and risk regional spillover.
Intensive diplomacy is under way, but even more is
needed regarding the situation in the north-east. The
way forward must — to paraphrase the SecretaryGeneral — ensure the unity and territorial integrity
of Syria and take into account the security concerns
of neighbouring States, while recognizing and giving
voice to different components of Syria’s population.
Likewise, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham’s advances in
Idlib and escalations in the area underscore the need
4/21

28/02/2019

to uphold the fragile ceasefire arrangements for Idlib,
protect its civilians and counter the Council-listed
terrorist groups and foreign fighters that have been
such a scourge on Syria, while also addressing the root
causes and conditions in which they thrive. I welcome
the fresh impetus of the recent Sochi Congress to fully
implement the Russian-Turkish memorandum and I
urge for it to be a continued focus in the lead-up to the
next Astana meeting.
Meanwhile, the international community must
ensure that international norms against the use of
chemical weapons are respected and enforced. On
another note, I would add that the growing risk of
further confrontations between Israel and Iran in Syria
should not be overlooked.
Beyond crisis management, I note well that key
international players express emphatic support for
a political settlement for Syria under United Nations
auspices and affirm resolution 2254 (2015). They agree
on the need to counter Security Council-listed terrorist
groups and the need for peace and stability. They
support a political settlement that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and preserves Syria’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
They share an appreciation of the realities of 2019 and
understand that real diplomacy is needed to address
them. At present, different discussion formats are
contributing, and the United Nations has engaged
judiciously with all who seek to help, but I believe
that there are real possibilities for strengthening
international support and that we need to be creative
in that regard. I will work diligently to that end. If we
are to see how issues can be unblocked and how to help
the parties move forward in a Syrian-led and-owned
process, we may need a common forum where key
States engage seriously on those issues.
In conclusion, my engagements with all parties,
without exception, have been positive and forwardlooking, but of course, as we get deeper into the issues,
the parties’ willingness to move from good words to
real talks will be put to the test. I will engage all, in
good faith, with five goals in the period ahead: first,
to begin and deepen a sustained dialogue with the
Syrian Government and the opposition on building
trust and confidence towards a safe, calm and neutral
environment; secondly, to see more concrete action
on detainees, abductees and missing persons through
engagement with the Astana players, the Syrian parties
and all concerned; thirdly, to engage a wide range of
19-05856

28/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Syrians as I proceed and involve them in the process;
fourthly, to convene a credible, balanced and inclusive
constitutional committee as soon as possible; fifthly,
to help the international parties deepen their own
dialogue towards the common purpose of a credible and
sustainable political settlement of the Syrian conflict
that can enjoy international legitimacy.
I have one final thought — Syrians have every
capacity to live together in peace, and a political
settlement is plainly needed if we are to see real and
genuine reconciliation. There is no military solution
and the true victors will be those who can move beyond
slogans and paint a hopeful picture of what Syria
could look like in 10 years — a picture that all Syrians
can support, even if the road towards it will be long
and hard.
I have spent much of my career working with
problems that seemed totally intractable and dynamics
that seemed eternally frozen. But I know, first hand, that
history can bend in directions that nobody anticipated.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen for being here today. The
United States congratulates him on his appointment
and welcomes him to the Security Council for his first
briefing as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria. We look forward to working with him to find a
political solution to the Syrian conflict through the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). The United
States is unwavering in its commitment to achieving a
peaceful political settlement to the Syrian conflict in
line with resolution 2254 (2015).
I am joined today by the Secretary of State’s Special
Representative for Syria Engagement, my good friend
Ambassador Jim Jeffrey, to underscore the United
States determination and sense of urgency towards
implementing the blue print of resolution 2254 (2015)
for a political transition in Syria, which still remains
stalled by the Russian Federation and its supporters,
although the Council unanimously adopted it three
years ago.
The United States supports the Special Envoy’s
efforts to convene a legitimate, credible and balanced
constitutional committee. We remain prepared to

S/PV. 8475

support the formation of a constitutional committee
once the United Nations is satisfied that the membership,
composition and rules of procedure are balanced. We
once again affirm that the committee must be balanced
in its inclusion of civil society, opposition and regime
representatives if it is to meet the credibility criteria.
The United States welcomes Special Envoy Pedersen’s
plans to explore other potential initiatives within the
four-baskets framework, including constitutional
reform and the need for credible preparations for United
Nations-administered free and fair elections.
In addition, it is clear that violence must stop in
order for a political solution to take hold. One of the
best ways that the Council can support Special Envoy
Pedersen’s efforts on the political track is to ensure the
creation of a stable security environment not just in
Idlib, but throughout Syria. That, of course, will require
the Al-Assad regime and its allies to uphold the calls of
resolution 2254 (2015) for a comprehensive nationwide
ceasefire. Therefore, it is vital that Security Council
members redouble our efforts towards our shared
goal of de-escalating the military conflict in Syria in
order to create a safe and calm environment, alongside
a political process that honours the will of the Syrian
people. To that end, the United States strongly urges
the parties to maintain the Turkish/Russian-brokered
ceasefire agreement in Idlib. We are deeply concerned
about both the increase in air strikes and other military
activity in Idlib.
Terrorism cannot be used as a pretext for targeting
civilians. The United States urges the parties to the
Idlib ceasefire to ensure the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure in Idlib governorate in
accordance with international humanitarian law. As we
have repeatedly stressed since its inception, the Turkish/
Russian-brokered ceasefire is essential for protecting
the nearly 3 million civilians residing in Idlib. Syrians
have experienced significant reductions of air strikes
and civilian deaths since the ceasefire went into effect
in September 2018. Once again, to repeat what we have
said in the Council for many months, any major military
operation in Idlib would be a reckless escalation of the
conflict and would result in a humanitarian catastrophe
far beyond what we have witnessed during previous
regime assaults on eastern Ghouta, Aleppo and Homs.
The international community should find ways to
de-escalate the conflict, including by maintaining the
Idlib, ceasefire in order to save lives and provide space
for the political process.

19-058565/21

S/PV.8475

The situation in the Middle East

Resolution 2254 (2015) also calls on the parties to
release arbitrarily detained individuals, particularly
women and children. Efforts to release detainees,
including abductees and missing persons, held by
the Al-Assad regime and Syrian political opposition
groups, have been insufficient under the auspices of the
Astana guarantors. Progress on the release of detainees
and missing persons is an important step towards
building the trust and confidence necessary to achieve
a political solution, and it is a vital component of a
political solution under resolution 2254 (2015).
Next month will be the eighth anniversary of the
beginning of the Syrian conflict. The United States
believes that a political solution in Syria can be arrived
at only through the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015). We will continue to support the efforts
of the United Nations and Special Envoy Pedersen to
achieve that goal.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for
his valuable briefing. We take this opportunity to offer
him and his team our full support in undertaking their
difficult task. We hope that his efforts will be crowned
by future success in order to move forward the Syrian
political process.
We are meeting today for the first time this year
to discuss the Syrian political issue. It is an issue that,
regrettably, has seen no progress for a number of years.
The State of Kuwait has always stressed that the failure
of the Security Council to implement its resolutions
would prolong and compound conflicts and weaken
its credibility. We have seen that happen in Yemen,
Palestine and a number of other countries, as we see
today in Syria. I am referring in particular to resolution
2254 (2015), which was adopted by consensus in
December 2015. The resolution established a road map
to reach a just political settlement in Syria, facilitated
by the United Nations while led and owned by Syria.
That would contribute to restoring stability in this dear
Arab country, but unfortunately is not translated yet on
the ground.
The Special Envoy therefore has many challenges
ahead, but we are confident that he is determined
to ensure the implementation of the resolution. His
latest visit and meetings with the parties concerned
represent a good beginning, which reflects his resolve
to revitalize the political process in Syria. The Security
Council and the international community must renew
6/21

28/02/2019

their commitment to the political process, as outlined
in resolution 2254 (2015), which established the steps of
a political transition process consisting of many stages,
including the drafting of a constitution and the holding
of free and fair elections, in accordance with the
Constitution and under the supervision of the United
Nations. Those elections would be held according to
the highest international norms of transparency and
accountability, inclusive of all Syrians, including those
living abroad. Resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) are the major
terms of reference regarding the Syrian crisis, and the
Security Council must ensure their implementation.
It has been more than a year since the Sochi
agreement was concluded regarding the establishment
of a constitutional committee. To date, the work of
such a committee has yet to begin. In that context, we
reiterate our call for the committee to be balanced,
credible and inclusive of all sectors of Syrian society
and to devise its working methods. On 15 February,
the Special Envoy expressed in Geneva his hope that
the Committee would meet as soon as possible, also
in Geneva, to begin serious discussions, which would
signal the long-awaited launch of the political process.
Furthermore, like any other political process,
confidence-building measures among the parties are
important; the most prominent of these is the release
of detainees and prisoners. We take note of the recent
release of a number of prisoners, but we need to see
more progress on this issue. We urge the parties to the
conflict to cooperate with the Special Envoy and his
Office to achieve further progress in that regard.
The Syrian crisis has seen many violations of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. Those responsible must be held
accountable. Lasting and comprehensive peace cannot
be achieved without justice or with impunity for those
who committed crimes against humanity. In that
regard, we reiterate our support for the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011.
Perhaps among the most important repercussions of
the Syrian crisis is the fate of the refugees and internally
displaced persons. Their hope must be restored for a
safe and normal life, reunification with their families,
19-05856

28/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

and a safe, voluntary and dignified return to their
homes, in accordance with international norms and
without regard for political considerations or the narrow
interests of any party on the crisis. Measures, such as
arbitrary detentions and the expropriation of property,
are in contradiction of all efforts aimed at ensuring the
safe return for refugees. We also reject any attempt to
undertake demographic changes in Syria.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that there is no military
solution to the crisis in Syria. A solution can be attained
through international concerted efforts to implement
resolution 2254 (2015). The upcoming Brussels
conference will be an important opportunity to mobilize
resources in order to alleviate the humanitarian suffering
of the Syrian people and to renew the international
community’s commitment to resolving the conflict
peacefully, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
so that the brotherly Syrian people can achieve their
legitimate aspirations and realize a peaceful settlement,
agreed to by all parties, while preserving the unity,
independence and sovereignty of Syria.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for his first
briefing to the Council. The lessons he has learned
from his initial contacts and the insights he offers on
the next steps in the political process are particularly
enlightening. At the outset, I would like to assure the
Special Envoy of France’s full support.
Let there be no mistake about the current situation.
It would be a serious error in judgment and a grave
political miscalculation to believe that the Syrian
tragedy is behind us. It is not, as the country begins
its ninth year of conflict. The terrorist threat has not
disappeared — far from it. The ceasefire in the northwest is regularly violated by the regime, the risk of
regional escalation increases day by day due to the
presence of Iran and gross human rights violations by
the regime continue with impunity. The overwhelming
majority of refugees do not plan to return to Syria and
the humanitarian situation remains catastrophic. It is
no surprise then — and I return here to my previous
point — that the vast majority of refugees do not
wish to return to Syria. Statistics from the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
which estimated that 58,000 refugees returned to
Syria in 2018 — barely an increase from 50,000 in
2017 — are telling.

S/PV. 8475

Nonetheless, given that forthright report, France
firmly believes that, for the first time in many years,
there is a small but genuine window of opportunity to
put an end to the Syrian conflict. We have the shared
responsibility to seize that opportunity via an inclusive
political solution because it is the only way to prevent
similar causes and effects of aftershocks of the Syrian
crisis. In other words, to prevent another grim decade in
Syria, it is the responsibility of the Council to overcome
its divisions — I repeat, overcome its divisions — on
the basis of our shared objectives and interests. On
behalf of France, I would like to make an urgent appeal
in that regard. With that objective in mind, I will focus
briefly on three main points.
First, our common priority must be to continue
the fight against terrorism and to work towards a
national ceasefire, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2254 (2015). The fight against Da’esh
continues in north-eastern Syria and in Iraq and, as the
Council knows, is a top priority for France, which will
maintain its involvement on that front. The imminent
fall of Da’esh in Baghouz will be an undeniable military
success but will in no way mark the end of the threat
that Da’esh poses to the region and to our national
territories. In that regard, France welcomes the United
States announcement that it will maintain a military
presence in north-eastern Syria. That is good news for
the ongoing fight against Da’esh and for stabilizing
region in order to prevent the resurgence of the terrorist
group in another form. Pursuing the fight against
terrorism in the north-east requires the protection of
our operational partners on the ground in the fight
against Da’esh. We all know that the coalition’s success
against Da’esh would not have been possible without
the Syrian Democratic Forces.
With regard to the situation in Idlib, I reiterate
France’s deep concern about the strengthening of the
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham group, designated as a terrorist
organization by the United Nations. Its neutralization is
our common objective but we must spare civilians and
bear in mind the possible catastrophic humanitarian,
migration and security consequences of an offensive.
France is concerned about the increase in the number of
ceasefire violations by the Syrian regime, including air
strikes. That is why it is now essential to do all in our
power to preserve the ceasefire. We call in particular
on Russia and Turkey to exercise responsibility as they
continue their efforts.

19-058567/21

S/PV.8475

The situation in the Middle East

Lastly, the Council must unite to ensure respect for
international law and international humanitarian law.
Today, I call on members with influence on the parties
to the conflict to exert pressure in that regard. First
and foremost, that means ensuring the protection of
civilian and humanitarian and medical workers, as well
as free and unhindered humanitarian access. Obstacles
to humanitarian access and the use of torture, forced
conscription and arbitrary detention in areas reclaimed
by the Syrian regime are clearly unacceptable. It is also
imperative to discourage any use of chemical weapons
in Syria and to react firmly to any new cases of such
use. France’s resolve in that regard remains unchanged
and uncompromising.
It is more necessary than ever to pave the way for
a credible political transition under the auspices of the
United Nations. That is our second priority and it is
inextricably linked to the first. The regime’s military
victory, which was achieved thanks to the support of
its two allies and at the cost of considerable human and
material destruction, is in no way a prelude to peace
and reconciliation in Syria. Such an outcome will be
possible only if the regime agrees to sit at the table with
the opposition and negotiate in good faith.
To that end, France fully supports the Special
Envoy’s efforts to establish a comprehensive road
map based on all elements of resolution 2254 (2015),
which is now more than ever our common compass.
That implies working in parallel with efforts on
the constitution to establish credible, inclusive and
non-sectarian governance, preparing for free and fair
elections under the supervision of the United Nations
and developing confidence-building measures that can
create the safe and neutral environment outlined in the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), including by
addressing the issue of detainees and missing persons,
property rights and forced conscription.
The United Nations alone, through the work of the
Special Envoy, will be able to make genuine progress on
those converging priorities. In that regard, we welcome
the Special Envoy’s efforts to establish a constitutional
package as an entry point to the process. That would
require reaching a credible and balanced agreement on
both the composition of the third list for the committee
and on its rules of procedure so that it can start its
work quickly, under the auspices of the United Nations
and within the framework of resolution 2254 (2015).
We lost valuable time last year and it is clear that the
Syrian regime is responsible for failing to establish the
8/21

28/02/2019

committee, contrary to the commitments made by the
Astana group and at the Istanbul Summit.
This will be my last point, and I will make it short.
Today we are at a crossroads, and the Council must
therefore support the efforts of the Special Envoy. Only
an inclusive political solution can provide a lasting
response to the Syrian tragedy, the expectations for
reconciliation and the threat of terrorism. It is also
our responsibility to respond to Syrian victims’ need
for justice, without which peace will be impossible.
That is the aim of our support to the United Nations
investigative mechanisms and to efforts to see justice
done, including in a national capacity, as I brought up
once again at the beginning of the week (see S/PV.8471).
The return of refugees will be essential in the long
run, but the key to return is in Damascus, not New
York, Brussels or anywhere else. It is up to the regime
to establish the conditions that will enable refugees to
return in complete safety and with all the guarantees
necessary to ensuring respect for their freedoms and
the restitution of their property. We all see clearly that
those conditions and guarantees are not in place today,
so we should understand that without irreversible and
credible progress towards a political solution, it will
not be possible to encourage refugees’ return, pave the
way for reconstruction, contemplate any normalization
of our relations with the regime or lift the sanctions on
it. France and the European Union have affirmed that
clear and unambiguous position several times.
Lastly, based on that, France will continue to work
tirelessly with its partners to arrive at a credible political
solution in support of the Special Envoy’s mission. On
behalf of France, I want to once again appeal to every
member of the Council to regroup on that basis, to
stop running on automatic pilot and to move on from
posturing to action. There is not a minute to lose, so let
us get to work.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome Special Envoy Geir Pedersen to
the Council for his first briefing and thank him for his
report. We share many of the views that he expressed.
Needless to say, one of the key points he made was about
the importance of restoring lost confidence not just
inside Syria but around it, among all the stakeholders
who are engaged in Syria.
We welcome the Special Envoy’s willingness to
maintain intensive contacts with the parties to the
Syrian conflict and key participants in the efforts to
19-05856

28/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

resolve the situation in Syria. That is clearly the key to
success of any intermediary. We believe it is important
to maintain a normal working dialogue with Damascus,
which must be involved in all measures designed
to advance the political process and stabilize the
situation in the country. That also applies to the March
Conference in Brussels, incidentally. On 22 January
Mr. Pedersen visited Moscow, where he had extensive
talks with Russia’s Foreign and Defence Ministers,
Sergey Lavrov and Sergey Shoygu. It appears from the
results of this and subsequent meetings of the Special
Envoy with Russian representatives, including Deputy
Foreign Minister Vershinin and Alexander Lavrentiev,
Russia’s special envoy for Syria, that we have been
able to surmount the unpleasant and largely artificially
created incident that occurred in December with regard
to the formation of the constitutional committee.
Together with the Special Envoy and our Astana format
partners Turkey and Iran we are continuing the work of
finalizing the parameters for launching the committee,
created based on the decisions of the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress and resolution 2254 (2015). We
hope to see it launched soon.
We should not fail to note our Turkish and
Iranian partners’ constructive contribution within the
framework of the Astana process, which has enabled us
to achieve qualitative change in the situation in Syria,
ensuring a genuine ceasefire in the greater part of the
country and the start of direct dialogue between the
Government and the armed opposition. We hope that
in the near future we, the Astana troika, will be able
to arrive at mutually acceptable conclusions on the
Idlib de-escalation zone and north-eastern Syria in line
with the mutual understandings reached at the trilateral
summit of the Presidents of Russia, Turkey and Iran in
Sochi on 14 February, and needless to say taking full
account of the position of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
We are willing to work, including in stages and
step by step, to implement the tasks ahead, which
include eliminating the hotbed of terrorism in Idlib
and ensuring the protection of the civilian population.
The permanently frozen situation in north-western
Syria, which is controlled by militants of Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham militants, cannot continue, and those who
want to sit on their hands should understand that. We
should point out that no one wanted to take pity on the
Islamic State in Syria and the Levant by freezing the
situation in Hajin or Raqqa. Incidentally, there were a

S/PV. 8475

great many civilian casualties in those places. In that
regard we can only welcome the words — basically the
admission — of the United States representative that
the fight against terrorism cannot be an excuse for
destroying the civilian population.
We would like to emphasize that, in addition
to the de-escalation and political issues, Astana
has been the platform for discussions of important
confidence-building measures between the opposing
parties such as the exchange of prisoners of war that
the Special Envoy mentioned. The exchanges took
place in November 2018 and in February of this year,
and while they may have been small in number, they
give us hope for further progress in this area. All these
measures are contributing to stabilization in Syria. An
important area of work for the international community
is restoring damaged infrastructure and doing mine
clearance. On 21 February the Government of the
Russian Federation decided to contribute to the United
Nations Mine Action Service budget in order to support
the mine clearance efforts in the Syrian Arab Republic,
and we urge our colleagues to join in these efforts. I
think I can say on behalf of the whole Astana troika that
we are open to cooperating with all interested parties
who sincerely — I emphasize “sincerely” — intend
to help to stabilize and advance a political settlement
in Syria. The quadrilateral summit in Istanbul in
October 2018 was an important contribution to the
bridge-building process.
We want to emphasize that the situation in Syria
has changed for the better, and many people have
acknowledged the changes that have happened. We
have seen positive steps on the part of States of the
region seeking to normalize relations with Damascus.
We believe that economic cooperation and participation
in the restoration of Syria’s national economy will help
to accelerate that process. We hope that an openness
to achieving the full restoration of relations between
the Arab countries and Syria, and Damascus’s speedy
return to the Arab family, will lend significant support
to the Syrian settlement process, in accordance with
the fundamental principles of international law and
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
In its national capacity, as a member of the Security
Council and a participant in the Astana troika, Russia
is ready to continue working with the Special Envoy to
bring peace back to Syria. Mr. Pedersen can count on
our help.

19-058569/21

S/PV.8475

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to commend Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
the quality of his first briefing of the Council in a public
meeting, and to wish him every success in carrying out
his mission.
Côte d’Ivoire has noted with concern the violations
of the agreement reached between Russia and Turkey
on 17 September 2018 establishing a de-escalation
zone in Idlib governorate, particularly by the jihadist
group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which has strengthened
its control over more than 90 per cent of the area.
The violation of that agreement undermines efforts
to stabilize the situation in the Idlib de-escalation
zone and could jeopardize the smooth running of the
political process expected to lead to the formation of
the constitutional committee.
My country is also concerned about the military
escalation in the Hajin region, in south-east Deir ezZor governorate, where military operations against the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant have continued
and affected nearly 25,000 displaced persons from that
region. In that adverse context, Côte d’Ivoire urges the
parties to the conflict to cease hostilities and favour
the path of dialogue to ensure lasting peace in the
Syrian Arab Republic. It wishes to remind the warring
parties of their obligation to respect human rights and
international humanitarian law, whose violations shall
not go unpunished, whoever the perpetrators may be.
My country therefore calls on all actors in the Syrian
conflict, civil society and the international community
to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes the recognition of
the authority of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons to identify the perpetrators of
chemical-weapons use in Syria, which occurred at the
end of the fourth special session of the Conference of
the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
held in The Hague on 27 June 2018.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes all initiatives aimed at the
political settlement of the Syrian crisis, including the
holding of the tripartite summit on 14 February 2019,
held in Sochi, and it takes note of the resulting final
communiqué. Similarly, my country welcomes the
10/21

28/02/2019

progress made within the pilot project of the working
group established by the Astana process and the United
Nations to investigate the fate of missing persons and
release detainees. That progress, as demonstrated by
prisoner exchanges between the Syrian Government
and armed groups between 24 November 2018 and
12 February 2019, contributes to building trust between
the parties to the conflict and creating the necessary
conditions for the continuation of the political process.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its full
support for the efforts of Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, and calls on the
Syrian parties to strengthen their cooperation with him
in order to stimulate new momentum in the political
process, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). It
also encourages the guarantors of the complementary
processes in Astana and Sochi to continue their efforts
towards a definitive and lasting solution to the crisis
in Syria.
Lastly, it urges the parties to the conflict to agree
on the effective establishment of the constitutional
committee to draft the new constitution with a view
to holding free and impartial elections under the
supervision of the United Nations.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his first briefing to the
Security Council and reassure him of our full support.
I will focus on two points — the political situation
and the situation on the ground.
First, with respect to the political situation, in
2015 — four years ago already — the Council mandated
the United Nations to facilitate the intra-Syrian
political process for the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015). In Belgium’s view, the Syrian conflict can
be resolved only through a negotiated political process,
in accordance with that resolution and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). Resolution 2254
(2015) contains all the ingredients necessary for a
political solution — a political process, a revision of the
Constitution and free elections with the participation of
the Syrian diaspora in an environment that protects the
rights of Syrians.
A
Syrian-owned,
Syrian-led
constitutional
committee, facilitated by the United Nations, has the
potential to serve as an entry point or a key that opens
the door to other aspects of the political process. We
19-05856

28/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

support the important role that the Special Envoy must
play in its establishment. Nevertheless, if we want
that committee to be a real instrument that works
effectively, we must ensure that its composition is
credible, balanced, inclusive and representative of all
components of Syrian society and that each agreement
on its composition is accompanied by procedures and
working methods.
Significant work was done last year and extensive
consultations have taken place. Unfortunately, that work
has not yet been completed, neither in terms of the formation
of the committee nor in terms of working procedures.
It is now up to the new Special Envoy to put in place
his own strategy and we encourage him to explore
the various possible avenues, within the framework
of resolution 2254 (2015), in order to achieve
concrete progress.
That peaceful, inclusive and sustainable transition
must take place in a safe, stable and calm environment.
On the one hand, lasting peace is not possible without a
reconciliation process and reconciliation is not possible
without justice. We attach particular importance to the
fight against impunity and, in that regard, we support the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011, the commission
of inquiry mandated by the Human Rights Council
and the accountability mechanism set up within the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
On the other hand, the voluntary and sustainable
return of refugees will take place only if life in a safe
and dignified context is guaranteed. In order to ensure
a dignified return, there must be an end to looting,
expropriation and arbitrary enforcement of the rules.
Syrians aspire to a country based on the rule of law.
Security goes far beyond the absence of armed conflict;
it also includes the protection of fundamental rights and
the absence of repression and the forced recruitment
into the armed forces. Thousands of Syrians continue
to be illegally arrested and arbitrarily detained. We call
on all actors to continue their efforts to put an end to
those practices.
Secondly, with regard to the situation on the ground,
violence continues and is causing the displacement
of thousands of people, particularly in the north. In
Idlib, the agreement between Turkey and Russia, which

S/PV. 8475

was signed in September 2018, has helped to avert the
prospect of a humanitarian disaster but the situation
remains particularly fragile. It is imperative that all
parties remain fully committed to the agreement.
In Deir ez-Zor, the last fights against Da’esh
are taking place. The end of Da’esh as a terrorist
organization with a territorial base does not mean
the end of the threat it poses. It is essential that the
international community continue its efforts to prevent
its resurgence and capacity to cause harm. While
neutralizing and judging those responsible for Da’esh’s
crimes, parallel work is needed to avoid reproducing
the causes that led to its creation and development. We
must do everything we can to ensure the protection of
civilians. In that regard, we call for a national cessation
of hostilities.
As this is my first statement to the Council on
the political situation in Syria, allow me to end with
this reflection.
In order to continue this difficult mission, the
Special Envoy will need the support of the international
community, the parties to the conflict and the countries
of the region, and he will also need the members of the
Security Council to work together. The success of his
mission will also depend largely on the political will
of the parties to the conflict and we urge all those
who have influence on the parties to use it to support
Mr. Pedersen’s efforts. Ultimately, it is only if there is
a minimum of trust between the parties and if the sense
of urgency is shared by all of us that we can really make
progress towards the essential settlement of the conflict.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): First, I would like to thank Ambassador
Pederson for his briefing and wish him every success in
his work as the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for
Syria. We are confident that his extensive diplomatic
experience will serve him well on the long and often
tortuous road travelled by his predecessors in the quest
for peace in Syria. We recognize that the challenges
ahead are very serious.
For almost eight long years now, the Syrian people
have been plunged into a conflict with devastating
consequences — a conflict that has stripped millions
of people of the conditions necessary to achieve a
promising future. We must work to ensure that a new
Syrian generation is born free from the odious scourge
of war. The Dominican Republic is a faithful believer
in dialogue and in the concerted search for peaceful

19-0585611/21

S/PV.8475

The situation in the Middle East

solutions to conflicts. We therefore understand that the
process of mediation and rapprochement between the
parties responsible for driving the political renewal of
Syria must be promoted on the basis of the provisions
and guidelines of resolution 2254 (2015), thus ensuring
its full implementation.
Our task is clear — we must work together as
one to strengthen the role of the United Nations as
facilitator of the political process in Syria and as a
guarantor of conditions that are viable for all parties
but especially for the Syrian population. We know that
the task ahead of us in this new stage in the Syrian
conflict is not easy — how to unify criteria, purposes
and objectives. That is what is implied by what we see
as a political process that must be carried out by Syria
and for the Syrians as shapers of their own future. That
will also require the full participation of all levels of
society, including organized groups, in an inclusive,
transparent and safe environment. The achievement of
a sustainable and lasting peace in Syria that leads to
national reconciliation in a fragile and complex context
leads us to reflect on two points that we consider crucial
to highlight collectively.
First, we must build confidence in the political
process so that the Syrian people can make it their
own as part of a broader and more integral political
transformation towards the attainment of their own
peace. We believe it is important to emphasize that
there is a need for concrete facts that demonstrate the
necessary political will to move forward so that the
Syrian people can see the real fruits of the process, such
as the provision of sustainable solutions for the civilian
population and for its security and protection, as well
as the acceleration of the process of releasing detainees
and hostages and the clarification of the situation of
disappeared persons.
Secondly, we must ensure the full participation of
civil society, in particular Syrian women, both inside
and outside the country. Syrian women should no longer
be seen as passive entities, victims of war or consorts
of terrorists. The reality we see is that, more and more,
Syrian women are owning new spaces as activists,
journalists, artists and entrepreneurs. Let us put in their
hands the construction of a new country and we will see
extraordinary results.
As Special Envoy De Mistura said on 20 December
in this Chamber (see S/PV.8434), we need a renewed
sense of our common purpose and concerted action in
12/21

28/02/2019

the Security Council if 2019 is to be the real turning
point for Syria. The Dominican Republic shares this
sense of renewal and is willing to participate in that
spirit by building bridges and fostering dialogue. Let us
be ambitious in our aspirations.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for this
briefing and commend him for his active efforts since
his assumption of his position to promote a political
settlement in Syria.
Years of conflict in Syria have brought profound
suffering to the country and its people. The Syrian
people long for peace and to return home and rebuild
their normal lives as soon as possible. The large-scale
conflict in Syria has essentially come to an end.
China welcomes the meeting in Sochi on 14 February
of leaders from Russia, Turkey and Iran to discuss
the Syrian issue, which produced a joint statement
reaffirming continued efforts to crack down on terrorist
groups and individuals listed by the Security Council,
as well as a renewed commitment to the Syrian political
process. As the next step, the international community
should focus on promoting work in the following areas.
First, we must continue to advance. the process of
political settlement in Syria. The United Nations should
strengthen coordination with the Syrian Government,
promote the prompt formation of a representative
Syrian constitutional committee that is acceptable to
all and that accommodates the legitimate concerns of
the Syrian Government and all other parties with a
view to launching an effective and sustained Syrian
political process. The United Nations should continue
to intensify its efforts and act as the main channel
of mediation. The members of the Council should be
united and speak with one voice in order to create the
conditions for a political solution to the Syrian issue.
Secondly, we must persist in combating terrorist
forces. There is a tendency for terrorist groups in Idlib
to re-emerge, which threatens Syria’s security and
stability and hinders reconstruction and the return
of refugees. The international community should
strengthen counter-terrorism cooperation, harmonize
standards, crack down on all terrorist groups listed
by the Council and prevent the resurgence of terrorist
organizations to undermine the hard-won stability of
the security situation.
19-05856

28/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Thirdly, we must encourage Syrian parties to meet
each other half way. In accordance with the spirit of
resolution 2254 (2015), on the basis of respect for
Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, and in line with the principle of a Syrianowned and Syrian-led process, the parties concerned
in the Syrian issue should promote the adoption of
an inclusive political process by all Syrian parties
and seek a solution acceptable to all. China has been
consistently committed to a political solution in Syria.
We stand to ready to enhance communication and
cooperation with the United Nations and all other
relevant parties and to play an active and constructive
role in advancing the political settlement in
Syria.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): My delegation would like to
welcome my good friend, Ambassador Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, with
whom we look forward to working closely in moving
the peace process in Syria forward. We wish once again
to reaffirm our full support and cooperation for him and
his team. We would also like to thank Special Envoy
Pedersen for his briefing to the Council today, having
taken note of his various visits and meetings with all
parties concerned since he took office on 7 January.
Indonesia calls on all parties to support the Special
Envoy’s efforts in facilitating a peaceful solution to
the Syrian crisis within the framework of the Geneva
process and resolution 2254 (2015). We also believe
that it is essential that the Security Council strongly
signal to all parties our full backing of the efforts of the
Special Envoy.
We have noted with thanks Mr. Pedersen’s
insights, in particular, the progress vis-à-vis the
delivery of humanitarian assistance in Rukban, the
release of detainees and the relative calm in several
areas. Nevertheless, the situation is still precarious,
particularly in terms of, inter alia, the continued threat
of terrorism by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the issue of internally displaced persons. We would like
to highlight several points.
First, Indonesia believes that it is critical that we
ensure our support and commitment to establishing
an inclusive and credible political process in Syria,
including the setting up of a constitutional committee
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.
This is indeed key to establishing a Syrian-owned and

S/PV. 8475

Syrian-led political solution that is facilitated by the
United Nations, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015).
The establishment of a constitutional committee
is not an easy task, but it is indeed doable. We note
that the Astana guarantors presented a third list to the
Special Envoy in Geneva on 18 December 2018. We
call on the Special Envoy to continue his engagement
and consultations with the Syrian Government and the
guarantors, bearing in mind that the necessity of having
the first meeting of the constitutional committee in
Geneva is greater than ever. All parties’ commitment
and consistency in making progress in this process is
critical, as it would open the door towards efforts that
could further the political process. And on this journey
of finding a lasting political solution, the international
community must always bear in mind that it is the
Syrian people who will decide their own future.
Secondly, my delegation strongly believes that a
truly genuine dialogue is crucial to the success of the
peace process, as it is the most important foundation for
building trust and confidence. To that end, Indonesia
sincerely hopes that the dialogue among all relevant
stakeholders will continue, with a view to contributing
to a credible and sustainable solution to the conflict.
In the short run, dialogue is also critical to moving the
process forward by helping to build consensus and curb
the violence and hostilities that continue to imperil the
prospects of peace.
Thirdly, and as the Security Council has said for
many years, all sides must cease hostilities and avoid
resorting to force. This is fundamental for progress
to be made on the political front. In that regard, we
again call on all parties to respect the current ceasefire
agreements. We believe that it is important to reiterate
the important role of ceasefire agreements in facilitating
the delivery of humanitarian assistance, which saves
civilian lives and thereby promotes the cause of peace
and reconciliation.
I wish to make clear that we have no option but
to pursue a political solution in Syria in the spirit of
resolution 2254 (2015). In addition, we all know how
devastating the humanitarian situation in the country
is. Having heard Special Envoy Pedersen’s briefing just
now on the precarious situation with regard to plight
of civilians, displaced persons, refugees and poverty,
we can safely say that, unless we achieve the objective
of a political solution, the humanitarian situation will
continue to deteriorate. In Indonesia’s view, that is

19-0585613/21

S/PV.8475

The situation in the Middle East

an option we cannot afford to entertain. We reaffirm
our national commitment to a comprehensive solution
within the prism of full respect for Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and within the context of the
United Nations-facilitated political process.
Finally, we urge all parties to support Ambassador
Pedersen in his very important task of moving the
political process forward and leading the way to a
peaceful resolution to the conflict. We have listened
carefully to the five goals that Ambassador Pedersen
laid out. We believe that they could form a valuable
road map for the achievement of a durable solution.
We naturally welcome the five goals, since the number
five has always been important for us. We commend
Ambassador Pedersen’s efforts to continue engaging
with all parties, including civil society actors, women
and young people.
In conclusion, we would like to imagine a
prosperous, stable and peaceful Syria arising in the
near future, where children can roam and play freely in
the streets of the Syrian Republic. We hope that Special
Envoy Pedersen can bend history in the direction that
the people of Syria expect and could ultimately accept.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): The delegation of
South Africa would like join others in thanking the
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, for his
insightful, broad and forward-looking briefing. As this
is the first time that my delegation participates in the
political briefing on Syria, please allow me to join my
colleagues in congratulating Mr. Pedersen on assuming
his important role as the facilitator of the political
process in Syria. He has a challenging task ahead of him.
Our responsibility as the Security Council, together
with the backing of the international community,
is to provide him with all the support necessary to
successfully facilitate a Syrian-led, United Nationssponsored political process, as outlined in resolution
2254 (2015). We welcome his determination to build
upon the solid progress achieved by his predecessor,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura.
Next month will mark eight years since the crisis
in Syria began. We are extremely concerned about the
devastating and tragic consequences that the war in
Syria continues to have on the people of the country. It
is also having an increasingly destabilizing impact on
the wider region, through the displacement of people,
the exacerbation of political and sectarian differences
and the spread of extremism. It is the Security Council’s
14/21

28/02/2019

responsibility to ensure that political progress is made
and that Syria returns to normal. The people of Syria
deserve a future that is stable and prosperous.
Since the Syrian conflict erupted, South Africa
has maintained a principled position by reiterating the
importance of protecting the fundamental interests
and rights of the Syrian people, of maintaining
peace and stability in the Middle East region, and
upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the basic norms governing
international relations.
We reiterate our view that the only sustainable
solution to the Syrian question remains the achievement
of a political solution through an inclusive Syrian-led
dialogue aimed at achieving a political transition that
reflects the will of the Syrian people, with guaranteed
protection for all groups in Syrian society. We
therefore call upon the Council to unite behind the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) as the road
map towards a long-term political solution in Syria.
We welcome the extensive consultations that
Mr. Pedersen has undertaken with the Government
of Syria, the opposition parties and key partners
in the region since January, when he took up
his responsibilities. Those comprehensive and in-depth
engagements are critical to building trust among
the people of Syria and the region and to move the
process forward. Equally important to the success of
the political process in Syria is the need to respect the
ceasefire and de-escalation agreements and to continue
to fight terrorism.
Furthermore,
South
Africa
commends
Mr. Pedersen’s efforts to continue overseeing the
deliberations on the establishment of the constitutional
committee. We call upon all relevant parties to make
every possible effort to support Ambassador Pedersen
in that endeavour.
In order to ensure that the Syrian-led and United
Nations-sponsored political dialogue does not end
behind big walls and in great halls in foreign countries,
we need to facilitate the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees to resettle peacefully in their
ancestral lands. We need to receive regular feedback
from Mr. Pedersen and to ensure that all the groups have
a seat at the table and participate in talks on progress
so that the Syrian people are not reduced to being mere
observers in a process that will determine their future
and that of future generations. Rather, we must make
19-05856

28/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

sure they participate in and own the outcome of the
process and build a stable, prosperous Syria.
Finally, the Council and the international
community should support a political solution to the
situation in Syria as a matter of priority and continue to
support the United Nations, including the Special Envoy,
as well as other mediation efforts aimed at resolving
the conflict. South Africa continues to maintain that
democracy is an unassailable right of the Syrian people
and therefore remains convinced that in a complex and
diverse society such as Syria’s, there can be no military
solution, only a political negotiated settlement.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive
briefing and commend him for his clear methodology
of work. I warmly welcome him to the Security Council
and wish him all the best. He has our full support.
Regrettably, as the Syrian conflict enters its ninth
year, continuous violence is widespread on the ground
and brutal violations of international law, including
abuses of human rights and international humanitarian
law, still take place. Now, at the beginning of 2019, we
are at a critical juncture. We strongly believe that the
Idlib ceasefire agreement introduced some positive
dynamics. However, questions remain about the
future sustainability of the arrangement, the degree of
compliance by parties to the conflict in Syria, as well
as the ongoing difficult situation of internally displaced
persons and other civilians present in Idlib and its
surroundings. As we heard two days ago from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the situation is especially worrying in the north-west
and north-east of the country. We need to once again
emphasize the need to prevent military hostilities, which
could have disastrous humanitarian consequences.
Let me also briefly touch on the very important
issue of accountability for war crimes. We urge all
parties to the conflict to condemn arbitrary detentions,
kidnappings, hostage-taking and forced disappearances,
and to protect humanitarian workers and journalists.
I underscore that the political process continues
to fail to gain traction, including with regard to the
establishment of the constitutional committee, the first
step towards a genuine political process under United
Nations supervision. We see a special role for Syrian
women in that regard.

S/PV. 8475

Let me underline something that has already been
mentioned by many around this table — no military
solution to the conflict can bring sustainable peace
to the Syrians. Instead, we should aim at reaching a
framework for an intra-Syrian framework political
agreement. A cessation of hostilities may give a chance
for peace talks to succeed under the auspices of the
United Nations in Geneva and to gain momentum so
that a political solution may finally be reached. We
also call on the Astana guarantors to follow through
on their commitment to protecting civilians as a matter
of priority.
Let me also insist that any political solution must
be brokered in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
The United Nations, and particularly the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for Syria, has a particular
role to play in that process. That is why we express our
full support for all of the Envoy’s efforts to establish
a constitutional committee as soon as possible. We
ask all the actors involved, in particular the Astana
guarantors, to support that process. The constitutional
committee should be established now, as a matter of
priority, and further steps should swiftly follow to
enable a negotiated political transition process. It will
require the full and constructive engagement of all
parties to the conflict. A special role must be played
by the Syrian authorities, who should participate in the
negotiations in good faith and without preconditions.
Allow me to reiterate the European Union’s
common position on the reconstruction of Syria. We
believe that it should commence once an inclusive
political transition is firmly under way, as we need to
support the safe return of the millions of Syrian people
who have fled their homes. We believe that the primary
long-term solution for Syrian refugees throughout the
region is their sustainable, safe, dignified and voluntary
return to their country of origin, in accordance with
international law and the principle of non-refoulement.
That is why the European Union is organizing the
third Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future
of Syria in March, demonstrating our commitment
to millions of people affected by the conflict. The
conference will also renew international support for
the United Nations-facilitated Syrian-led and -owned
political process, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communiqué.

19-0585615/21

S/PV.8475

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me too welcome the
new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria.
As our Polish colleague just remarked, his briefing
was very clear. He has a very clear methodological
approach, and I can only say that we stand fully behind
the five priorities he presented.
I believe that, on the basis of resolution 2254
(2019) and under United Nations leadership, there
is a window of opportunity to find a solution to this
terrible conflict. Let me also echo what my Belgian
colleague highlighted — that what is key is to gain the
confidence of all of the participants, which is the basis
for Mr. Pedersen’s success.
From a German perspective, and as a number
of colleagues from Kuwait, France, Belgium
and Poland have added, there needs to be a fifth
priority — accountability. Reconciliation in Syria will
not be possible without accountability. Germany is now
prosecuting members of the Syrian regime who have
been accused of abhorrent crimes. It is necessary that
we stop impunity, and Germany fully supports the
International Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011. As in other crises
and conflicts, no lasting reconciliation will be possible
without an end to impunity.
Let me also highlight the need at this stage for
confidence-building measures. I believe that the
Special Envoy mentioned the releases of 42 detainees.
The Russian Ambassador also welcomed that. I believe
that Russia will continue to exert pressure on the Syrian
regime so that there are additional releases. With regard
to confidence-building measures, we therefore have
to do more so that additional detainees are released,
those abducted are freed and we enjoy further clarity
concerning missing persons. With regard to returns, we
need those confidence-building measures. People will
come home only if they know that there is no torture,
that there is no use of chemical weapons, that there
will be no forced recruitment and that their homes are
not expropriated.
Among the priorities that the Special Envoy
mentioned, I wanted to highlight the constitutional
committee. I think that that is extremely important. I
agree with my Russian colleague, who, with regard to
the third list, mentioned the unpleasant circumstances
16/21

28/02/2019

of December 2018. Perhaps, we have a different
interpretation of that. We fully support the decision
made by Staffan de Mistura at that time to reject the
proposals made by the Astana group concerning the
third list. It is very important that, with regard to the
constitutional committee, we have a credible, balanced
and inclusive committee, because we need that as a
basis for the political process. In that context, I wish
the Special Envoy good luck in achieving that goal. I
would also encourage him, in putting the list, together
to ensure that women are represented. Thirty per cent
representation would be a minimal amount, as they
represent 50 per cent of the population. I think that it
should be 50 per cent, but 30 per cent would already be
a positive step. We know, after all, that the women and
children have suffered most in the conflict and that they
have to be represented. We appreciate his mentioning
civil society and that he wants to engage the latter in
finding a political solution.
My last point concerns the humanitarian situation.
Germany is among the largest donors of humanitarian
aid. My Polish colleague just mentioned that the
European Union (EU) has scheduled another donors’
conference for March. The EU is the largest donor of
humanitarian aid and will also potentially be a major
donor in terms of reconstruction. In that regard, we
would have liked to demonstrate to our colleagues in
the Security Council what Brussels can do by taking
a trip there next month. In any case, I can only repeat
what my French and Polish colleagues said, which is
that we will participate in reconstruction only with a
credible and inclusive political process and transition
under way.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for
the briefing by Mr. Pedersen. We acknowledge his
intense work with a view to establishing a constructive
dialogue and relations built on trust with the key actors,
while gaining detailed knowledge of their positions. We
are familiar with his exemplary qualifications, wish
him every success in navigating the delicate task ahead
of him and reiterate our full support.
Given the impact of the Syrian conflict on the
country’s population, regional stability and the
credibility of the Security Council, we reaffirm the
urgent need to move forward the inclusive political
process under the auspices of the United Nations. The
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution
2254 (2015) must continue to guide our work. We stress
19-05856

28/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the importance for all parties to engage constructively
in finding a political solution, while looking towards
the future and showing flexibility and national unity so
as to build the trust needed to promote reconciliation.
That essential positive spirit must be immediately
reflected in efforts to draft a new constitution laying
the political and institutional foundations for achieving
sustainable peace in Syria.
We hope that the constitutional committee will be
convened in Geneva as soon as possible. To that end, we
believe that it is necessary for the parties to continue to
work on measures fostering an improved environment
of understanding, including the release of detainees,
the identification of missing persons and the transfer
human remains. We welcome the progress that has been
made in this area under the Astana agreement, and we
encourage further substantive developments.
We also stress the need to avoid any escalation of
the conflict that would undermine the prospects for
reaching a political settlement. Maintaining respect
for the Idlib agreement, brokered by Turkey and the
Russian Federation, is of fundamental importance in
those circumstances. We welcome the willingness of
both countries to seek peaceful solutions to the issue of
terrorism, which is particularly acute in north-western
Syria. Another major challenge concerns addressing
the grave situation faced by millions of refugees and
internally displaced persons, which entails not only
the availability of financial resources, but mustering
the political to guarantee them a voluntary, safe
and dignified return under internationally accepted
parameters. The property rights of those persons must
not be abrogated in any way.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Peru’s full commitment
to preserving the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity of Syria. Accordingly, any de-escalation or other
measures, including the presence of foreign forces to
combat terrorism, must always be temporary.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will add our voice
to all those welcoming the Special Envoy and thanking
him for his briefing.
I think that there has been a lot of identity of view
today, and it is all centred around our support for the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria. I just
want to note that, to date, we have had resolutions, we
have got principles, we have got baskets, we have got
pillars and we have not had any meaningful progress,
in particular with regard to the notion of a political

S/PV. 8475

settlement. I believe therefore that the most useful thing
I can do today is to add the United Kingdom’s voice
to all those pledging to support the Special Envoy, as
well as to highlight one theme that I think nearly every
speaker has touched upon.
As the Special Envoy said, that concerns the critical
importance of an eventual settlement that is inclusive
of all the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people,
which is related to what the German Ambassador just
said about reconstruction. For Syria to be rehabilitated
within the international community in the way
that we all want to see, there needs to be a political
settlement firmly based on resolution 2254 (2015) and
a representative set of politics in Syria that address all
the underlying issues that led to the crisis in the first
place. We are not going to get there quickly, and I am
not going to talk about the constitutional committee,
which has bedevilled the Security Council for far
too long. I am going to say that we trust the Special
Envoy to use his very best efforts to make progress on
that absolutely critical part.
To avoid any doubt, there is nothing ideological
in the United Kingdom’s position on this. We want a
political settlement that is inclusive and credible and
one that will last. We will support the Special Envoy
to the hilt in reaching that settlement. I would like to
put that on the table because I think it is a very critical
point. I join all those speakers who have called on
members of the Council with strong influence on the
Syrian authorities to use that influence to support the
Special Envoy in making serious progress, because the
situation has gone on too long. I really hope that by the
time the Special Envoy returns next month, there will
be something more to say than the messages that we
have repeated for so many months and so many years.
The other point I wanted to make is about Idlib.
I agree with other speakers who have made the very
important point about our concern for Idlib and for the
safety of civilians there. The fight against terrorism is
not a license to harm civilians, and I think that point
bears repeating. I endorse what other speakers have
said about humanitarian access.
Lastly, I would like to make common cause with
the French representative and his remarks about
north-eastern Syria. We too welcome the American
announcement. It is very important. There is more to be
done against Da’esh, even as the territorial manifestation
of Da’esh is being defeated. I hope that we can continue

19-0585617/21

S/PV.8475

The situation in the Middle East

to collaborate on combating terrorism but that ought
to be in the context of assisting an overall political
settlement in Syria. I repeat that it is not an excuse or a
justification to be used by the Syrian authorities to go
after the Syrian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Equatorial Guinea.
We welcome the new Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and
thank him for his briefing on recent developments
in Syria. This was his first briefing to the Security
Council. Equatorial Guinea would like to extend its
full support for his new mission. We are pleased that,
since his first meeting, held in mid-January with
the Damascus authorities, he has expressed his full
willingness to make every effort to achieve a credible
political solution that will allow for a lasting resolution
to a conflict that has lasted more than eight years. Such
a commitment reaffirms, without a doubt, that there is
no military solution to the conflict, but only a political
one. Based on that premise, the Special Envoy would
agree with me that it is essential to establish objective,
frank and unhindered cooperation between the Syrian
authorities and the United Nations, as well as with the
Astana guarantors, with the aim of exploring common
ground and divisions.
We would like to see progress in establishing
the constitutional committee. We believe that the
committee could be very valuable in promoting a
peaceful and inclusive solution to the conflict. The
Syrian Government has managed to strengthen its
control and authority throughout its national territory.
Given the situation, we believe that the Government
must demonstrate considerable willingness to negotiate
and make concessions in order to reach a broad-based,
acceptable political solution and end the violence that
has affected the country for more than eight years.
With the relative decrease in the level of violence
and expected increase in humanitarian aid for a
population that has been adversely affected by the war,
the political process must be accelerated. The former
Special Envoy made a considerable effort in the past
four years to promote the political process, with the
support of the Council. The current Special Envoy has
our ongoing support to ensure that efforts continue
with a view to reaching the desired outcome that
Syrians and the international community long for. That
18/21

28/02/2019

is why we welcome the meetings between Mr. Pedersen
and the Syrian opposition, in particular the Syrian
Negotiation Committee and the Russian authorities,
the recent summit of the Astana guarantors in Sochi, as
well as the meeting with the High Representative of the
European Union.
For the Government of Equatorial Guinea, it is now
time for Syria and all parties involved to move into an
active phase of the political process. In that regard, we
have high hopes for the transition to an active political
process, which includes establishing a constitutional
committee, drafting a constitution, and developing
a mechanism to adopt and proclaim the constitution,
which would all improve the situation in Syria. We
emphasize the need to establish a mechanism to ensure
that it is launched and becomes operational, under the
auspices of the United Nations, as agreed in January
2018 in Sochi.
We hope that the third list, on civil society
representatives, will not deviate from the objective
of creating a balanced, inclusive and trustworthy
constitutional committee, in accordance with the
decisions of the Congress of the Syrian National
Dialogue, held in Sochi, and resolution 2254 (2015).
In that regard, we encourage the Special Envoy to
continue to consult with the parties in a timely manner
in order to achieve a list that enjoys the broadest
possible consensus of all parties. As we recently stated,
Equatorial Guinea hopes that there will be no further
delays in establishing the constitutional committee and
that the deadlock in negotiations will not undermine the
Astana process. We encourage Special Envoy Pedersen
to continue exploring all opportunities to overcome the
obstacles on the path to establishing the committee. In
so doing, he will be able to convene its first meeting
without delay.
In the hopes that the third Brussels Conference
on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region,
scheduled for 12-14 March, will succeed in mobilizing
the $9 billion required for the United Nations
Humanitarian Response Plan to ease the suffering of
millions of Syrians who have endured the consequences
of the conflict since 2011, Equatorial Guinea will
remain fully committed to a political resolution to the
Syrian crisis, within the framework of resolution 2254
(2015).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
19-05856

28/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

I now give the floor the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome
Mr. Geir Pedersen and thank him for his first briefing
to the Council.
I sympathize with Geir Pedersen today and express
my solidarity with him in the light of the worrisome
number of preconditions and refusals expressed by
some colleagues — I repeat, by some and not all of
our colleagues — while others have encouraged him
to move forward in implementing his mandate and
carrying out his noble task, which has our approval.
Today, we have heard a staggering series of moody
and selective opinions concerning the mandate of
the so-called Special Enjoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, nearly six years after the beginning of the
Envoy’s mission. Six years, and we are still hearing
strange, moody and selective opinions concerning the
mandate of the Special Envoy. Of course, the objective
of those opinions is to stick a spoke in the wheels and
hamper him in his efforts and mandate, while putting
political pressure on him and distorting his objective
reading of the situation in my country. That is why my
advice for my dear colleague Geir Pedersen would be
to reduce the number of briefings that he delivers to
the Council so that he can carry out his noble mission
in accordance with his mandate, which he knows and
understands very well and which we support.
During the Special Envoy’s visit last month, he
held useful discussions in Damascus. We affirmed
Syria’s readiness to cooperate with him in order to
guarantee the success of his mission and facilitate a
Syrian-led and owned inter-Syrian dialogue for moving
forward with the political process. That is, first and
foremost, a Syrian interest, more so than that of any
other country. In conjunction with that, we affirmed to
him our pursuit of efforts to eliminate terrorism, put an
end to the illegitimate foreign presence across Syrian
territories and preserve the effective maintenance
of Syria’s unity, sovereignty and independence. Any
political process that does not take those elements into
account will remain an unrealistic solution without
political prospects.
That said, I would like to recall what the statement
our American colleague has just made, which was
commended by my British and French colleagues,
about the decision of the United States Administration

S/PV. 8475

to maintain an occupying force in part of the Syrian
territory. That was said in the presence of members
of the Security Council, who are responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
mandated to implement scores of resolutions adopted
by the Council, which stipulate that the Council is
unanimous in favour of preserving the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of
Syria. The Council’s members have affirmed that in
more than 20 resolutions. Nevertheless, today we have
heard our American colleague, commended with pride
by my British and French colleagues, talking about the
decision of the United States Administration to maintain
the presence of 200 or 400 intelligence elements and
marine troops on a dear part of our territory.
In that context, I note that we stand ready to directly
consider, with Mr. Pedersen during his next visit to
Damascus, issues relating to cooperation between the
United Nations and Syria, including the formation of
a constitutional committee and the various elements
relating to that. However, it is now clear that those who
are delaying the launch of the work of that committee
are the same parties that are interfering in the internal
affairs of Syria and seeking to impose their agenda
and preconditions on the actions of the committee. In
that respect, we stress that any action pertaining to the
constitution must be founded on the principle that the
Syrian people alone have the right to decide the future
of their country, without foreign interference, given
that the Constitution and all related issues are a purely
sovereign matter, solely decided upon by Syrians.
The first paragraph of every resolution adopted by
the Council on what has been called the Syrian crisis
states that the Security Council reaffirms
“its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Syria and to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations”.
Those are the words of the Security Council. That
commitment, which goes hand in hand with the
common denominator that is supposed to bring
us together — namely, respect for the provisions
of the Charter and the principles of international
law, — immediately requires the following.
First, the illegitimate presence of foreign
forces, including American, French, British and
Turkish forces, in all territories of the Syrian Arab
Republic must be brought to an end and the so-called

19-0585619/21

S/PV.8475

The situation in the Middle East

international coalition must be dissolved so as to end
the war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
by that coalition, including the total destruction
of the city of Raqqa, which was undertaken on the
pretext of eliminating Da’esh there. In addition, much
infrastructure was destroyed that was symbolic of the
development of the Syrian people and took many years
to build.
Any foreign military presence in Syria, without the
approval of the Syrian Government, is a full-fledged
aggression that needs to be ended immediately. That is
how we, as a State, would deal with this issue. In that
context, my country categorically rejects the hostile
and changing statements made by the United States
Administration with respect to keeping a reduced force
in my country, regardless of the pretexts given to justify
such presence.
Secondly, the efforts of the Syrian State, its
allies and friends to combat the remnants of terrorist
groups such as Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front, as
well as entities and individuals related to them, must
be supported. Any support for those terrorist groups
must cease. Moreover, work to return foreign terrorist
fighters, including Europeans and others, to their
countries of origin and to hold them accountable for
the crimes that they committed against the Syrian and
Iraqi peoples must be given support. The fundamental
pillar of the terrorist war to which my country has been
subject has always been the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters, who were brought to Syria from the
four corners of the globe. Indeed, more than 100,000
terrorists were sent to Syria from more than 100
Member States of this international Organization.
Around five years after the Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 2170 (2014), which called for the
immediate withdrawal of all foreign terrorist fighters
from Syria, a European official just told us that “the
return of our terrorist fellow citizens from Syria
represents a danger for my country”. That official
has thereby deviated from the propaganda that has
been broadcast by his country for years about those
terrorists being birds of peace and members of the
Syrian moderate opposition. Another European official
just told us that those terrorists are “the enemies of
European nations”. That official has also deviated
from his country’s years-long propaganda campaign,
which holds that “those are jihadists and friends of the
Syrian people”.
20/21

28/02/2019

Members of the Council recall what Laurent Fabius,
former French Foreign Minister, said in Marrakech on
12 December 2012, to the effect that French jihadists
are doing a good job in Syria, and I now repeat his
words in French in order to help my French colleague
to recall them. Worse still, a third European official
considers that the return of those terrorists to Europe
is an “extremely difficult matter”. I would like to
ask this European official why it was easy for some
Governments to recruit, finance, train and send those
European terrorists to Syria.
The irresponsible position regarding the return of
foreign terrorist fighters to their home countries and
their prosecution for what they have done in Syria and
Iraq clearly proves that some countries are afraid of the
information that the terrorists would reveal about the
role of the States that sponsored them. It also shows
that those countries would like their terrorists to
remain a factor of destabilization in my country and
in the Middle East as a whole. They would also like to
continue to invest in those terrorists and recycle them
so that they can be sent to other parts of the world in
the future.
We are not making this up. Some time ago,
the Algerian authorities announced that they had
detained hundreds of terrorists from Da’esh and other
organizations on the Algeria-Niger border, who turned
out upon investigation to have come from Aleppo in
Syria. Who sent hundreds of terrorists from Aleppo
to the Algeria-Niger border? Who provided them with
transportation and logistical support?
Thirdly, in order to bring an end to the suffering
of the Syrian people and give them the opportunity to
return to their normal lives and meet their daily needs,
the coercive economic sanctions, which have had a
devastating effect on all Syrians, must be immediately
and unconditionally lifted. The sanctions have caused
immense losses to our national economy that go far
beyond the value of the humanitarian assistance that
has been offered to Syrians.
Fourthly, the Syrian State must be supported in its
efforts to create an environment conducive to the return
of displaced persons and refugees to their homes,
towns and cities with safety and dignity. I reiterate the
appeal to all those who have left the country because
of terrorism to return and shoulder their national
responsibility to rebuild their country, which belongs
to its entire people.
19-05856

28/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Our national anthem begins with the words
“Defenders of the homeland, may peace be upon you,
refuse to be humiliated”. Those words demonstrate
the commitment of the Syrian people to their political
independence territorial integrity and high appreciation
to the defenders of the country who are its strong
shield, namely, the Syrian Arab Army and the armed
forces that have made enormous sacrifices to preserve
the sovereignty of Syria and the independence of its
national decision-making to oppose foreign interference
and any attempt to undermine the integrity of its land
and people, not only for the last eight years but for
decades before that.

S/PV. 8475

That is why the Syrian Government, which has held
firm over eight years in the face of terrorism and foreign
interference, is now determined to reject the agendas of
hostile countries. We are determined, now more than
ever, to recover all our territory and liberate it from
terrorism and the illegitimate foreign presence there.
In parallel, we are committed to working towards
a political solution in which Syrians — and Syrians
alone — decide on their future and make their choices
through an inter-Syrian dialogue that is Syrian-led,
without any external interference, in order to guarantee
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

19-0585621/21
