United Nations

S/PV.5130

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5130

th meeting
Thursday, 24 February 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adechi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Benin)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Kitaoka
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Denisov
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Leahy

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2005/88)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-24777 (E)

*0524777*

S/PV.5130

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2005/88)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Luxembourg and Serbia
and Montenegro, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nebojsa Cović,
President of the Coordination Centre of Serbia and
Montenegro and of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo
and Metohija.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cović
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Søren JessenPetersen, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Jessen-Petersen to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

2

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, document
S/2005/88.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Jessen-Petersen: The three months since my
last report to the Security Council have been marked
by a positive trend in what is a crucial year for Kosovo
and for the region. The challenges ahead of us in the
coming months are, however, considerable. Let me first
say a few words on the progress made.
The security situation continues to improve based
on strong daily cooperation between the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), to whose Commander and
forces I would like to pay tribute. Levels of serious
crime are low — indeed, not higher than other
comparably populated areas of Europe — and the trend
is positive. Crime rates are showing no evidence of
ethnic bias in policing or judicial processes.
Community policing initiatives and the ongoing
successful transition of policing responsibility to the
Kosovo Police Service are helping to bring policing
closer to all the people of Kosovo. Where additional
security measures are required for particularly
vulnerable areas, these are taken.
Two recent trips, by the Prime Minister and by
the President of Serbia, passed off without incident and
confirmed the professionalism of KFOR, the UNMIK
police and the KPS, and the good cooperation among
them.
While we have made progress, the Kosovo
security environment does, however, remain fragile. I
therefore welcome the recent decision by NATO to
maintain KFOR’s operational capabilities during this
crucial year.
Members of the minority communities continue
to feel insecure. Kosovo’s Serb community is,
regrettably, often the victim of misinformation that is

S/PV.5130

disproportionate to the facts on the ground. Fears,
whether fuelled by misinformation or by intimidatory
acts, and even when not borne out by facts, translate
into largely self-imposed limits on freedom of
movement, and, thus, limits on access to employment,
health care, electricity, justice and education. These
perceptions of insecurity also prevent many displaced
Kosovo Serbs from returning to their homes. The
Prime Minister of Kosovo, Ramush Haradinaj, has set
an example to political leaders and officials, and to the
people of Kosovo, by continuing to reach out to
Kosovo Serbs and other minorities through repeated,
inclusive public statements and through visits to
municipalities, where he has met with returnees. It is
important that other political leaders and citizens
follow his example.
The new two-party coalition government has,
since taking office on 3 December 2004, undertaken a
sustained effort to accelerate standards implementation
on the basis of a number of priority standards goals and
indicators to measure progress, agreed upon between
the government and UNMIK. As members know,
priority standards goals are those central to the
improvement of the rights and living conditions of
minority communities and to the building of a multiethnic, democratic and stable Kosovo.
The conclusions of the technical assessment
before the Council are clear: The Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government have made tangible
progress, but there is further to go to ensure that the
positive processes are translated into action on the
ground. The new government is aware of that and
continues to be committed to delivering standards as its
first priority. Leadership by the Prime Minister and his
Cabinet
are
creating
both
ownership
and
accountability. I am pleased to report to the Council a
key step forward in the construction of democratic
institutions in Kosovo. In accordance with the
Constitutional Framework and in fulfilment of his
commitments to me and to representatives of the
international community, President Rugova has
announced his resignation from the position of
president of the political party he helped to found, the
Democratic League of Kosovo.
In recognition of the central role of municipalities
in delivering the most essential standards, the Prime
Minister wrote to the presidents of all municipal
assemblies to ask them to directly target their efforts on
a number of immediate priorities agreed between the

Government and UNMIK — including the use of
languages, equal employment, property rights and
returns — and to set clear deadlines for action. That
initiative by the Prime Minister has resulted in
considerable efforts and the beginning of results in
many municipalities. I shall report on the full extent of
the efforts and the results achieved in my next
technical assessment.
All the elements of institution-building that I
have mentioned, and upon which the implementation
of standards is based, are important and will help the
institutions of Kosovo better serve all the people of
Kosovo in the future.
The
Government
has
undertaken
the
reconstruction of almost all properties damaged or
destroyed last year in March — nearly 900 houses in
all, plus several schools. It has also provided cash
grants to returning families. The Government and
UNMIK are committed to achieving progress in the
reconstruction of certain Orthodox churches and
monasteries. The Provisional Institutions have
transferred €4.2 million into the 2005 budget to finance
the reconstruction of religious sites. Regrettably,
progress has been blocked since last September by a
senior figure in the Serbian Orthodox Church.
However, the Holy Synod has now decided that
Serbian Orthodox Church will re-engage constructively
on the basis of the earlier agreement, a decision that
opens the way to progress on church reconstruction.
The Government is moving on the devolution of
authority to the local level to realign centralized
structures of the past with European standards of local
self-government. That is a complex and difficult
exercise anywhere, and Kosovo is certainly no
exception. Nevertheless, we do detect a welcome
degree of interest transcending ethnic division on the
part of local authorities to implement the process, as
that process offers tangible benefits to all. To succeed,
the process must be aimed at bringing municipal
authorities closer to citizens. It must be an essential
element in the process of integration, and, if
successfully implemented, it will defeat the forces of
division and do away with parallel structures once and
for all.
The Government has just agreed on five pilot
municipalities, two of which are of particular interest
to Kosovo Serbs. The next step will be to define the
exact nature of additional municipal competencies,

3

S/PV.5130

with particular attention given to areas such as
policing, justice, education and health. As we move
forward in that delicate and difficult process, it is
important that all political parties at the central and
local levels, as well as all communities, are involved
and that a Kosovo-wide consensus on the way ahead is
pursued.
Over the last six months, we have accelerated the
transfer of competences from UNMIK to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in areas
not related to sovereignty. Three new ministries —
those of Communities and Returns, Local Government
Administration, and Energy and Mining — have been
established and are now becoming operational. In the
field of the economy, significant transfers are taking
place. We are looking at transferring further
responsibilities in the areas of justice and police. Those
transfers go hand-in-hand with an emphasis on
accountability, including the availability of corrective
measures if officials block progress. The Prime
Minister has already demonstrated readiness to deal
with non-performing officials. In order to ensure that
transferred competencies can be exercised efficiently,
we are also encouraging donors to coordinate and
better target their efforts to help the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government build capacity across
all areas.
Economic stagnation remains a serious concern.
Unemployment is rampant, the social safety net is nonexistent, and social and economic hardship could at
any moment turn into a threat to political stability. The
European Union’s UNMIK pillar, which is under new
leadership, is making some progress, and we are giving
privatization greater impetus. However, it is clear that
we will not find miracle solutions.
Real progress on the economy requires certainty
on status combined with a healthy environment for
investors and a functioning market economy. At
present, we are focusing on short-term job generation,
microcredit schemes and other measures that provide
some degree of hope, in particular for young people, to
pre-empt dramatic expressions of frustration. The
Government is engaged in developing a comprehensive
Kosovo development plan comprising different sectors
of the economy, including energy, to help chart the
road ahead in the medium and the long term.

4

The full receipt of telecommunications revenues
would give an important boost to the economy in
Kosovo. In that context, I am pleased that a study
group of the International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) has just concluded that there is no obstacle to the
allocation — on a temporary basis and in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) — of a
dialling code to UNMIK, in line with our request. We
trust that the ITU will now rapidly allocate such a
code, as requested by the United Nations, and thus help
stimulate the economy.
Work is proceeding on a census of the population
of Kosovo, which will — and should — include
internally displaced persons in Serbia and Montenegro.
That is needed as a basis for important activities,
including the development of economic strategies and
the reform of local self-government. We are looking at
best practices from recent similar exercises in the
region. The Provisional Institutions will present their
project document to a donors’ meeting on the census
next month.
As we move forward, dialogue remains essential
at various levels, including local dialogue between
majority and minority communities. Regrettably,
following their election boycott last October, Kosovo
Serbs are still staying outside most political and
democratic processes. There is some progress,
however. A Kosovo Serb recently joined the
Government as Minister for Returns and Communities,
and Kosovo Serbs have participated in recent talks on
decentralization. However, it is my impression that
many Kosovo Serbs are frustrated and are waiting for
more positive signals from Belgrade. They know that
their future lies in Kosovo - as confirmed by Mr. Tadić,
the President of Serbia, during his recent visit to
Kosovo — and they need to take an active part in the
democratic process to help shape that future.
I am pleased to inform the Council that direct
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade is about to
resume, after 12 months of boycott by Belgrade. It has
now been confirmed that the Working Group on
Missing Persons will resume its work on 10 March,
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
acting as chair. I hope that the Working Group will
make a significant contribution to an early resolution
of one of the most painful legacies of the war. We are
also discussing other areas of dialogue with Belgrade,
and I am hopeful that the recent more positive signals

S/PV.5130

from Belgrade will result in an intensification of the
direct dialogue.
The regional dialogue with Tirana, Skopje and
Podgorica continues to develop in a variety of fields,
including the economic one. We expect high-level
visits to Pristina from both Skopje and Tirana to take
place shortly.
Finally, in the international field, UNMIK, KFOR
and Kosovo’s Provisional Institutions are maintaining
close and frequent contact with the Contact Group —
meeting about every six weeks in Pristina — and with
our close partners NATO, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We also have frequent and continuous dialogue with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the Council of Europe, among others.
Last Monday, I had the opportunity to brief the EU
foreign ministers on the situation and the way ahead,
and I stressed the key role that the European Union
must play, in close cooperation with the members of
the Contact Group and, of course, with the United
Nations.
So there is progress, but at the same time
problems do remain. Much more has to be done to
reassure the minorities that they have a future in
Kosovo, to guarantee freedom of movement for the
minorities, and to speed up the process of returns of
displaced persons. There is constant pressure from our
side for progress, and we are holding the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government fully accountable for
continuing to make progress in line with the promising
start of the Government. At the same time, the
improvement of the economy in the short term,
pending the outcome of status discussions, must
receive and is receiving constant attention and action.
Following my next technical assessment in May,
a comprehensive review of standards is planned to take
place in mid-2005. Should that review conclude that
sufficient progress has been made, the international
community should be prepared to embark on a process
leading to status talks. My evaluation is that we have a
good chance of keeping to that timetable and that the
process leading to status talks could therefore begin in
the second half of this year. At the same time, we must
also understand that, as we move towards the status
process, tensions may rise. The Kosovo Albanians who
want to enter that status process have understood that
violence will be a major setback. On the other hand,

those bent on derailing the process may see violence as
their only means to do so. The message must be clear:
Provocations and violence cannot be allowed to stop
progress towards a stable, multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo.
I will not comment today on the principles that
will guide status talks, with one exception. As I
mentioned when I addressed the Council last
November, the partition of Kosovo is simply not a
realistic option as we move forward. The society we
are trying to build in Kosovo must have space for all
communities as a stable, tolerant, multi-ethnic
democracy. As such, all talk about the partition of
Kosovo becomes an agenda for those who may be
eager to reignite the divisions and flames of the past.
Partition, in my view, would betray European values of
integration and coexistence. Partition would also
sacrifice the 60 per cent of Kosovo Serbs who do not
live in the North, and it would reopen many wounds
that are slowly beginning to heal throughout the region.
2005 is a key year for Kosovo. There is now
broad agreement on a clear way forward and a clear
timetable that could lead us to the negotiations on final
status in the second half of this year. To defer that
process for much longer would only prolong the pain,
increase the risks and delay the day when the region
turns its back on a painful past and moves forward
towards a common European future.
Almost 14 years after the outbreak of a series of
wars across the former Yugoslavia, and nearly six years
after NATO intervened to put a halt to gross violations
of human rights in Kosovo, 2005 is the year in which
we must seize the opportunity to resolve one of the last
conundrums of the former Yugoslavia: ensuring
peaceful coexistence and mutual tolerance among all
communities in Kosovo. The Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government, the institutions and the people of
Kosovo have further to go in implementing the priority
standards, but initial progress, determination and
effort, and accelerated pace are all tangible. I count on
the Security Council to continue supporting the efforts
of the institutions and the people of Kosovo to develop
and shape their society and their future in Europe – as I
have said, a multi-ethnic, stable, tolerant and
democratic Kosovo at peace at home and at peace with
its neighbours.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to Mr. Nebojsa Cović, President of the

5

S/PV.5130

Coordination Centre of Serbia and Montenegro and
Montenegro and of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo
and Metohija.
Mr. Cović (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in
Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): First
of all, I would like to greet the Council on behalf of the
Council of Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro and of
the Republic of Serbia and express my appreciation for
being able to participate in today's meeting of the
Security Council on Kosovo and Metohija. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report.
Time and again, I have tried to draw the attention
of the Security Council to the difficult position of the
Serbian and other non-Albanian communities in
Kosovo and Metohija, which has not often been
properly addressed in the official reports coming from
the province. In recent talks with international
officials, I have been told that the world is tired of
repeatedly coming back to this issue, that Kosovo and
Metohija will never be like Switzerland in terms of the
standards of a modern democratic society, and that it is
necessary for Belgrade to change its approach in order
to board the train which is leaving the station, with or
without us.
Even at the risk of being reproached again, I
cannot but repeat that the conditions of life of Serbs
and other non-Albanians in the province are
unacceptably poor. The Secretary-General has also
unambiguously noted that fact in his latest report on
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija. On this occasion
as well, I would like to express my appreciation to the
Special Representative who, despite the aggressive
Albanian and international campaign to portray the
achievements of the newly-elected Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in a more favourable
light than the actual situation warrants, has consistently
insisted that none of the standards was even close to
being fulfilled.
The pretext for such a situation should be sought
neither among the Kosovo Serbs nor in Belgrade, but
in the general environment prevailing in the province,
characterized by a lack of political maturity on the part
of the leaders of the majority community. Let me offer
some examples that convincingly illustrate the reality
in Kosovo and Metohija. The Parliament and
Government of Kosovo and Metohija are not truly
multi-ethnic. There is no protection for non-Albanian

6

communities from being out-voted. There is no
strategy to resolve the massive unemployment or to
embark upon economic recovery. There is a lack of
opportunity for Serbs and other non-Albanians to find
employment in the public sector, and a lack of
elementary security for Serbs and other non-Albanians,
whose freedom of movement is limited to the
"humanitarian bus service" and the "freedom of
movement" train. The ongoing illegal privatization
serves as a basis for the further ethnic cleansing of
Serbs and other non-Albanians by economic measures.
The constant attacks and incidents against Serbs are
neither isolated, nor condemned, nor countered by
efficient measures by the local political leadership.
Serbs and other non-Albanians are deprived of all
linguistic rights. Serbian property continues to be
looted without any protection by the local authorities
and police. There have been no returns of expelled and
displaced persons nor any efforts to encourage returns.
No municipality in Kosovo and Metohija has worked
out a plan or a strategy for returns.
No efforts have been made to reconstruct the
Serbian cultural heritage, and the Serbian Orthodox
Church has been falsely blamed for that.
All forms of organized crime continue to thrive in
Kosovo and Metohija, not only multi-ethnic but also
multinational. The Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) is a
training ground for Albanian extremist groups
committed to violence; the KPC is preparing to become
an army, in direct violation of resolution 1244 (1999).
Serb
and
other
non-Albanian
national
communities have practically no confidence in the
political and administrative system in Kosovo and
Metohija; they are totally prevented from taking part in
all political processes, having been fully marginalized
as second-class citizens.
Since October 2000, Pristina and Albanian
leaders have been consistently evading the necessary
dialogue with Belgrade, shifting the blame to Belgrade.
The media in Kosovo and Metohija are promoting hate
speech on a regular basis and are broadcasting
falsehoods about Serbian and other non-Albanian
communities; they have been engaged in a campaign
for the province’s independence, and carry hardly any
Serbian-language broadcasts. There is no rule of law,
and Serbian and other non-Albanians do not have
access to the judicial system.

S/PV.5130

Despite such a situation, an inappropriate
decision to open the question of the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija has been made under the pretext
that the perpetuation of the status quo is no longer
possible. Understandably, no one is in favour of
perpetuating the status quo in Kosovo and Metohija,
least of all Belgrade. But we should be aware that the
implementation of key provisions of resolution 1244
(1999) would be a major step forward, a move away
from the status quo.
Clearly, with regard to the most sensitive issue
related to Kosovo and Metohija — the preservation of
its multi-ethnic character — not only has there not
been any headway in the implementation of the
resolution, but the situation has worsened. For almost
six years now, the new reality of Kosovo and Metohija
has been that one national community, the Serbian one,
has been disappearing under pressure from, and violent
acts by, the majority community. If this is an important
yardstick for measuring the standards in the
implementation of the rule of law, democracy and
minority protection, not only do we have a status quo
in Kosovo and Metohija, we have a general regression.
These facts cannot possibly be hidden in any way. In
light of these facts, how can we contemplate the
perspective of a future status of Kosovo and Metohija
at all?
Since their deployment in the province in June
1999, the international forces have been trying to put in
place the standards of a modern multi-ethnic and
democratic society. Three years ago, that approach to
the resolution of the problems of Kosovo and Metohija
was defined and officially called “standards before
status”, which Belgrade supported. Despite the
negative assessment of the implementation of these
standards — also indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General
—
unjustifiably
optimistic
assessments were made that after six years of poor
results, a turnaround and major progress would occur
in just a few months, thus creating the conditions for
negotiations on the future status of the province.
At the same time, there are suggestions that the
“standards before status” will be reformulated into a
“both standards and status” policy, which actually
implies the recognition of the failure on the part of the
international community and a search for a quick exit
strategy, deliberately embracing a detrimental
compromise as regards the creation of a truly multiethnic and democratic society in Kosovo and Metohija.

I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize
that since the democratic Government took over in
October 2000, Belgrade’s approach has remained the
same. We have been sincerely trying, as partners with
the international community, to contribute to the
establishment of a multi-ethnic society and to
confidence-building. Immediately after the democratic
changes took place in Belgrade, in 2000 and 2001, with
the assistance of and in partnership with the
international community, we jointly achieved great
success in defusing the crisis in the south of central
Serbia. However, when we tried to apply a similar
approach in Kosovo and Metohija, we were blocked
and all our initiatives were immediately rejected, since
they came from Belgrade.
We are firmly committed to helping in a
constructive manner so that the months-long deadlock
in relations with Pristina are overcome as soon as
possible. I would like to recall that this deadlock was a
consequence of a mass organized pogrom against the
Serbs carried out by the Albanian extremists in March
last year. We believed then, as we do now, that the
question of the survival of the Serbs is directly
connected to more efficient and more reliable
institutional protection for them as a community in
Kosovo and Metohija. That is why we have focused
our activities on decentralization as a crucial issue of
security and institutional transformation of Kosovo and
Metohija. In doing so, we did not want to diminish the
importance of the so-called technical issues. However,
in conditions of physical endangerment of the Serbian
national community those issues were objectively less
important. We do not believe that by placing some of
these technical issues back on the agenda, the problem
of decentralization has lost its crucial importance in the
province.
In view of the above, we raised the issue of
revitalizing the working groups for missing and
abducted persons and for energy with the Special
Representative, and we sought to initiate the process of
reconstruction of the churches and monasteries
damaged or destroyed in last year's wave of violence.
The meeting of the working group for missing and
abducted persons will be held in Belgrade on 10
March, and we hope that it will contribute to the
resolution of this sensitive and, above all, humanitarian
issue.
Some steps have also been taken in order to start
the work of the high-level group on security, as well as

7

S/PV.5130

of working groups for decentralization, transport and
returns. We hope that initial results will already be seen
in the next few weeks. I would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate that Belgrade stands ready to
participate fully in all processes in Kosovo and
Metohija — however, on an equal footing, from
beginning to end of each individual process, including
the process of decentralization.
Let us return, in the end, to the popular metaphor
that has been often used recently to describe the
unfolding of the process in Kosovo and Metohija.
Where is the train — which I mentioned at the
beginning of this statement — heading? If the final
destination is Europe rather than it being a local train,
the train should allow us to travel steadily towards the
full implementation of all standards of modern
European States and to full membership in the
European Union. There should be no stops at side
stations, where bad compromises are made in reaching
for the standards of a truly multi-ethnic society and
where the borders of a mono-ethnic State are drawn. If
its destination is Europe without compromises,
Belgrade will be on that train.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): First of all, I should like to
welcome Mr. Søren
Jessen-Petersen,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), to the Council. I thank him for a
comprehensive, interesting and encouraging briefing.
This is only the second time that Mr. Jessen-Petersen
has reported to the Council, and we are already full of
respect for the impressive results he has achieved so
far.
The representative of Luxembourg will shortly
make a statement on behalf of the European Union.
Denmark fully associates itself with that statement.
I would like to express my gratitude for the report
of the Secretary-General that we have before us today,
which contains UNMIK's second quarterly technical
assessment of standards implementation in Kosovo. We
will discuss a third assessment in May. Thus, we are at
the halfway point in this essential but intricate process,
which will have decisive influence on the future of
Kosovo and indeed on the stability and prosperity of
the broader region of Southeastern Europe. It is
encouraging that the report highlights tangible progress
in the reporting period, and we welcome that. Tribute
should be paid to UNMIK and to the Special

8

Representative, but also to the new Government, which
has demonstrated real commitment and determination.
It is, however, notable and perhaps to be expected
that the report concludes that at this stage progress in
some key areas remains insufficient and further work is
needed. We may be at the halfway point in time, but we
are not yet halfway in implementation. It is therefore
important that the Council today give its full support to
the Special Representative and his staff in their
admirable efforts to keep up the pace of the process.
No one involved in standards implementation can
afford to slow down now. The momentum must be
maintained, and the focus should be strictly kept on the
prioritized standards concerning the rule of law,
freedom of movement, returns, functioning local
institutions and security. In that way, our overall aim of
securing a multi-ethnic Kosovo will be kept constantly
in sight.
With a decision on a comprehensive midyear
review on the horizon, we will in the coming months
closely follow and measure the political commitment
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
of the Kosovar communities in general to the standards
process. Realistically, the 400 or so detailed indicators
laid out in the Standards Implementation Plan will take
some years to fulfil completely. But without an
unambiguous demonstration of the political will and
the administrative capacity to do it, we will not be able
to move beyond the present phase.
In that regard, we call on all authorities and
communities of Kosovo to engage in dialogue and
standards
implementation.
The
continued
unwillingness of the Kosovo Serbs to do that is
worrying, counterproductive for themselves and
unhelpful for the process. The Provisional Institutions
cannot be held accountable for delays caused by the
unwillingness of the Kosovo Serbs to participate in the
process. Belgrade and other opinion leaders in Kosovo
bear their fair share of the responsibility for rectifying
that situation. I welcome the fact that Belgrade has
decided to resume direct dialogue with Pristina and
that the working group on missing persons will meet in
early March.
The Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
should be given a real chance to show their worth. We
support a further transfer from UNMIK to the
Provisional Institutions of all competencies not directly
involving sovereignty. That should be accompanied by

S/PV.5130

greater accountability and increased capacity-building.
In other areas, the Provisional Institutions should be
consulted in order to create a sense of local ownership.
Decentralization is an equally important element
in the way forward, as it is instrumental in forming a
basis for the political integration of minority
communities and for the dissolution of parallel
structures. We support the decentralization plan of
UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions, while we
encourage Belgrade to take up the advisory role for the
Kosovo Serbs that has been reserved for it in these
discussions.
In his last briefing to the Security Council three
months ago, the Special Representative stressed that
the international community would soon have to move
beyond managing Kosovo as a “holding operation”.
My Government shares that view. A decision to start
negotiations on Kosovo's final status should come this
year. But there is no automaticity as to the start of
talks. And while the reintegration of Kosovo into
Serbia or the territorial division of Kosovo into Serb
and Albanian areas may not be feasible solutions, there
is no predetermined outcome of such talks. Any
outcome will be conditioned primarily on the
authorities' ability to secure a democratic and multiethnic Kosovo.
As any solution should be based on the broadest
possible acceptance both locally and in Belgrade, it is
our hope that all parties will participate in a
constructive manner. Also crucial to such a process
will be an endeavour to deal efficiently with Kosovo’s
dire economic situation. It is important for the efforts
to secure economic growth and employment in Kosovo
that UNMIK have access to international lending
institutions. The clarification of property rights and, at
a later stage, of Kosovo's future status will help to
attract severely needed foreign direct investments. In
general, probably only a regional approach to
economic development and a common long-term
European perspective will provide the framework
necessary for narrowing the economic gap with the rest
of Europe.
Finally, I should like to stress that an
unconditional prerequisite for maintaining the positive
momentum we now see in Kosovo is the maintenance
and even the strengthening of security. Security in
Kosovo has improved considerably since last March.
We recognize and welcome that. But as the difficult

questions of decentralization and rebuilding a multiethnic society are successfully dealt with, as suspected
war criminals are summoned to the Tribunal in The
Hague and as status talks approach, security could
come under pressure. Some observers warn us that new
inter-ethnic violence could erupt. Let us hope that they
are overly alarmist.
But if such a scenario materializes, there will be
no room for compromise or for pragmatic acceptance
of impunity. Criminals responsible for the riots of
March last year are being prosecuted, and the
international community should be equally steadfast
with regard to situations that might arise in the future.
Kosovo is entering a decisive period, and
therefore it is particularly important that any political
moves be safeguarded with the right level of military
and police preparedness. The UNMIK police and the
Kosovo Police Service have shown great skill and
professionalism in tackling difficult situations — for
instance, during the visit to Kosovo of Serbian
President Tadic. KFOR has strengthened its operational
capabilities, and we welcome NATO's intent to
maintain its strong presence to deal with challenges
that may arise. The Council should make absolutely
clear that no group will be allowed to make political
gains through provocations or through violence or the
threat thereof.
So on the basis of what we have heard here today,
it is with a strong sense of optimism and progress that
we encourage the Council, the Secretary-General and
the Special Representative to stay the course and to
keep up the pace of standards implementation as we
move into what will probably prove to be a very
decisive year for Kosovo.
Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation is grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and to Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen, Head of
the Mission, for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in the province. We also note the participation
in and the statement made at today’s meeting by the
President of the Coordination Centre of Serbia and
Montenegro and of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo
and Metohija, Mr. Cović.
The assessments contained in the report and in
the statement made by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to a large extent echo our view

9

S/PV.5130

of the processes occurring in Kosovo, Serbia and
Montenegro. Despite some advances, progress in the
implementation of standards in Kosovo remains, so far,
uneven.

Of course, as the Secretary-General quite rightly
warns, any outbreaks of violence such as the ones that
took place in Kosovo in March 2004 would be a step
back in the process of finding a political settlement.

As the report notes, none of the eight standards
has been so far implemented. We agree with the view
of the Secretary-General that real progress in standards
implementation in Kosovo will become possible only
when the statements and the intentions of the political
leaders of the province are reflected in concrete,
effective action that brings solid results.

Let me make another specific point as well. We
deem of great importance for the normalization of
inter-ethnic relations in the province the restoration,
with the constructive cooperation of the Orthodox
Church, of religious and cultural heritage sites that
were damaged or destroyed during the outbreak of
violence that took place in March 2004.

The non-participation by the Kosovo Serbs in the
activities of the province’s Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government proves that Kosovo is still far from
resolving the main challenge of creating a multi-ethnic
and democratic society. The level of minority trust in
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government for
Kosovo remains low. Moreover, the fears of the nonAlbanian communities are being fuelled by all kinds of
incidents that often are not eliciting due reaction from
local political leaders. The provincial authorities are
not taking the necessary action to prosecute those
responsible for ethnically based crimes, to organize a
system to monitor violations of the language laws, or
to establish a culture of human rights and tolerance,
particularly among the young people of Kosovo.

Frankly, there is something we do not fully
understand. We were surprised to hear statements to
the effect that the Serbian Orthodox Church has opted
out of these reconstruction efforts. In this situation,
which is very delicate, we believe that a special role
could be played by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
helping to find a mutually acceptable option for
resolving this problem for the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government and the Serbian Orthodox Church.

Efforts are still insufficient to speed up the
process of returns. We are convinced that today the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government must take
visible practical steps to create conditions that would
encourage minorities to cooperate with the provincial
authorities and to participate in all ongoing activities in
Kosovo. The majority community, as is quite rightly
noted in the report, must create a climate in which
members of the minority communities, in particular the
Kosovo Serbs, feel confident that they can return to
Kosovo and that they can remain there. The speedy
restoration of power supplies to the Kosovo Serb
enclaves would be of great political and humanitarian
importance.
The priority tasks of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government in Kosovo, as we see it, include
achieving concrete results in the priority areas of
providing security, freedom of movement and equal
rights for ethnic minorities, as well as post-March
rebuilding and accelerating refugee returns and the
return of displaced persons from the non-Albanian
community.

10

Moreover, we believe that involving Belgrade in
the negotiating process would help to find a solution to
the whole range of priority problems for the ethnic
minorities in the province. We, like the SecretaryGeneral, take note of the recent proposal by Belgrade
to resume direct expert dialogue on missing persons
and on energy. The constructive participation of all
parties could only help to restore trust and bring about
reconciliation among the communities.
Reforming local government is important to the
normalization of the situation in Kosovo. We believe
that it is appropriate to continue the practice of
consulting on decentralization within the format of the
September meeting that was held in Vienna, that is,
with the participation of the representatives of
UNMIK, the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment of Kosovo, Kosovo Serbs, Belgrade and
the Contact Group. This is particularly useful given the
need to establish constructive interaction between the
United Nations Mission and the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government with the Kosovo Serbs
and Belgrade.
We welcome the progress that has been made in
resolving economic difficulties in Kosovo. We take
note of the increased oversight over the pension system
and the banking sector of the province, as well as the
fact that the process of privatization is continuing and

S/PV.5130

that, on the whole, there is some capacity-building of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in the
economic sector.
However, assigning additional authority to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government should be
accompanied by greater accountability and greater
effective control over its activities by the head of
UNMIK. In particular, there should be appropriate
sanctions against those persons whose actions run
counter to the tasks set forth in the Kosovo standards.
We deem it exceptionally important that the SecretaryGeneral has drawn the conclusion that resolution 1244
(1999) is the essential political platform for reaching a
settlement in Kosovo. We remain committed to the
comprehensive strategy of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo as well as to full and consistent support for the
policy of standards before status.
The lasting stabilization of the province will be
possible only if there is an agreed international
strategy, with the lead role being played by the
Security Council. We deem highly useful the initiative
of Romania to dispatch to Kosovo a Security Council
mission right before the next assessment, so that
Council members could have firsthand information to
form an objective picture of the situation in the
province.
We firmly believe that there can be no
automaticity in launching the upcoming political
process for determining the future status of the
province unless there is real progress towards the
implementation of democratic standards and unless the
Security Council takes a specific decision in that
respect.
Russia, for its part, is prepared to cooperate very
closely with the Secretary-General and with his Special
Representative, with the head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. JessenPetersen, as well as with partners in the Contact Group,
in the interest of consolidating stability and security for
all inhabitants of the province.
Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): Mr. President, I would like
to thank you for convening today's public meeting. I
wish also to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen, for his
briefing, which I found very illuminating and
insightful. We are fully aware of the fact that today's
meeting has significant implications for the coming

comprehensive review of the implementation of the
standards planned for the middle of this year.
Japan
welcomes
the
relatively
smooth
establishment of the coalition Government of
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, based on
the results of the election held last October, as
evidence of political maturity in Kosovo, which was
also acknowledged as such by the Secretary-General.
We would like to commend the proactive efforts of the
new Provisional Institutions for the implementation of
the standards, and we welcome the fact that measurable
progress has been made towards the implementation of
the standards, coupled with noteworthy concrete steps
in several areas.
Japan, however, acknowledges that many
challenges remain to be addressed by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government on the implementation
of the standards. In particular, I am concerned that
progress has been impeded in the areas of minorities’
freedom of movement and sustainable returns. While I
would like to express Japan’s appreciation for the
efforts of all parties concerned, such as KFOR, to
maintain security as a prerequisite for implementing
the standards, it is important to point out that
minorities’ fear is the major obstacle confronting them.
Therefore, I would also like to strongly urge political
leaders in Kosovo to make further initiatives to remove
such fear.
From that perspective, Japan calls on the
Provisional Institutions to engage in an intercommunity dialogue initiative in order to rebuild
confidence and trust. Through these efforts, we expect
increased participation by Kosovo Serbs in the
standards implementation process. They will also have
the effect of reminding us that the implementation of
standards must benefit all the people of Kosovo.
Japan appreciates the progress made in the
discussions on decentralization, as reported by the
Secretary-General. The results of the pilot projects that
are scheduled to be carried out in March in several submunicipal bodies, including one in an area where
mainly Kosovo Serbs reside, will be of importance in
that regard. I would like to reiterate my request here
for the united efforts of all Kosovo political leaders in
this undertaking. At the same time, the Belgrade
authorities must halt their assistance to parallel
structures and must encourage all Kosovo Serbs to

11

S/PV.5130

participate in the political process in Kosovo, including
in discussions on the issue of decentralization.
Macroeconomic indicators show Kosovo to be in
a calm recovery phase. Noting, however, that the
unemployment rate remains high, and that the poverty
rate is increasing, we continue to recognize that the
economic situation in Kosovo remains serious. We
expect that Mr. Joachim Rücker, the new head of the
UNMIK’s pillar IV, in cooperation with the Provisional
Institutions, will make the utmost effort to realize
economic development through the privatization of
socially owned companies and the formulation and
implementation of a social development plan.
Japan also shares the view expressed in the report
of the Secretary-General that the lack of reliable
electricity is a serious constraint on Kosovo’s
development. However, while the stable provision of
electricity is essential for the long-term development of
Kosovo, taking into account that electricity is a basic
need of the inhabitants of the region, the reform of
Kosovo’s energy sector should not be politicized. Japan
calls on all parties concerned to seek a solution to this
issue with earnest and sincerity.
Japan co-hosted the Ministerial Conference on
Peace Consolidation and Economic Development of
the Western Balkans last April and is working on the
follow-up activities to that meeting. We wish to
reaffirm our commitment to the region, including our
intention to provide assistance, in cooperation with the
international community, to advance the Kosovo
Standards Implementation Plan. As a member of the
Security Council, Japan would like to express its
readiness to participate constructively in the
comprehensive review of the standards scheduled for
the middle of 2005.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to join previous speakers in
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen, for his thorough
briefing on activities carried out by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
in accordance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), and on events in Kosovo between 1 November
2004 and 31 January 2005.
My delegation wishes to underscore positive
signs highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report on
progress in implementing a comprehensive and
integrated strategy. We agree with the report’s

12

assessment that increased attention to standards
implementation on the part of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and efforts to ensure
that implementation is carried out — such as the
establishment of a coalition government following the
October 2004 elections and public demonstrations in
support of the standards — are all encouraging signs.
That not withstanding, we cannot fail to mention
that the same report says that none of the eight
standards has been completely fulfilled. We, therefore,
urge the Provisional Institutions, political leaders and
members of all communities to make every effort to
ensure effective fulfilment of the standards. In that
context, we join in the Secretary-General’s appeal to
the Kosovo Serbs to participate constructively in the
institutions and processes of Kosovo and that the
Serbian authorities encourage this participation so that
Kosovo Serbs will participate in the local government
reform process.
In addition, we believe that the Provisional
Institutions must take visible measures to facilitate the
return of displaced persons. The majority community
must create a climate in which members of minority
communities, in particular the Kosovo Serbs, feel safe
enough to return and to stay in Kosovo. The Serbian
authorities must also encourage this process. Moreover,
we believe that the majority community must facilitate
and ensure actions that would create the conditions
required for broad participation on the part of minority
groups in all aspects of life in Kosovo, particularly by
promoting their trust in the political and administrative
systems and their participation in the political process.
We feel that this is essential.
It is also worrying to see that there are still
parallel structures in the health and education sectors.
We, therefore, appeal for compromise and cooperation
among those who are responsible for creating and
promoting a stable multi-ethnic society.
We know that this cannot be achieved while
minority communities are still concerned about their
safety and their freedom of movement, and until
interaction with members of the majority community is
encouraged. The lack of such interaction inevitably
heightens existing ethnic division. In addition, those
fears and concerns become greater as a result of
isolated incidents that are not always condemned. Once
again, we call on the government to take the measures
necessary to punish ethnic crimes, to set up a system

S/PV.5130

that will penalize violations of the language laws and
promote a culture of human rights, and to faithfully
implement the guidelines and standards established by
UNMIK on respect for the rights of minorities.

four members of the Contact Group are permanent
members of this Council, and the other two have their
own passion with regard to the issue of permanent
membership in the Council.

Finally, my delegation wishes to draw attention to
the need to meet the remaining priority standards goals
in the economic area. The marginalization of minority
communities in terms of access to employment and in
terms of income will not help create a sustainable
multi-ethnic Kosovo. In this context, we trust in the
commitment of the new government and in Prime
Minister Ramush Haradinaj to maintain their political
will to deliver standards for Kosovo as a priority and
thus to correct the inequalities that still persist.

I think time is of the essence. A repetition of the
deadly uprising in March last year is an unwanted but
likely possibility if continuing uncertainty prevails on
the ground. The economic situation, as painted this
morning by the Special Representative to the
Secretary-General, could be a ticking bomb and should
be diffused as soon as possible. Another series of
incidents like those of March 2004 would unravel
whatever progress or gains NATO, the European
Union, the government in Kosovo and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) have achieved for Kosovo. Another
explosion like that of March 2004 would unleash the
dogs of another war which would generate regional
instability. Even a well-endowed UNMIK may be
unable to contain the escalation of such an explosion.

Mr. Baja (Philippines): We too are grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Jessen-Petersen, for his comprehensive
briefing. We appreciate the progress made in some
areas, which Mr. Jessen-Petersen described to the
Council this morning. Nevertheless, in trying to solve a
problem like Kosovo, it is time to face some realities.
First, Kosovo has been run practically as a United
Nations protectorate for the last six years. Although the
Security Council sat out the Kosovo conflict, in
significant ways it has owned the problem. Kosovo
cannot remain in some sort of international limbo
indefinitely. Secondly, under present circumstances,
neither Kosovo’s return to Belgrade’s rule, nor its
partition, nor any possible unification with Albania has
a sporting chance of being supported. Thirdly, neither
Kosovo Albanians, nor the Kosovo Serbs, nor Belgrade
is able to adopt more accommodating positions.
This morning we heard a dichotomy of
assessments of the situation in Kosovo. The problem
for some delegations, in particular that of the
Philippines, is not only what we still do not know, but
what we do know that may not be so. Therefore, under
the present circumstances, the suggested mission to
Kosovo becomes a necessity.
We believe that it is time for the international
community to begin to act decisively. NATO, which
prosecuted the war, and the Group of Eight, which
negotiated the peace, have key roles to play. The
Security Council should not allow Kosovo to dangle
much longer.
The six-member Contact Group should be able to
devise a more viable road map for Kosovo. After all,

Therefore, a process for determining the future
status of Kosovo, with timelines and guarantees for the
protection of minority rights and other human rights, is
an attractive approach. We are gratified to know that
this process could begin in the middle of the year. The
challenge for the Council is to ensure that when the
train leaves, the important passengers are on board.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen for the
excellent introduction he gave us to the report of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and to pay tribute through him to
members of the United Nations mission for the
outstanding job they have accomplished in the field.
The Council’s consideration of the progress
report on its agenda today allows us to appreciate the
progress made — limited, of course, but still
significant — in the process of the stabilization and
normalization of the overall situation in Kosovo.
My delegation welcomes the establishment of the
coalition government following the elections of last
October and its commitment to continue on the path of
reform, to consolidate local institutions and to
implement established standards for Kosovo. The
commitment of Kosovar leaders to quickly complete
the rebuilding of property and the social and
educational infrastructure that was damaged during the
reprehensible events that took place last year, and their

13

S/PV.5130

resolve to relaunch the process of the return of
displaced persons, are a positive development. That
commitment is also a sign of the beginning of a
process of détente and of an improvement in the
situation in the best interests of all.
However, the progress remains insufficient, vis-àvis the standards set by the international community
and the expectations of the local people for improved
economic and social conditions. Moreover, the fact that
the Kosovo Serbs are not participating in the
democratic process remains a source of concern for the
international community and is a major obstacle to the
advent of a democratic, tolerant and multi-ethnic
Kosovo.
We take the opportunity to reiterate once again
our appeal to all parties to participate fully in
confidence-building efforts, to strengthen relations and
to promote reconciliation among all Kosovars. The
attainment of those goals is primarily incumbent upon
the leaders and people of Kosovo, but it is no less for
the international community to create all conditions for
the comprehensive and successful implementation of
established standards and to proceed, as soon as
possible, to consideration of the basic question of the
final status of Kosovo.
Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura (Brazil): I wish to
thank Special Representative Jessen-Petersen for
providing us thorough information on the current
situation in Kosovo. My delegation continues to
appreciate and support his work and that of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We consider that his balanced technical
assessment of progress in standards implementation
offers an accurate picture of progress made and the
challenges that remain for the future.
There seems to be little doubt that, in spite of
encouraging
movements
by
the
Provisional
Institutions, standards implementation is our toughest
challenge in Kosovo. The report of the SecretaryGeneral before us today refers to tangible progress that
has to be made. We note, in this regard, achievements
in the functioning of democratic institutions, such as
the holding of fair and free elections and the
establishment of a coalition government. We also note
the improvement of the Kosovo Police Service, which
is now fully multi-ethnic. Other noteworthy
achievements are the establishment of ministries for

14

communication, communities, returns and migration,
and the approval of legislation for economic reform.
In spite of the good progress made over the
reporting period, none of the eight standards which
were laid out for Kosovo by the international
community has been completely fulfilled. Most
refugees and displaced persons are still afraid to return
to their devastated towns and villages. Limited actions,
such as the reconstruction of some houses financed
through the Kosovo consolidated budget, have not been
effective in addressing persistent problems. Fear that
last year’s ethnic violence could be re-ignited prevents
minorities from feeling safe in a homeland that is also
their own. Kosovo authorities have already pledged
that such violence will not be repeated, but they must
work harder and in concrete terms towards rebuilding
the confidence that has eroded since last March.
In fact, it is clear that the situation of minorities
continues to be extremely precarious. Their daily lives
are still hampered by restrictions of movement. Their
basic rights are not respected. Access to public services
and economic opportunities is still denied them.
Moreover, sporadic manifestations of hatred against
them show that ethnic rivalries continue to simmer. In
that context, we can understand why the majority of
Kosovo Serbs regard the standard related to the rule of
law as the most important one.
Although we recognize the steps that have been
taken towards democratic reform, we believe that
Kosovo’s authorities should do more to ensure
effective participation in governmental structures by
minorities, and especially by the Serb minority.
Kosovo Serbs must also do their part by engaging
actively in the government and in the political process.
Although calm, the security situation remains a
source of concern. Mr. Jessen-Petersen warns that the
state of things in Kosovo is still fragile and that a
period of increased risk of incidents lies ahead. The
Albanian majority must have realistic expectations
regarding the decision concerning the status issue;
otherwise frustration can lead to resentment and
turmoil, which would in fact be detrimental to the
fulfilment of their own aspirations.
We once again urge the Provisional Institutions to
continue to address as their highest priority the issue of
the implementation of standards as a whole. Failure to
do so will obstruct the beginning of the process to
determine the final status of the province. A joint effort

S/PV.5130

is needed by the international community and the
Kosovo authorities to foster progress in the area of
standards. In that regard, we support the efforts of the
Contact Group to facilitate dialogue between the
parties. We hope that the next meeting of the Group,
which is scheduled to take place this week, can foster
that dialogue.
A more positive contribution by Belgrade is also
needed. The conditions established for the resumption
of dialogue should be reviewed in the light of the
willingness shown by the Kosovo government to
engage in constructive talks. The authorities in Serbia
and Montenegro are about to resume dialogue with
Pristina. We also encourage them to avoid sending
mixed signals that have thus far prevented the Serb
minority from participating in all aspects of the
process.
Brazil remains especially concerned about the
human dimension of the situation in Kosovo.
Uncertainty regarding the political future continues to
mar prospects for badly needed economic recovery. In
that regard, we once again stress the urgency of
tackling unemployment, rural backwardness, gender
disparity and deficits in the education, health and
social welfare systems.
Resolution 1244 (1999) and the “standards before
status” policy constitute a viable path to peace and
reconciliation. In a year in which so many important
decisions must be taken, unwavering political will and
frank dialogue are needed more than ever to lead the
province safely down the path towards a multi-ethnic,
democratic and prosperous Kosovo that is at peace
with its neighbours and that makes a contribution to
stability in the Balkan region.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): We too are grateful for
the briefing by Mr. Jessen-Petersen, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. Mr. JessenPetersen has a firm grip on the job in Kosovo, as has
already been demonstrated by the good results
achieved. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate Romania’s full support for Mr. JessenPetersen as he tackles this year’s many challenges. As
always, we would also like to express our highest
appreciation for, and encouragement to, the men and
women of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), as well as the staff of other international
organizations and agencies working in Kosovo. I also

thank Mr. Nebojsa Cović, President of the
Coordination Center for Kosovo and Metohija, for his
briefing.
Romania associates itself fully with the statement
that will be delivered later by the Ambassador of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.
The year 2005 is a significant one for Kosovo and
the whole region of the Western Balkans. We need
stability and security in Kosovo. But above all, we
need a tolerant and democratic society there. Dialogue
and thorough implementation of standards are
essential. We welcome the signs of progress described
in the report of the Secretary-General. There are
indications of growing political maturity in Pristina, as
proven by a rather smooth electoral process and the
energetic approach to standards by the new
government. We appreciate in particular the efforts
made to disseminate the message on standards as
broadly as possible among the population.
However, we will know that standards have
succeeded when Serbs no longer fear for their lives in
Kosovo. We recall the document on standards for
Kosovo, which states that the future of Kosovo must be
one in which all people — regardless of ethnic
background, race or religion — are free to live, work
and travel without fear, hostility or danger, and where
there is tolerance, justice and peace for everyone. That
is not yet the case in Kosovo.
We are aware that standards have multiple and
complex dimensions. There are painful problems
related to the economy, the rule of law, corruption,
organized crime and so on. Children going to school
under military escort, as described in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, is not a sign of normalcy, nor is it
something that one can durably build upon. Fear for
one’s life and security — especially if that fear is
ethnically motivated — must be addressed politically
and in an urgent manner. That makes it one of the
biggest challenges ahead for the political leaders of
Kosovo. It will also be a clear and objective test of the
implementation of standards. We also call on Serbs
living in Kosovo to work with UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to find
ways to end such fears.
Dialogue at all levels, between all communities in
Kosovo and between Belgrade and Pristina, is crucial
at this moment. Romania notes the impediments to
dialogue thus far. Nevertheless, we echo the call by the

15

S/PV.5130

Council of the European Union and the High
Representative, Javier Solana, to all communities in
Kosovo and to authorities in Belgrade and Pristina to
engage in substantial dialogue.
Romania continues to promote the idea of a
Security Council mission to Kosovo in the course of
this year. We believe in the importance of such a
mission, as it has been more than two years since the
last one took place, in December 2002. Although the
best moment for such a mission is yet to be
determined, the Council needs to take its messages
closer to all actors involved. It must also find ways to
stimulate cooperation and dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina.
In that regard, I am pleased to welcome the
comments made today by Mr. Jessen-Petersen and
Mr. Cović with regard to prospects for the resumption
of direct dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. We
hope that such a dialogue will be a meaningful one this
time.
As for what needs to follow the standards
evaluation, we reiterate our belief that a solution for
Kosovo must flow from and be based on the broader
European and Euro-Atlantic integration processes.
Romania welcomes the recent confirmation of such a
policy by the EU Council. Moreover, we believe that
the legitimate concerns of countries in the
neighbourhood should be duly taken into account.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
should express my appreciation to Mr. Søren JessenPetersen, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
commend the dedication of the entire United Nations
Mission in Kosovo.
I join others in welcoming the current report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. It is yet another
reminder that we cannot give up on our belief in and
insistence on a multi-ethnic Kosovo in which all ethnic
groups can live freely without fear. We commend the
work being done by the Special Representative. We
also share his dedication to ensuring that the situation
in Kosovo does not degenerate, but improves to serve
the aspirations of all people to justice, peace and
prosperity in a multi-ethnic Kosovo.

16

We are encouraged by progress made by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in the
implementation of the standards for Kosovo. We note
with concern, however, that, although work on the
standards has intensified, progress in many areas has
been slow and that none of the set eight standards has
been completely fulfilled. It is absolutely essential that
the political leadership in Belgrade and Pristina do
more work and engage in serious dialogue towards the
full implementation of the standards.
It is encouraging to note that there are internally
self-generated signs of political maturity in elections
and Government formation based on democratic
principles. That must be welcomed, strengthened and
consolidated. We welcome the positive commitment of
Kosovo’s opposition parties to playing a more
constructive role and to respecting the Constitutional
Framework.
The implementation of the standards remains key
for Kosovo. Thus, new mechanisms and structures
need to be put in place for specific actions with the
potential for providing positive results. The standards
are important, as they address a multiplicity of
concerns that are legitimate, fair and necessary. There
is no alternative to the standards and they should not be
renegotiated.
We urge greater efforts to be made to obtain the
cooperation of the Kosovo Serb community with the
Provisional Institutions, since that remains a major
hurdle to constructing the necessary institutions of
governance under the Constitutional Framework. At
the communal level, more deliberate initiatives are
required to promote incremental measures for more
inter-communal trust, interaction and accommodation.
The progress made in the area of local
Government reform is commendable and needs support
so as to increase the pace of the devolution of authority
at the local level. Local communities need to be
encouraged to make full use of this opportunity to
enrich their cultural identities and aspirations while
overcoming politically motivated ethnic divisions.
We encourage the measures, albeit still limited,
that have been taken in promoting gender equality,
including the filling of obvious gender gaps and the
revisiting of legal issues, together with the
development of an action plan for gender equality.

S/PV.5130

We note that the security situation has remained
stable and that the safety of minorities has improved
slightly. None of us can rest until all the people in
Kosovo are secure and at peace with themselves. That
freedom of movement has remained delicate is a source
of concern that requires urgent attention. Kosovo Serbs
who consider themselves at risk need to be reassured of
their freedom.
Efforts directed at infrastructure development,
humanitarian assistance, the reconstruction of
buildings, the supply of reliable electricity and the
strengthening of monetary institutions are crucial in
addressing Kosovo’s economic difficulties. We urge
efforts by all, including international partners, donors
and relevant agencies, to enhance the assistance that
Kosovo and its people need for their future.
Lastly, we recognize that the President of Serbia,
Boris Tadic, paid a visit to Kosovo last week — the
first visit by a President of Serbia since the inception
of UNMIK in June 1999. We welcome such visits and
hope they will serve to build confidence among the
people of Kosovo. We hope that Belgrade will continue
to be more forthcoming and supportive in the ongoing
efforts to build bridges between the majority and
minority communities in Kosovo and to enhance
mutual trust and accommodation. We commend the
assistance of the UNMIK police to the Kosovo Police
that helped in making the visit successful.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report on the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We also would like to thank his
Special Representative and head of UNMIK,
Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation in the region.
I would also like to thank the President of the
Coordination Centre of Serbia and Montenegro and of
the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija,
Mr. Nebosja Cović, for his participation in today’s
meeting.
Greece associates itself fully with the statement
that will soon be made by the Ambassador of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.
We agree with the analysis of the SecretaryGeneral that, in the aftermath of elections and the
creation of a coalition Government in October 2004,
the international community is witnessing encouraging

signs of commitment by the leadership of the
Provisional Institutions to the implementation of the
standards. We also share the Secretary-General’s
overall assessment that, while concrete steps have been
taken in some areas, the progress is uneven.
The transition from the elections to the
installation of the new coalition Government was held
in a smooth and democratic manner that showed
increasing maturity on behalf of the Provisional
Institutions and the Kosovar political parties. That
maturity has, however, to be extended to all parts of
Kosovar political life and especially to the
implementation of the standards.
The new Government has indeed undertaken
serious efforts to accelerate the implementation of the
standards, prioritizing those most affecting minority
communities. A number of elements from the
Standards Implementation Plan are reportedly
complete. A number of new mechanisms have been set
up and a number of measures taken or are envisaged to
be taken.
And yet, we have to note with concern that, as the
report recognizes, none of the standards has been fully
implemented, while there is a discrepancy between the
progress reported in the implementation of the
standards and the equally verified widening of the gap
in the ethnic divide among the two communities. In the
months to come, we should therefore ensure that due
attention be paid not only to the observance of the
listed actions and recommendations under the
standards Plan, but also on how that translates in the
reality of the lives of the communities on the ground.
Encouraged though we may be by the early signs
of progress, now is the time to focus on the obvious
shortcomings. Progress, as amply demonstrated in the
report, is for the most part limited to the central power
institution structures, with the rest of the system
unwilling or unable to follow. The report also rightly
points to the fact that the Provisional Institutions have
failed to embark on the crucial undertaking of
rebuilding the confidence and trust of the minorities.
The new notion, set out in the report, of differentiating
between the reality and the perception of security for
the minorities can be misleading. And in any case
winning the battle against perception is sometimes
winning half the war.
A serious effort to revitalize the returns process
and to improve freedom of movement and the public-

17

S/PV.5130

sector employment rates of members of minorities,
and, in general, a robust outreach to minorities by the
provisional authorities at all governmental levels,
would go a long way towards ensuring real and full
progress.
As the Secretary-General several times
emphasizes in his report, there cannot be full progress
in standards implementation without the participation
of the Kosovo Serbs and, thus, without a resumption of
the dialogue with Belgrade. In that spirit, we welcome
the recent letter from Mr. Cović to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General calling for a
resumption of the meetings of the working groups on
missing persons and energy, and we join the SecretaryGeneral’s call to the Kosovo Serbs for engagement in
the local reform process.
A key challenge in the whole process remains
addressing the problems of the Kosovo economy.
Progress in privatization is essential, along with the
strengthening
of
institutional
capacity
and
infrastructure. This is necessary in order to
successfully tackle the explosive unemployment
plaguing the society, particularly among young people,
and potentially undermining efforts for stability and
development.
The restoration of all religious sites and property
should be a priority for the provisional authorities.
Cultural monuments are part both of the history and
identity of the communities in Kosovo and of the
common heritage of the region. Their preservation is
not only a sign of respect, but a duty as well. We are
certain that, with the assistance of the international
community, the right framework of protection will be
formulated and that reconstruction programmes will be
promptly implemented.
The road ahead for Kosovo has been clearly
defined, within the parameters of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). As we are nearing the time of
the comprehensive review, progress has to be taken
forward beyond the first encouraging signs and uneven
results. A lot is still expected from the provisional
authorities, as indeed the people of Kosovo expect a lot
from the international community. But the goal of a
stable, multi-ethnic, democratic and prosperous
Kosovo is a prospect worth all the effort.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Like
others, I am grateful to the Secretary-General of his
report (S/2005/88), to the Special Representative for

18

his briefing and for the energy with which he is
carrying out his tasks in Kosovo and to Mr. Cović for
his intervention. The United Kingdom associates itself
fully with the European Union’s statement to be
delivered subsequently by the representative of
Luxembourg.
The United Kingdom shares the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that progress in implementing the
standards for Kosovo in recent months has been
tangible and is encouraging, and the view of the
Special Representative that the new Prime Minister and
his government have shown impressive commitment
and energy in striving to achieve the standards. Focus
now must be on continued delivery in the run-up to the
comprehensive review later this year. Yet, at the same
time, the overall situation in Kosovo is fragile. Hence
the need for the United Nations, in cooperation with
other appropriate organizations, to manage processes
and outcomes so that we are not again overtaken by
events.
I would like to make four simple points on what
we see as the priorities of Kosovo in the coming
months. First, Kosovo cannot take its eye off the
paramount task of fulfilling the standards, especially
those that relate to Kosovo’s minority community. The
onus is on the Provisional Institutions, on the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and on all the
communities in Kosovo to make sufficient progress on
the standards in order for the comprehensive review,
which will probably take place this summer, to decide
that it is possible to move to the next stage of the
process and therefore to start to discuss Kosovo’s final
status, as is already provided for in resolution 1244
(1999).
That may not be a foregone conclusion, but it is,
we believe, achievable if all make the necessary effort
and if current trends continue. But standards,
particularly those pertaining to the protection of
minorities, freedom of movement and the rule of law,
are not just a means to starting the status discussion.
They are essential to improving the daily lives of all
people in Kosovo, and they are also a precondition for
European integration. Obviously, any failure to
cooperate fully with the International Tribunal in The
Hague or any incitement, explicit or implicit, to interethnic violence would be a very serious setback.
Secondly, local government reform is a key to
reassuring minorities. The United Kingdom hopes to

S/PV.5130

see early progress on the five pilot decentralization
projects that the new government is now establishing.
We hope that these can be launched as soon as
possible, and we look forward thereafter to the
devolution
of
further
competencies
to
the
municipalities.
Thirdly, Kosovo’s struggling economy, with up to
60 per cent unemployment, is obviously a threat to
political stability. As regards the European Union and
UNMIK’s pillar IV, their leadership has an important
role in helping the Provisional Institutions to develop
an economic development plan and short-term job
creation schemes.
Fourthly, Kosovo Serbs remain largely outside
Kosovo politics, and we all know the background and
the reasons for that. There has been some progress
recently with a Kosovo Serb minister in charge of the
new Ministry for Returns and Communities, and there
has been some Kosovo Serb participation in the
decentralization working groups. The prospect of the
resumption in March of the direct dialogue working
group on the missing, which will take place with
Belgrade, is encouraging. But I have to say that,
despite the efforts of Mr. Cović, a much more
constructive approach is needed from Belgrade. And
let me put it to Mr. Cović bluntly, if I may. The only
way for Kosovo Serbs to have a say in the future of
Kosovo, a future where they can live in peace with
their neighbours, is to engage now in the political life
of Kosovo. In our view, Belgrade will not be allowed
to derail a possible future status process by deliberately
obstructing standards implementation.
In conclusion, 2005 will be a key year for
Kosovo. The onus lies with the people of Kosovo to
make the necessary progress themselves to allow a
final status process to start. But the international
community, the United Nations, the European Union
and NATO must be engaged in ongoing deliberations.
The investment being made in Kosovo, if it is to be
successful, has to lead to a Kosovo at peace at home
and with its neighbours, as Mr. Jessen-Petersen put it
in his intervention. But success will also have to
recognize that the European destination of Kosovo and
its neighbours will be key to insuring that peaceful
outcome. But that destination comes with a heavy
conditionality.
Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I
should like to welcome Special Representative Søren

Jessen-Petersen and to thank him for his instructive
and thorough briefing. We commend him and his staff
for bringing new life to the standards process. The
United States appreciates his strong leadership and his
hard work in Kosovo. We look forward to continuing to
support him and the rest of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) as they
work to implement Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).
Next month will mark the one-year anniversary
of the deplorable violence that erupted in Kosovo. This
moment of reflection one year later provides an
opportunity for Kosovo’s leaders and people to
recommit themselves to fulfilling the internationally
endorsed standards and to ensuring security and
freedom of movement for all its communities.
In that regard, we welcome the energy and
determination that the new government of Kosovo’s
Provisional Institutions has brought to the
implementation of the standards for Kosovo. Although
some progress has been made, it is important that more
be done, particularly in securing the right of refugees
and displaced persons to return to their homes, in
ensuring security for all communities and in reforming
local government. The momentum and the focus that
has been applied in recent months must continue,
especially at the local level, where progress in some of
those areas has thus far been insufficient.
In addition to helping to improve the lives of all
residents of Kosovo, sufficient progress on the
standards is necessary so that the international
community can begin a process to determine Kosovo’s
future status. We reaffirm that mid-2005 will present
itself as the first opportunity for a comprehensive
review of Kosovo’s progress in implementing the
standards, as set out in the Council’s presidential
statement of 12 December 2003 (S/PRST/2003/26).
We welcome UNMIK’s prioritization of the
standards as an important step in helping Kosovo to
prepare for the mid-2005 review. We also welcome
UNMIK’s effort to work with the Provisional
Institutions to reform local government throughout
Kosovo. Decentralization is an area of special
importance in implementing the standards and will
help make local governments more responsive to the
needs of their residents. We welcome recent progress
in producing a work plan for the Ministry of Local
Government Administration, and we urge the

19

S/PV.5130

Provisional Institutions to launch an initial tranche of
pilot projects as soon as possible.
The best chance to build a multi-ethnic,
democratic Kosovo will come if all of Kosovo’s
communities participate. We encourage the Kosovo
Serbs to rejoin Kosovo’s political institutions and
working groups, and we urge Belgrade to support that
engagement. It is not appropriate to deride the
conditions for minorities in Kosovo while refusing to
engage in efforts to improve them. In that regard, we
welcome the plans to resume the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina on missing persons, and we
encourage the resumption of all aspects of the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue.
We also reaffirm the need for all the
Governments of the region to cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. That would be not only an important step
in moving beyond the legacy of war, but foundational
to the establishment of the rule of law.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing, which is a useful supplement to the report of
the Secretary-General. I wish to express to him once
again France’s full support for his activities in Kosovo.
His determination, his energy and his leadership
qualities have made it possible to maintain a very
constructive climate for the international community’s
efforts in Kosovo. We therefore thank him once again
for that. Our thanks go also to General Yves de
Kermabon, Commander of KFOR, who in full
cooperation with Mr. Jessen-Petersen is leading the
stabilizing activities of the international military
presence in Kosovo.

there is still much to do to ensure the protection of
minorities, freedom of movement, the return of
displaced persons and refugees, the rule of law and the
fight against organized crime.
In particular, we agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s emphasis on returns and the rights of
Kosovo’s communities, and we expect concrete results
from the provisional authorities in that area. The
responsibility of the majority community is to create a
climate in which the members of minority
communities, particularly Kosovo Serbs, feel that they
can live in Kosovo in normal conditions of safety and
dignity.
I would also like to stress that we can move
forward towards resolving this matter only if
substantial progress is made in those priority areas.
That has been the consistent position of the Security
Council. The provisional authorities must not only
make progress in the areas that concern them, but also
permanently sustain the progress made. That is the
only way we will be able to decide whether to begin
negotiations following the comprehensive review that
must be carried out later in the year.
From that perspective — and this is my last
point — we appeal to all parties to participate actively
and constructively in the processes under way in
Kosovo. I would like to stress that my country supports
the Secretary-General’s appeal to the Kosovo Serbs to
become constructively
involved
in
Kosovo’s
institutions and his appeal to Serbia’s authorities to
encourage them in that regard. It is only through
participation in the institutions and implementation of
the standards — not through withdrawal or defiance —
that the legitimate interests of the various parties can
be taken into account.

The Permanent Representative of Luxembourg
will shortly make a statement on behalf of the
European Union. I associate myself with that
statement, and therefore I shall make only a few
comments.

Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General
for his report and to thank Mr. Jessen-Petersen for his
briefing. I should also like to thank Mr. Cović for
participating in this meeting and for his statement.

First, I would refer to the Secretary-General’s
report on standards implementation in Kosovo
(S/2005/88), which was issued last week, to note that it
welcomes the commitment of Kosovo’s provisional
authorities to make progress on the eight standards set
out by the international community. But, together with
the Secretary-General, we also wish to note that
progress in many areas remains insufficient and that

Mr. Jessen-Petersen has done a great deal of
active work since he assumed his post last year, and we
express our appreciation to him for that. We believe
that in his future work he will continue to earnestly
carry out the mandate entrusted to him by the Security
Council.

20

S/PV.5130

This is a crucial period for Kosovo. The current
developments in the situation will have an important
bearing on its future and on the stability of the entire
Balkan region. We have always believed that a sound
and comprehensive settlement of the question of
Kosovo will require comprehensive implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999).
During the most recent period, the situation in
Kosovo has remained generally stable. We welcome
the active efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
implement the standards in relevant fields. However,
we also note that progress in some key areas remains
insufficient, including promoting the return of refugees
and ensuring the safety and freedom of movement of
minority communities.
We also note that progress has been slow in
addressing the issues of employment and economic
development and in improving the lives of members of
minority groups. We hope that Kosovo’s leaders will
cooperate actively with UNMIK to undertake further
measures in those areas to effectively promote trust
and reconciliation among all ethnic communities, thus
laying a solid foundation for peaceful coexistence
among all of Kosovo’s communities. In addition, we
hope that the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment and Belgrade will resume direct dialogue
as soon as possible. That is essential in order to steer
developments in the situation in Kosovo in the right
direction.
This year is a crucial one for Kosovo. We believe
that during this next stage work should focus on the
implementation of the relevant standards in all areas.
We hope for a sincere and pragmatic spirit on all sides,
which will help promote implementation.
Any acts of violence such as those that occurred
last March would have very serious and negative
consequences and are therefore unacceptable. We hope
that Kosovo can achieve substantive results in the
economic and security areas and thereby effectively
improve the lives of all the peoples of Kosovo.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Benin.
I should like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for having introduced the

report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We particularly appreciated the objective technical
assessment of the implementation of the standardsbefore-status policy.
We have gleaned from what we heard that the
situation in Kosovo is, on the whole, developing
satisfactorily and that significant progress has been
made in standards implementation. We particularly
welcome the progress made by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo since the
October 2004 elections. We welcome the fact that there
has been strict compliance with the Constitutional
Framework and the rules of the Kosovo Assembly, and
we commend the ongoing efforts made by the new
Government to ensure respect for the consistent
implementation of standards to stabilize the political,
economic and security situation in Kosovo, as well as
to reinforce the multi-ethnic nature of Kosovo.
We encourage the Government to continue to
work towards effective minority integration. We agree
with the Secretary-General, who stresses that the
Government of Kosovo will be judged on its efforts to
build confidence among minorities without losing the
confidence of the majority. Therein lie the true
challenges that need to be met in order to make Kosovo
a multi-ethnic, viable and liveable entity where all
communities can be on good terms with each other and
work together for a consensus-based management of
their daily lives, so that they can design, and have a
future together in, a shared society.
We believe that the Government needs to step up
its initiatives to overcome the reluctance of the Kosovo
Serb community to cooperate with the Provisional
Institutions.
The
Government
must
promote
constructive dialogue with the authorities of Serbia and
Montenegro to that end. The Serbian side must be
willing to engage in that dialogue.
Belgrade’s opposition to the participation by
Serbs in the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment has been a real impediment to the
implementation and the attainment of the principal
goals of the standards-before-status policy. We
welcome Belgrade’s willingness to resume direct
dialogue within the working groups on missing persons
and on energy. UNMIK should, for its part, also
intensify discussions with the Belgrade authorities,
because participation by minorities is the only realistic

21

S/PV.5130

option for creating understanding among communities
that are bound by a common history and by their
commitment to a common land where coexistence is
their only choice.
Likewise, it is important for the Kosovo
authorities to take a clear stance on inter-community
incidents, which continue to taint the atmosphere in the
province. However minor they may be, they have a
major impact on the subjective considerations which
mould people’s perceptions about security and give rise
to confidence among minority groups.
We encourage all countries in the region to try to
find solutions that suit all parties and to restore the
inalienable rights of all communities living in Kosovo.
For its part, the international community must remain
mobilized and speak with one voice to the parties
involved in Kosovo to obtain the results we hope to
see.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Luxembourg. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria, Romania,
Croatia and Turkey and the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) country Iceland, member of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
declaration.
Let me begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for his
briefing and by reiterating the European Union's full
support for his work towards implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
It has been nearly a year since the political
process was derailed by an outbreak of violence in
Kosovo in March 2004 and a few months since the
central-level institutions began to function. The
European Union shares the Secretary-General's
assessment that the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment have shown “some encouraging and
tangible progress" in their commitment to the
implementation of the standards. The new

22

Government's publicly stated resolve in this regard is
duly noted.
The European Union supports UNMIK's
prioritization of actions carried out within the
framework of those standards that most directly affect
minority communities and the goal of a democratic and
multi-ethnic Kosovo, especially those concerning the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons, the
protection of minority communities, freedom of
movement and decentralization. In that context, the
European Union calls on the Provisional Institutions to
make full use of the increased competencies recently
transferred to them by UNMIK. It encourages UNMIK
to examine the possibility of further such transfers.
Given the important milestones coming up in
2005, we welcome the substantial dialogue between all
Kosovo communities, as well as between Belgrade and
Pristina. The European Union calls upon all
communities to participate actively in the ongoing
process leading to the reform of local government and
to the establishment of a decentralized and sustainable
administration that can guarantee the protection of
minority communities and improved living conditions
for the population at large.
In that context, the European Union calls
particularly on the Kosovo Serb community to engage
constructively in the Provisional Institutions at a
central level. Kosovo Serbs must recognize that it is in
their immediate interest to participate in the ongoing
political process; that is the best way for them to
promote their legitimate concerns and to have a say in
shaping the future of Kosovo.
While the European Union is encouraged by the
fact that the authorities in Belgrade have announced
their readiness to restart a direct dialogue with Pristina,
it regrets that they have not as yet encouraged Kosovo
Serb participation in any of the ongoing processes.
While recognizing that progress in the
implementation of some of the standards has been
made, substantial further progress across all eight
standards will be necessary, particularly on the priority
actions taken in the framework of those standards. This
is especially important given the fact that we are
approaching the comprehensive review of overall
progress made towards implementation of the
standards, to be held in mid-2005. That review will
have a major impact on the timing of final-status talks,
and it is therefore in the common interest of all

S/PV.5130

concerned to ensure that real, verifiable progress has
been made in the implementation of the standards.
In the long term, and with the European
perspective for the Western Balkans in mind,
accelerated implementation of standards should not be
viewed as a goal in itself nor as a quicker way to a
decision on the future status of Kosovo. Through this
exercise of implementing the standards, and thereby
building a sustainable democratic and multi-ethnic
society, the people of Kosovo will move closer to
realizing that European perspective.
In that regard, the European Union underlines
that full and unrestricted cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia is an international obligation and an
essential requirement for further rapprochement with
the European Union.
The European Union has been steadfastly at the
side of the people of Kosovo throughout the postconflict period by providing the lion’s share of
resources — military, financial and human — to repair
the damage of war and decades of under-investment.
The European Union will continue to help Kosovo to
make progress towards sustainable economic
development. However, such development is
contingent on the creation by UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions, as a matter of priority, of the
necessary conditions in the framework of a
comprehensive, integrated strategy compatible with the
European Union.
I wish to conclude by reiterating that Kosovo will
not return to a pre-1999 situation and that the European
Union is unwavering in its commitment to helping a
democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo, characterized by
the protection it provides to its minority communities,
on its way to full integration in Europe, regardless of
its future status.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Albania. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Nesho (Albania): Allow me at the outset to
express my delegation’s appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) (S/2005/88).

Let me also welcome the presence at this meeting
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen, and thank him for his
excellent briefing on the situation in Kosovo.
On behalf of my Government, I would like to
commend Mr. Jessen-Petersen for his tireless and
professional work as head of the Mission, for his
effective cooperation with the Kosovo Institutions and
with all other stakeholders, and for his active
diplomacy in the region. Once again, I would like to
assure him of Albania’s full support.
We would also like to acknowledge here the
important contribution of UNMIK and of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR), both of which have definitely played a
role in bringing about a much better situation in
Kosovo today.
The year 2005 is an important one for Kosovo. In
a few months the standards implementation review will
take place. Albania shares the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the recent period, since his last report,
has marked significant progress. As the report notes in
paragraph 2, “encouraging and tangible progress” has
been found in the “commitment of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to the implementation
of the standards. Overall performance has improved”,
and “work on standards has intensified”. Also, as noted
in paragraph 4, “the new Government has undertaken
serious efforts to accelerate the implementation of the
standards”. We know that much more remains to be
done, but those are tangible accomplishments for
UNMIK and the new government headed by
Mr. Haradinaj, who, as the report notes in paragraph 2
of annex I, has demonstrated an “outstanding personal
commitment to standards, and to accelerating standards
delivery”.
These accomplishments show movement along
the right track, good will and the necessary
commitment. They form a solid and optimistic basis
for further overall progress on the implementation of
the standards during the upcoming months. The
implementation of the standards is a complex and longterm process that needs time, capacity and the
cooperation of all political factors in Kosovo with the
international community. The commitment of all
parties and their shouldering of responsibilities in this
process will make possible the fulfilment of the
required standards.

23

S/PV.5130

It is important to highlight that an effective,
multi-ethnic, stable and democratic society in Kosovo
requires, first of all, adherence to prior commitments
and focus on the minority issues, good governance and
decentralization.
The issue of minorities, as a basic element of a
multi-ethnic society, demands the engagement of
governmental institutions at all levels and civil society
in Kosovo. We have encouraged the Government of
Kosovo to pay closer attention and to work harder in
this area; to exert further efforts to revitalize the return
process; to expand the inter-community dialogue; and
to respect the rights of minorities, including their
cultural and religious heritage. We are pleased to note
that the Secretary-General states in paragraph 6 his
report that “the Government has made the enhancement
of minority rights a priority in its programme”.
Meeting those objectives not only demands the
vision, disposition and commitment of the Kosovo
leadership; it also requires the will, engagement and
efforts of the Serb community to become part of and a
contributor to the new democratic and multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo. The non-participation approach, the
boycott of the political elections, disengagement in the
Assembly and the provisional government, and outside
influences in the activities and decision-making of the
minority communities not only impede progress in
standards implementation but also calls into question
the establishment of multi-ethnic institutions and
society.
The Serb minority is a part of Kosovo society
and, as such, has equal rights and obligations. There is
no excuse for a lack of willingness to engage and
participate in political life, decision-making and even
the process designed to address their special needs. The
parallel structures should immediately be dismantled in
order not to keep that minority a hostage of the past.
Good governance is a priority objective for the
governing institutions of Kosovo. The establishment of
the rule of law, an independent judiciary, public
administration and respect for private property are
indispensable in this respect.
Meeting the standards requires that more
competences and responsibilities be transferred to local
authorities and that privatization be accelerated. That
process would have a positive impact on economic
development and on the climate for foreign investment
in Kosovo.

24

Decentralization remains a key process for the
establishment of a democratic society in Kosovo. We
think that this process should take into account the
following three important aspects: respect for the
parameters set out in the principles of the Council of
Europe on this matter; broad, but gradual,
implementation; and the avoidance of cantonization,
which would impede the normal functioning of a multiethnic society in Kosovo. The Albanian Government
holds the view that decentralization should be in
parallel with the shaping and strengthening of the
central government structures and that the autonomy of
local authorities should not avoid or harm the vertical
line of power and, what is more, should not encroach
upon the territory of Kosovo. We see this as a
necessary process that will help the economic, social
and cultural development of all communities,
strengthen local initiative and bring all the
communities closer to the decision-making process.
The standards implementation review requires
preparation and commitment by the international
community with respect to opening the discussion on
the status of Kosovo. As we approach mid-2005,
“standards with status” might be the most realistic
approach. That would generate a positive impact on the
internal developments in Kosovo, as well as on
stability, peace and security in the region.
Albania firmly believes that the international
community and the Security Council, in cooperation
with the Contact Group, the United States of America
and the European Union — which have always had a
major constructive role in fostering a just and stable
balance in the region — need to move forward with the
discussion of the status of Kosovo. The solution of the
status issue is an indispensable factor for short-term
development, as well as for the long-term prospects of
Kosovo in the European family.
The Albanian Government thinks that the process
of discussion and definition of the status of Kosovo has
to take into consideration some basic elements which
will undoubtedly produce a long-term solution that
would have a positive impact on stability, peace and
security in the region. Among them, we would like to
mention the following: respect for the democratically
expressed free will of the people of Kosovo; guarantees
with respect to protection of and respect for minority
rights in Kosovo, including guarantees regarding the
protection of the legacy of cultural and religious

S/PV.5130

values; and ruling out the partition of the territory of
Kosovo.
Albania remains fully committed to cooperating
with the Security Council and the international
community in finding just and long-term solutions that
will better serve peace and security in the Balkans. As
part of the region’s trend towards Euro-Atlantic
integration, Albania’s policy is oriented toward the
future, bearing in mind that the past belongs to the past
and should not become an obstacle to that future.
Certain irreversible realities have to be accepted with
courage and realism in any country in the region. Only
in that way will we strengthen our cooperation and
achieve our common future in the European family.
The President (spoke in French): Mr. Nebojsa
Cović, President of the Coordination Centre of Serbia
and Montenegro and of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, has asked for the floor, and I
call on him now.
Mr. Cović (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I am very grateful for the
statements made at this meeting. I have just a few
comments to make on what the Council has heard
today.
I must make it clear that the Serbs are not victims
of misinformation; their sense of insecurity is a
consequence of the horrific reality that for nearly six
years they have faced in Kosovo and Metohija. Since
2001, I have had the opportunity to observe and
participate in the ongoing process. I have attended a
number of Security Council meetings on this subject,
including meetings that took place before 17 March
2004. At that time, we were full of optimism and we
hailed the great achievements that had been made.
Then came the events of 17 March. Everyone said that
they amounted to a mere incident, but after all that has
happened I will leave it to Council members to decide
whether that was indeed the case.
We are in an environment that limits our options.
Our choices have been reduced to the following. If the
status quo remains, there will be violence. If the status
quo cannot continue, some Council members have said
that Kosovo and Metohija will never come under
Belgrade’s rule or that the situation will never revert to
that of 1999.
Some members have also said that the partition of
Kosovo is unacceptable. I appeal to them to take that

one step further and say whether or not they would
view independence for Kosovo as acceptable. Perhaps
we should attempt to have such an exchange of views,
because the problem of Kosovo and Metohija has gone
beyond the constraints of diplomatic exchanges of
views that focus on great achievements, impressions
and so forth. For nearly six years, more than 200,000
people have been unable to return to their homes.
Some speakers today, with the best of intentions,
spoke of the lack of good will on the part of Kosovo
Serbs. What sort of good will must the Serbs
demonstrate when their houses are set on fire, when
they must go to work in armoured vehicles and when
their children need armed escorts to go to school? Does
that reflect the multi-ethnic society and the standards
we are all fighting for?
I do not think that this is an easy problem. I do
not think that Mr. Jessen-Petersen has an easy job. But
I appeal to Council members to stop accusing Belgrade
of things for which it bears no blame. If the
international community is to blame any party for the
failure and incompetence of those who should be
addressing the Kosovo issue, that party is not Belgrade.
Belgrade will accept responsibility, but only where it
bears blame.
The Contact Group needs to be able to influence
the assessment of standards implementation. Here, let
me speak of the standards relating to returns.
Assessments of progress cannot be limited to intentions
or desires. When we assess progress on returns, we
need to know how many people have returned and how
many of them have remained in their homes. We know
that many will not return, and we do not wish to be
biased in that regard. I know that some will respond
that numbers are not that important. But they are
indeed important. I was encouraged by the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2005/88), because it
has begun to make use of figures and percentages: that
is the only way that progress can be assessed.
We also heard today that security conditions have
improved. How can that be measured? Is it measured
by a smaller number of Serbs being killed or injured? It
is just that they have learned to keep out of harm’s
way: that is the reality of Kosovo. Perhaps no one
wishes to see that reality, but we must work to improve
the situation.
We heard that the situation can be seen to have
improved because President Tadic and Prime Minister

25

S/PV.5130

Kostunica have visited Metohija. If that is an
indication of improved security, then I agree. But this
assessment should not be misused with respect to
political processes. We have said that Belgrade would
not impinge on any such processes; as long as I am in
my present position, we will place no obstacles in their
way. But we have also promised that we would not
accept an arrogant approach on the part of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We can cooperate in the process, but it must
be on an equal footing. I request the Council’s support
in that regard, which would help both us and
Mr. Jessen-Petersen.
Encouraging Serbs to participate in the
Institutions is no easy matter. I regret that no speaker
today mentioned the fact that at one point Serbs did
indeed participate in the work of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government. They left, however,
because they viewed them as lacking credibility and as
being a step towards an independent Kosovo. Such a
Kosovo would be without Serbs, but it would not bring
peace and stability to the region. We have to be serious
politicians and consider matters in the long term.
Let me briefly address the question of power
outages. I agree that they constitute a technical
problem, and I shall provide members with a transcript
of our meeting with the Kosovo Energy Company at
Prolom Banja in December 2004. All that was said is
true, but it should be added that in the past there were
8,000 Serbs among the company’s 15,000 employees;
today, there are only 28.
Parallel structures were also mentioned. Such
parallel structures provide a livelihood for 35,000
people who live and work in Kosovo.
Let us be open and frank about all the issues. I
know that Kosovo and Metohija poses a major twentyfirst-century problem, but I am here to work
constructively to resolve it.
Lastly, let me refer to the country dialling code,
which was also mentioned by the Special
Representative. The International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) has said that it would be possible to have
both the old country code and the new country code in
place, as well as a sub-code that is part of the current
country code for Serbia and Montenegro, 381. It would
be possible to do that through Monaco, as has been
done thus far. We are available for any talks with the
Special Representative and UNMIK to come up with

26

an economical solution. But I appeal to all not to
misuse the ITU country code issue.
I also ask that the Secretary-General not prejudge
the resolution of the issue of Kosovo’s final status. Any
change in the current “standards before status” policy —
such as a change towards “both standards and status” —
would basically be a recognition that the international
mission in Kosovo had failed.
As far as Belgrade is concerned, we are at the
Council’s disposal for any kind of constructive
cooperation. But we must be very realistic. No
politician in Belgrade is ready or willing to participate
in the independence of Kosovo.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
Mr. Jessen-Petersen.
Mr. Jessen-Petersen: Let me first thank the
members of the Security Council for their many very
useful and important observations and statements. It
goes without saying that I have listened very carefully.
In particular, I would like to thank members of the
Council for the many encouraging and supportive
words directed at the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMMIK) and at
my colleagues, who, as all the members of the Council
are aware, are working in difficult conditions in
Kosovo.
I listened with some perplexity, and even real
sadness, to the two statements made by Mr. Cović. I
must say that, in listening to Mr. Cović, I did not quite
recognize the situation he described in Kosovo as the
one I know after more than six months on the ground. I
will not take up the Council’s time to go into details
about the many things that Mr. Cović said. I think that
the technical assessment and the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/88) are clear, as Mr. Cović
just recognized. I believe that, as we presented it this
time, the technical assessment has the merit of being
based on facts, containing many statistics and being
based on reality. I am glad that Mr. Cović recognized
that.
As all the members of the Council have stated —
and I agree — the report of the Secretary-General is
very clear in stating that there has been tangible
progress but that there are still many shortcomings and
deficiencies. Our focus over the next several months —
working with the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment and, I certainly hope, with the minority

S/PV.5130

communities and the Kosovo Serbs — will be on
addressing all the deficiencies and shortcomings,
which are mainly linked to improving the conditions of
the minorities.
As I said, I cannot go into all the details. I would,
however, just like to give the Council a couple of
examples of what, I must say, I find totally out of touch
with reality on the ground. Mr. Cović spoke about the
lack of basic security. We should not get carried away
by statistics, but statistics are important. It is a fact —
and we have said it many times — that there has not
been one single serious ethnically related incident
since last June. The perpetrators in that case were
arrested immediately and are now before a court. With
all due respect to Mr. Cović, that is not because people
are simply not moving about. Many Kosovo Serbs are
moving about. Many in fact enjoy freedom of
movement. However, we must now focus on those who
do not enjoy freedom of movement. They exist; and
there are far too many of them. I have made it clear
that we cannot talk about sufficient progress in terms
of implementing standards so long as some minorities
are still forced to live behind barbed wire and are
unable to move. But the vast majority of Kosovo Serbs
are moving about freely. However, as I said, the fact is
that there has not been a single serious ethnically
related incident since last June.
Let me correct myself. That is not quite true.
Unfortunately, two of the Kosovo Serbs who
courageously stood in the election were both victims of
serious incidents. After the elections, one candidate
was attacked in Belgrade and is now seeking refugee
status in a European country. Another Kosovo Serb
leader was attacked recently in the northern part of
Kosovo. That attack was immediately condemned by
all political leaders. Again, it is not correct to say that
there are incidents and that they are not condemned. If
there are no condemnations it is because there have not
been any incidents. In the single case where there was
an incident — which, regrettably, was against a very
important Kosovo Serb leader — there was an
immediate condemnation.
Let me give the Council just one more example,
and I could give many. As to the lack of access to the
media, the easiest thing for me is to quote from a
recent report by the independent Temporary Media
Commissioner. It is a direct quote; these are not my
words: “Minority access to the media compares
favourably with the diversity and breadth of access

found elsewhere in the Balkans and, indeed, in much of
Europe”. I could continue, but I would like to point out
that it is important that we base our dialogue on
honesty and on facts. Then, I think, together we can
move forward.
That is also the reason I welcome the readiness
recently shown by Belgrade to resume the dialogue. I
have been pushing for that ever since my first visit to
Belgrade, at the end of August last year, two weeks
after I began my mission. I am very pleased that, as a
result of my constant pushing on the importance of a
dialogue and of Belgrade’s being actively involved, we
now have an invitation from Belgrade to resume the
dialogue. There have been several references to that. I
think that is very important, and I welcome it, because
it goes without saying — and I have said it so many
times — that Belgrade has a key role to play in this
process.
I have just two more comments on Mr. Cović’s
references to telecommunications and to electricity.
The reason that UNMIK, acting in full accordance with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and based on
a statement from the United Nations to the
International
Telecommunication
Union
(ITU)
supporting that request, has pushed for that is that right
now, with the telephone lines being under the control
of entities other than Kosovo, Kosovo is losing around
€50 million in revenue a year. In addition to that, I can
talk about telecommunications being, of course, a very
important engine of the economy, and, as I have said,
we need to get the economy moving.
So, we are not in any way intending to prejudge a
final status. That is not our mandate; that is not my
responsibility. We have simply asked for that telephone
code to be assigned on a temporary basis to the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo in
the interests of the clients and the customers
throughout Kosovo. It is a technical issue on a
temporary, interim basis — nothing else.
As to the electricity issue, I will not devote too
many words to it. Far too much has been said about it.
Let me just say that this is a problem that,
unfortunately, is affecting some 60,000 people right
now, of whom 95 to 97 per cent are Kosovo Albanians.
It is a result of the legacy of an absolutely dilapidated
infrastructure that UNMIK inherited in 1999, and in
order to simply have enough revenue for repairs, we
have to insist on customers’ paying their bills. That is

27

S/PV.5130

what we are doing, irrespective of ethnic background.
Again, it is a purely technical issue, but we have to
generate enough resources to keep the two power
plants going.
I do regret that it has affected those people whose
power supplies broke down — as a result of
deficiencies, not of any policy — and I do regret that,
for some people who are not prepared to pay their bills,
it is has not been possible to reconnect. I have one
single message for those people, including to the very
few Kosovo Serbs among them: Pay, and you will have
electricity this afternoon.
Let me say that I also welcome recent statements
that the Serb Orthodox church now seems ready to reengage so that we can get on with the urgent work of
repairing and restoring the religious monuments. That
is a top priority and I am very pleased that, as a result
of many initiatives that we have also taken to engage
those in the Serb Orthodox church who want to move
forward — and there are many, a large majority — and
also with the very important help of Belgrade, we have
now found a solution, and I believe that we will be able
to re-engage and start repairs very soon.
Finally, let me say that I will return to Kosovo
determined to continue our close partnership with the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and to

28

support them in their determination to address all the
shortcomings in standards implementation. They know
that they have a lot of hard work ahead of them. They
are committed to engaging in that hard work. We will
continue our daily efforts to reach out to the Kosovo
Serbs and to bring them into the processes, and we will
continue the very important dialogue with Belgrade
and with other States in the region.
We have a clear agenda ahead of us. We have a
clear timetable. We know what we have to do. The
Provisional Institutions, as I say, know that only hard
work and a strong commitment to the implementation
of the priority standards will get them there. They are
determined to succeed. We are determined to support
them, and I do look forward to meeting with the
Council again three months from now. I hope I will
then be able — and I believe I will — to report on
further progress, so that we can move Kosovo and the
region forward towards the normalization and the
standardization that they need.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list. The Security Council has
thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.
