A /77/PV.32

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

32

nd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 9 November 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Araba (Benin),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 89 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Notes by the Secretary-General transmitting
the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (A/77/308 and A/77/308/Add.1)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.9)
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): Slovenia aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of the
European Union (see A/77/PV.31). I wish to make the
following remarks in my national capacity.
Slovenia supports draft resolution A/77/L.9, on
the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). As one of the 32 States with a fully fledged
nuclear programme, Slovenia has always relied on
the important work of the IAEA pertaining to nuclear
safety and security. We also contribute to the important
work of the Agency through our activities as a member
of the Board of Governors and will continue to do so
in the future. The role of the IAEA is indispensable
in the field of nuclear non-proliferation, the peaceful
uses of nuclear technology and technology transfers to
developing countries, as well as nuclear safety, security
and safeguards.

With regard to nuclear safety, we are deeply
concerned about Russia’s war on Ukraine, which has
had significant ramifications for global nuclear safety
and security. Slovenia condemns in the strongest terms
the unprovoked and unjustified military aggression
against Ukraine. We fully support Director General
Grossi’s efforts to establish a nuclear safety and
security protection zone around Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant.
Slovenia regrets that the tenth Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) did not conclude with the adoption of
an outcome document. Nonetheless, the legally binding
obligations of the NPT and commitments from the past
Review Conferences remain valid. In that regard, the
IAEA safeguards system is a fundamental component
of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and plays an
indispensable role in the implementation of the NPT.
We welcome regular updates of the IAEA’s
verification and monitoring activities with regard
to Iran’s nuclear commitments under the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). In addition,
Iran still has to respond to the call of the Board of
Governors, which in June urged Iran to cooperate
in full with the IAEA, without any further delay or
conditionality, in order to resolve all pending safeguards
issues in accordance with its legally binding obligations
under its NPT Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement.
Slovenia expresses deep concern over the nuclear
and ballistic missile activities of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We call on that country to take

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-68288 (E)
*2268288*

A/77/PV.32

concrete, verified action towards the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula, comply with its obligations
under the relevant Security Council resolutions and
refrain from nuclear tests and ballistic missile launches.
We urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
engage in a meaningful dialogue to prevent escalation
and strengthen sustainable peace and security.
Slovenia commends the transparent manner in
which Australia, the United Kingdom and the United
States (AUKUS) have approached the potential
acquisition of conventionally armed and nuclearpowered submarines by Australia. We expect that
AUKUS partners will continue to pursue their goals
together with the IAEA secretariat and in full respect
of their international obligations.
Finally, as a country benefiting from nuclear
energy, we deeply appreciate the Agency’s work in
the area of nuclear safety, security and safeguards. We
promote sustainable development through our support
for the activities of the IAEA on a broad range of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, including as a clean
and reliable energy source. In that regard, Slovenia is
delighted to have been able to financially support the
renovation of the Seibersdorf Laboratories. At the same
time, we welcome the activities of the secretariat in
pursuit of gender equality and gender balance. For that
reason, Slovenia has provided a donation to the Marie
Skłodowska-Curie Fellowship Programme.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with
the statement of the European Union (EU) (see A/77/
PV.31). I wish to make the following statement in my
national capacity.
I would like to thank Czechia for introducing draft
resolution A/77/L.9, on the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Ireland strongly
supports the work of the IAEA and the professional,
objective and impartial manner in which it fulfils its
mandate of atoms for peace and development. We
are very happy to once again co-sponsor the draft
resolution on the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency.
Nuclear and radiological technologies have
an important role to play in efforts to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. Across areas such as
medicine, industry, food and agriculture, the IAEA’s
activities play a crucial role in supporting States to
develop, enhance and share their capacities in the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. I would like to point
2/17

09/11/2022

in particular to the Agency’s work over many years to
assist countries in building their capacity for diagnosis
and treatment in the fight against cancer.
The Director General’s work to advance gender
parity within the Agency, as well as its broader
initiative to increase the number of women in the
nuclear field through the Marie Skłodowska-Curie
Fellowship Programme, are very welcome. That is an
important contribution to the objective of strengthening
the gender perspective in the nuclear area. Ireland is
pleased to have been one of the first supporters of the
Fellowship fund.
The sustainable use of nuclear energy must be
accompanied by appropriate, strong and effective
nuclear safety and security. The IAEA plays an
essential part in supporting the implementation and
continuous improvement of nuclear safety and security
standards worldwide. Unfortunately, the issue of
nuclear safety and security has been highlighted this
year by Russia’s military action against, and in the
vicinity of, civilian nuclear installations in Ukraine.
Ireland condemns the actions of the Russian Federation
in its illegal, unprovoked and unjustified war in
Ukraine, which poses continued threats to the safety
and security of Ukrainian nuclear facilities and their
civilian personnel, and impedes the IAEA’s safeguards
verification activities.
We support the IAEA Director General’s promotion
of the seven pillars of nuclear safety and security
regarding peaceful nuclear facilities and materials in
all circumstances, including in situations of armed
conflict. The situation at Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant is untenable, and its illegal occupation by Russia
significantly raises the risk of nuclear accidents or
incidents. The ongoing shelling and missile fire around
Zaporizhzhya and other Ukrainian nuclear facilities
also raises grave concerns. We support calls for the
immediate withdrawal of Russian troops from the
entire territory of Ukraine, including those sites. In
that regard, and as stated by our EU colleague, we urge
agreement as soon as possible on the Director General’s
proposal to establish a nuclear safety and protection
zone around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
Ireland commends the important work of the
IAEA and recognizes that its safeguards system is
a fundamental component of the non-proliferation
regime and plays an essential role in the implementation
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
22-68288

09/11/2022

Weapons (NPT). Ireland strongly supports universal
adherence to the additional protocol and considers
that the comprehensive safeguards agreements and the
additional protocol constitute the current verification
standard under the NPT.
Ireland is gravely concerned by Iran’s continued
escalation of its nuclear programme, in some cases
with no plausible civilian justification. Those actions
are inconsistent with the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and raise very serious proliferation
risks. Ireland strongly supports the JCPOA and its
full restoration. Only full JCPOA implementation
and cooperation with the IAEA on monitoring and
verification can provide the international community
with the necessary assurances of the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. In that
regard, Ireland also urges Iran to cooperate with the
Agency in order to fully clarify and resolve safeguards
issues without further delay.
In the context of ongoing challenges to the global
disarmament and non-proliferation regime, we reaffirm
our strongest support for the indispensable work of
the IAEA in ensuring that the civil uses of nuclear
energy meet the highest safety, security and safeguards
standards against nuclear proliferation.
Mr. Salmeen (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): The
State of Kuwait believes in the important role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in various
spheres, most importantly the transfer of knowledge
and capacity-building for the optimal implementation
of nuclear applications. Accordingly, my country
is keen to participate in the annual discussion of
the report of the IAEA (A/77/308 and A/77/308/
Add.1). That has been the case for the 58 years since
the State of Kuwait joined the Agency. Through its
various national institutions, my country continues to
cooperate closely with the various departments of the
IAEA with a view to benefiting from its programmes
and building our capacities and national institutions in
order to implement vital projects for achieving social
and economic development.
My country underscores the importance of
promoting cooperation with all stakeholders in order to
advance the concept of atoms for peace and development,
especially as the world is facing successive crises that
impact energy, the economy and food security, which

A/77/PV.32

require the support of the IAEA for the systems of
nuclear security and safety in Member States and the
implementation of relevant safeguards.
In the area of nuclear security, our bilateral
cooperation is based on an integrated national plan,
which in previous years has played an important role
in establishing a strong and sustained infrastructure for
nuclear security. In early August, the State of Kuwait
presented its national report in the context of the eighth
and ninth review sessions of the contracting parties
to the Convention on Nuclear Safety. As evidence
of the continued cooperation between the State of
Kuwait and the IAEA, I am pleased to announce a
national contribution earlier this year of $200,000 to
the last phase of the programme for upgrading the
Agency’s Seibersdorf Laboratories, so that the overall
contribution from the State of Kuwait amounts to
$1.7 million for all the phases since the programme was
launched in 2015.
I would like also to note that my country also
hosted a number of events last year, both nationally and
regionally, in cooperation with the Agency. We support
the initiatives of the Agency in various fields, including
the Zoonotic Disease Integrated Action (ZODIAC)
initiative and the Nuclear Technology for Controlling
Plastic Pollution initiative. The State of Kuwait looks
forward to hosting the first ZODIAC training session,
to be held in 2023 for the Asia-Pacific member States,
and hosting the mission of an IAEA group of experts on
international advisory services in the area of physical
prevention. In the context of the programme of action
on curing cancer, my country commends the Agency’s
role in that programme, while noting that the Kuwait
Fund for Arab Economic Development contributed
€19.6 million to Chad for supporting a programme that
fights female cancer in cooperation with the Islamic
Development Bank.
My country reiterates its commitment to enabling
the role of women and achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals, in conformity with the 2035 vision
of the State of Kuwait. In that regard, we support the
Marie Skłodowska-Curie Fellowship Programme,
which provides grants to increase the number of female
participants in the nuclear field, since women are an
integral part of society. The State of Kuwait stresses
the need to strengthen cooperation mechanisms in
the area of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. We
also support non-nuclear States in fully enjoying their
inalienable right to the peaceful use of atomic energy,

22-682883/17

A/77/PV.32

in conformity with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We are concerned that the
risk of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and weapons
of mass destruction, which constitutes a challenge to
international peace and security.
We call on the Islamic Republic of Iran to
fully cooperate with the IAEA, return to the full
implementation of the provisions of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) and implement and ratify the
additional protocol so that the Agency can present
credible guarantees related to the absence of any
non-declared nuclear material and activity in Iran,
while ensuring its status as a non-nuclear State.
We call on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to be committed to international treaties and
relevant Security Council resolutions, while completely
abandoning its nuclear weapons through a verifiable
and irreversible mechanism. In that regard, we reiterate
our condemnation of the launching of ballistic missiles
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which
threaten international peace and security.
The State of Kuwait emphasizes its adherence to
the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East, in conformity with the resolution of the 1995 NPT
Review and Extension Conference and the outcome of
the 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences. My country
stresses the importance of Israel joining the NPT and
subjecting all its nuclear facilities to the comprehensive
safeguards system of the IAEA, given that Israel is the
only State and impediment in the region that is not a
party to the Treaty.
While we regret that the NPT Review Conferences
of 2015 and 2022 were not able to reach consensus on
a final document, we appreciate the efforts of the Arab
countries to establish a zone free of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East. The State of Kuwait and the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan presided over the first and second sessions,
respectively, of the Conference on the Establishment
of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and
Other Weapons of Mass Destruction, which was held
in response to decision 73/546. We look forward
to participating in the third session, which will be
held under the presidency of the brotherly Republic
of Lebanon next week, in order to build on the
achievements of the first two sessions.
4/17

09/11/2022

In conclusion, we emphasize the commitment
of the State of Kuwait to continuing to participate
effectively in supporting the IAEA in order to promote
its technical and professional work with a view to
realizing the aspirations of Member States, especially
those related to promoting the peaceful uses of atomic
energy for achieving peace, health and prosperity for
the entire world.
Mr. Romero Puentes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the presentation of the 2021 annual
report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) (see A/77/308 and A/77/308/Add.1) and draft
resolution A/77/L.9. We reiterate Cuba’s support for
the important work of the IAEA and its contribution
to promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy. We
would like to take this opportunity to thank the IAEA’s
Department of Technical Cooperation for its efforts to
meet objectives proposed for country programmes even
during the period affected by conditions resulting from
the coronavirus disease pandemic. We also want to
highlight the performance of the Regional Cooperation
Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and
Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean, in
support of the implementation in the countries of our
region of IAEA initiatives aimed at addressing global
problems in the fields of health and the environment.
We reject the unilateral coercive measures
that contravene article IV of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons by restricting
international cooperation for the developing countries
that are subject to such measures and limiting their
access to materials, equipment and technologies for
peaceful nuclear activities. We condemn the United
States’ economic, commercial and financial blockade of
Cuba, which has significantly increased the cost to our
country of acquiring equipment and building capacity,
and which is holding up our execution of our national
projects under the auspices of the IAEA. As an example,
the IAEA Secretariat has been dealing with ongoing
difficulties in acquiring the scientific equipment
approved for projects with our country, owing to the
fact that companies from the United States, and even
in third countries with the participation of American
capital, cannot sell equipment to Cuba.
Cuba has maintained the double certification
process of its Safeguards Agreement and Additional
Protocol for 15 years, adding to the satisfactory results
obtained in the IAEA’s inspections in Cuba and the
updating of our national plan for implementing nuclear
22-68288

09/11/2022

physical security, in a demonstration of our commitment
to the use of nuclear energy for strictly peaceful
purposes and the importance we attach to nuclear
and radiological safety. This year Cuba presented its
second national report at the seventh Review Meeting
of the Contracting Parties to the Joint Convention
on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the
Safety of Radioactive Waste Management. We also
presented our first national report on the Convention on
Nuclear Safety. We are proud that our country has been
recognized for its culture of safety. We want to highlight
the work of the Ibero-American Forum of Radiological
and Nuclear Regulatory Agencies, which contributes to
improving nuclear, radiological and physical safety in
Ibero-American countries.
The IAEA is the framework for the adoption of
international standards on nuclear security, which should
be the result of transparent and inclusive multilateral
negotiations with the participation of all States. The
application of the Agency’s safeguards verification
system is essential to the implementation of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, including
for verifying the peaceful nature of nuclear energy
programmes. We reiterate that in order to maintain the
credibility of the IAEA’s safeguards activities, it will
be vital to continue to ensure its Secretariat’s impartial
and professional performance. We advocate for respect
for the inalienable right of States to develop research,
production and uses of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, without discrimination or conditions. We
continue to believe that the only guarantee against the
use of nuclear weapons is their total elimination in an
irreversible, transparent and verified manner.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): I would like to express my
delegation’s sincere appreciation to the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for
its annual report (A/77/308 and A/77/308/Add.1) and
for providing updates on the Agency’s 2022 activities.
Bangladesh commends the Agency for its remarkable
efforts to conduct its important activities during the
reporting period amid multiple challenges, and for the
noteworthy dedication and professionalism of its staff.
We appreciate the Agency’s assistance to 129 countries
and territories, including Bangladesh, for coronavirusdisease-related support to strengthen the capacity of
their national laboratories to respond to the pandemic.
We are happy to support draft resolution A/77/L.9, on
the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

A/77/PV.32

Bangladesh strongly believes in the balanced and
effective implementation of the three pillars of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons — nuclear
disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. We recognize the inalienable
right of all States to develop, research, produce and
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, including
in power generation, health care, food and agriculture.
Bangladesh acknowledges the indispensable role of the
IAEA as the sole competent authority in promoting
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technology
in accordance with its motto of “atoms for peace and
development”. We support the central role played by the
Agency in the implementation of its global verification
regime. Today’s meeting is an occasion to reflect on
its role in supporting Member States in their pursuit of
nuclear energy in a safe and secure manner.
We in Bangladesh are constructing our first
nuclear power plant with a view to generating safe,
environmentally friendly and economically viable
electricity, following the highest IAEA standards,
in order to support our development efforts. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank the
IAEA for its support in successfully implementing
our nuclear energy programme, including by
establishing a regulatory framework and developing
a radioactive-waste-management system. We look
forward to receiving critical peer reviews and new
IAEA advisory missions in Bangladesh to ensure the
responsible and timely completion of our nuclear power
plant. We appreciate the contribution of the IAEA
Technical Cooperation Programme in supporting
Member States in the areas of health and nutrition, food
and agriculture and the environment to enable them to
attain the Sustainable Development Goals. Through the
Programme, the Agency has been assisting Bangladesh
in human-resource development and capacity-building
for the introduction and development of the peaceful
use of nuclear techniques in various sectors, including
agriculture, livestock and water management. That in
turn is contributing to our socioeconomic development.
Bangladesh also supports the application of nuclear
technology to address environmental problems. I am
happy to inform the Assembly that in 2021, Bangladesh
successfully used nitrogen-15 tracing techniques,
following the IAEA’s comprehensive guidelines,
to accurately measure emissions of nitrous oxide,
a greenhouse gas that is 300 times more potent than
carbon dioxide. We are encouraged to see the Agency’s

22-682885/17

A/77/PV.32

09/11/2022

initiative to collectively address plastic recycling
and marine monitoring of microplastics through the
Nuclear Technology for Controlling Plastic Pollution
initiative. We would like to see the Agency scale up
its support to developing countries in that regard. We
request the Agency to extend its cooperation in the
field of sterile insect technique to contain the Aedes
mosquitoes responsible for spreading dengue fever. We
also welcome the Zoonotic Disease Integrated Action
initiative to strengthen the preparedness and capability
of Member States to rapidly detect and respond in a
timely way to outbreaks of zoonotic pathogens.

which Australia condemns in the strongest terms. We
also condemn Russia’s reckless actions in relation
to Ukrainian nuclear facilities and remain gravely
concerned about the nuclear safety, security and
safeguards implications of those actions. We welcome
the IAEA’s commitment to monitoring and verifying
the peaceful nature of Ukraine’s nuclear facilities, even
when that commitment comes at the cost of the physical
risk and personal sacrifice of its staff. We call on Russia
to withdraw from the territory of Ukraine and in turn to
allow the Ukrainian authorities to re-establish control
over their nuclear sites.

We are also pleased to note that the Director
General’s call for nuclear energy to be part of our energy
mix in response to climate change was generally well
received at the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP) in Glasgow last year. We hope that the
Agency will continue its meaningful contribution at
COP27, to be held in Egypt this month, through its
unique science- and evidence-based approach, showing
how nuclear technology is vital both in fighting the
climate crisis and addressing its consequences. Whether
countering non-compliance or gaps in safeguards, the
IAEA brings commitment and competence to the tasks
at hand. But it is amply clear that the IAEA can continue
to excel only if we, the Member States, provide the
support it needs. Let me reaffirm Bangladesh’s strong
commitment to supporting the work of the IAEA for a
better world through the application of nuclear science
and technologies for peaceful purposes.

A further grave challenge for the international
community this year has been the ongoing development
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of its
illegal and destabilizing nuclear and ballistic-missile
programmes. Australia condemns those actions and
urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea not
to resume nuclear testing, an escalatory step that would
seriously undermine regional peace and security. It
is imperative that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea return to compliance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, permit the
return of IAEA safeguards inspectors, and sign and
ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.

Ms. McIntyre (Australia): Australia thanks the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for its
report (see A/77/308 and A/77/308/Add.1) and the Czech
Republic for introducing draft resolution A/77/L.9, of
which Australia is pleased to be a sponsor.
As a founding member of the IAEA and a
long-standing member of the Agency’s Board of
Governors, Australia strongly supports the Agency’s
roles — advancing our collective interests in the
peaceful uses of nuclear technology and safeguarding
against the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We
also support the independence of the Agency and its
Director General.
The events of this year have underscored how truly
indispensable the work and functions of the IAEA are.
I refer, of course, to Russia’s unilateral, illegal and
immoral aggression against the people of Ukraine,
6/17

Australia continues to support the professional
work of the IAEA Director General and IAEA staff as
they seek to implement Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) safeguards in the Islamic
Republic of Iran. We note with grave concern that Iran’s
actions prevent the Agency from providing assurances
that Iran’s nuclear programme is exclusively peaceful.
We support the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and
call on Iran to reverse the steps it has taken away from
its nuclear commitments under the plan.
While deeply disappointed that the tenth NPT
Review Conference did not reach a consensus
outcome, we will continue our active engagement
in the implementation of the NPT as the cornerstone
of the nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament
regime, and we will work to advance its three pillars.
Nuclear applications enable us to enhance human
health, investigate the origins of disease, support
industry and address environmental challenges,
including water sustainability, climate change
and marine pollution. Amid the ongoing global
challenges we face, including the deteriorating
security environment that we find ourselves in, it is
essential that the IAEA’s work on the peaceful uses
22-68288

09/11/2022

of nuclear technology be maintained. Australia was
pleased to engage on many of those issues during
Director General Grossi’s visit to our country in July.
Before I close, let me say that as a member of the
Group of Friends for Women in Nuclear in Vienna,
Australia commends the Agency’s efforts to increase
representation and diversity in the IAEA and strengthen
the role of women in the sector.
Mr. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish):
Honduras, a country committed to nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation, is pleased to be participating
in this meeting on the occasion of the presentation of
the 2021 report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) (see A/77/308 and A/77/308/Add.1).
We recognize the international importance of the
IAEA and its commendable work in disseminating and
transferring applications and nuclear technology for
peaceful uses, with a positive impact on the sustainable
development of our planet.
Within the framework of the Regional Cooperation
Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and
Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean, my
country would like to reiterate that we will continue to
promote strategic alliances to encourage, galvanize and
strengthen our region’s IAEA cooperation programme.
With the support of the IAEA’s Technical Cooperation
Programme, we are currently implementing four
national projects for the 2022–2023 biennium and are
part of nine regional projects for the same cycle. That
complements the goals of our national development
programmes
while
simultaneously
generating
synergies with different academic and research bodies
in the field. For example, in the health sector, the sterile
insect technique is playing a major role in Honduras
in the control and eradication of pests and diseases
transmitted by mosquitoes, including the mosquito that
transmits dengue, Zika and Chikungunya, a so-called
hidden pandemic that has claimed thousands of lives in
my country. With regard to combating cancer, Honduras
is grateful to the IAEA for the ongoing cooperation
that is helping us improve our efforts in the diagnosis,
prevention, treatment and palliative-care stages of
the disease. My country supports the Rays of Hope
Initiative to strengthen capacities in cancer treatment.
With the support of the IAEA, we have developed
and strengthened our capacities in the field of agriculture
and extending to the coffee production sector.
According to statistics from the Food and Agriculture

A/77/PV.32

Organization of the United Nations, around 10 million
people in Central America are engaged in agricultural
activity, and the use of nuclear techniques in our region
is therefore becoming vital to ensuring food production
in areas severely affected by the negative effects of
climate change. My country supports the Zoonotic
Disease Integrated Action Initiative, which aims to help
countries use nuclear and nuclear-based techniques to
rapidly detect disease-causing pathogens in animals
that are transmissible to humans.
With regard to disarmament, Honduras, as a State
party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, recognizes the importance of cooperation in
the area of nuclear energy. However, we want to reiterate
and put it on record that the three pillars of the Treaty
are complementary and indivisible. Likewise, and
given its complementarity, my country, as a State party
to the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons,
urges the countries that have not yet done so to sign
and ratify it with the urgency required to strengthen
the international disarmament and non-proliferation
regime.
We have taken note of the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (see A/77/308
and A/77/308 Add.1), and in that regard we trust that
the international community will fulfil its obligations
within the framework of the Organization in order to
guarantee peace and prosperity in the world. We are
pleased to co-sponsor draft resolution A/77/L.9, which
was introduced by the Czech Republic. Honduras
appreciates the support of the IAEA and welcomes
the Secretariat’s progress with respect to greater
representation and gender equality in the nuclear sphere.
Finally, Honduras currently has a new Government, a
testimony to the strength of our democracy and our will
to make a fairer, safer, more prosperous and equitable
country. My country’s support for the IAEA is part of
that context and of our commitment to a responsible
foreign policy and more humanitarian and supportive
international cooperation.
Ms. Le Son (Monaco) (spoke in French): The
Principality of Monaco aligns itself with the statement
of the European Union (see A/77/PV.31).
At the outset, allow me to thank Mr. Rafael Mariano
Grossi, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), for its report (see A/77/308
and A/77/308/Add.1).

22-682887/17

A/77/PV.32

It is important for my delegation to commend the
Agency for its efforts in Ukraine to prevent a nuclear
disaster at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
While the tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons did
not lead to the adoption of a consensus-based outcome
document, despite intense consultations, the role of the
IAEA in nuclear non-proliferation, verification, safety
and security has increased in importance and scope. We
welcome the recent findings of the Agency inspectors’
mission to Ukraine, which confirmed the absence
of undeclared nuclear material and activities. The
commitment, courage and determination of the teams,
which have been deployed in a war zone over the past few
months, should be commended. The IAEA’s contribution
to the objectives of preserving peace and security is
also reflected in its actions to promote the peaceful,
safe and secure use of nuclear science and technology.
The IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Programme
contributes directly to the achievement of a number
of Sustainable Development Goals through the
assistance provided to States in the field of energy,
human health, food production, water management and
environmental protection. Being particularly sensitive
to the efforts of the Agency in those areas, and as the
twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is
being held in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, the Principality
wishes to emphasize the crucial role of data collected
using nuclear and isotopic techniques in contributing
to a better assessment of the impact of climate change,
in particular its impact on the seas and oceans.
Those techniques are promoted by the IAEA Marine
Environment Laboratories, based in Monaco, in order
to assess marine and coastal pollution and identify its
source. In that respect, I would like to commend the
IAEA’s Nuclear Technology for Controlling Plastic
Pollution initiative, which aims to provide a better
understanding of the volume and impact of plastic
pollution in the marine environment and reduce its
quantity. That is a significant contribution to achieving
the goals of the United Nations Decade of Ocean
Science for Sustainable Development.
I cannot end my statement without mentioning
another aspect of the work of the IAEA: the peaceful
use of nuclear technologies in the service of human
health. The Principality of Monaco has long supported
the Agency’s activities in that area by providing regular
funding to the IAEA Programme of Action for Cancer
8/17

09/11/2022

Therapy initiative. Last September, we made a financial
commitment for the period 2022–2023 in order to
support the Rays of Hope initiative, which aims to
accelerate the creation of radiotherapy in countries that
do not have it.
In conclusion, the Principality wishes to express
its full confidence in this specialized United Nations
Agency and is pleased to co-sponsor draft resolution
A/77/L.9, which we will adopt at the end of this meeting.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile welcomes with satisfaction the annual report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for
the year 2021 (see A/77/308 and A/77/308/Add.1). We
thank Director General Rafael Mariano Grossi, the
Secretariat and all Agency officials for the hard work
carried out during that period.
We recognize the relevance of the role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency in promoting and
facilitating research, development and the practical
application of atomic energy for peaceful purposes,
as well as the Agency’s work in the fields of health,
agriculture and food, in line with the objectives
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We highlight the technical cooperation that was
successfully implemented by the IAEA in response to
the global coronavirus disease pandemic. In particular,
we emphasize its capacity for adaptation and flexibility
in the robust fulfilment of its commitments. We also
highlight the transfer of technology to developing
countries and all verifications carried out in pursuit
of nuclear safety and security. Safeguards inspectors
carried out more than 3,000 verification activities
during the year 2021. We appreciate the fact that the
Organization has been able to reach conclusions for all
States in which the Agency applied safeguards.
We acknowledge the collaborative work of the
IAEA with specialized national organizations, such as
the Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission, which has
made a commitment to host the meeting of the Technical
Coordination Body of the Regional Cooperation
Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and
Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean in
Santiago next year. To illustrate that collaboration,
we would like to point out that, in preparation for the
integrated review mission to the RECH-1 research
reactor in our country that was carried out this year,
the Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission requested a
consultative meeting with the IAEA, which was held
22-68288

09/11/2022

virtually owing to restrictions related to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). On that occasion, the then-current
status of RECH-1 was reviewed, and advice was given
on the potential and limitations of its use.
We wish to emphasize that Chile adheres to the
principle of the indivisibility of international security,
since all States, regardless of their size or power, have
the responsibility to contribute to the consolidation of
an international order that is based on multilateralism
and cooperation and is regulated by international law,
including international humanitarian law. Chile firmly
believes that the future of nuclear science technology
and its applications lies in its use for strictly peaceful
purposes. In that regard, we value emblematic
Agency projects, such as the Nuclear Technology for
Controlling Plastic Pollution initiative, which centres
on the management of plastic pollution in the marine
environment by means of nuclear technology. That is
very useful for the efforts of countries such as Chile. In
addition, the participation of the national agricultural
health agency in the Zoonotic Disease Integrated
Action initiative will strengthen national capacities for
the detection of zoonotic diseases.
The contribution of women is fundamental in the
field of science, technology and nuclear applications, as
well as in the activities associated with the tasks of the
IAEA. The Agency must guarantee the participation of
women at the highest level and strengthen the production
and dissemination of updated statistics thereon. The
Agency also has an important role in ensuring parity
in discussion panels and supporting civil society
organizations that bring together women scientists in
the nuclear field. We emphasize our conviction that the
IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme is essential
in areas such as capacity-building and training; the
strengthening of national infrastructure for radiation
safety; human health, with an emphasis on cancer and
other pathologies with a high impact on health and
quality of life; water resources, marine and coastal
environments; and food safety, among other things, all
of which are the focus of ongoing relevant technical
cooperation projects with the Agency.
Finally, we want to take this opportunity to mention
that Chile shares the concern expressed by the Agency’s
Director General about the nuclear facilities located
in Ukraine, and joins the calls to the parties urging
for containment and for refraining from actions that
could jeopardize the power plants’ physical safety and

A/77/PV.32

integrity. We ask for respect for the seven pillars defined
by the Agency in order to ensure the technological and
physical safety of all nuclear facilities in Ukraine.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador is grateful for the convening of
this meeting on the presentation of the annual report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
(see A/77/308 and A/77/308/Add.1), and recognizes the
central role that the Agency plays in the international
disarmament and non-proliferation regime and in the
promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. El
Salvador is a sponsor of draft resolution A/77/L.9,
presented by the Czech Republic in its capacity as
President of the Board of Governors of the IAEA in
recognition of the important work of this body. We
welcome the annual report of the IAEA for 2021
and acknowledge the important work done by Rafael
Mariano Grossi, the Director General of the Agency.
In that context, we noted the Agency’s dynamic
efforts in 2021 to tackle the challenges resulting from
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We
are pleased that the safeguards system verification
activities did not falter, despite the challenges posed
at the time by travel restrictions, quarantine provisions
and isolation requirements in countries all over the
world.
El Salvador participated actively in the latest
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and
regrets the final results. However, we reiterate our firm
commitment to continuing to work for the balanced
implementation of the three pillars of the Treaty and
also recognize the IAEA’s vital work in implementing
the safeguards system, which ensures that countries
can exploit the peaceful uses of nuclear energy without
discrimination and has helped us to advance in our
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. We
also want to reiterate our support for the pillars of nuclear
security, which are essential to safeguarding our common
security in a context of a high risk of proliferation.
For all of these reasons, El Salvador has concluded
its Safeguards Agreement with the Agency, as well as an
Additional Protocol and a Protocol on Small Quantities.
In our view, the safeguards agreements are an essential
and reliable instrument for verifying the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy and preventing nuclear proliferation,
and we encourage all Member States of the Agency that
have not yet concluded such agreements to accept their
full application in all their nuclear activities.

22-682889/17

A/77/PV.32

My country has long cooperated with the Agency
through the Technical Cooperation Fund, as well as
through our Ministries of Health, Environment and
Agriculture, which have benefited in important areas,
particularly agricultural management, radiotherapy
treatments and nuclear medicine, water-resource
management and radiation safety. I would like to take
this opportunity to highlight my country’s cooperation
with the Agency in some very specific areas. The
first is our COVID-19 pandemic response in 2021, for
which we received donated diagnosis and detection
equipment, including real-time reverse transcription
polymerase chain-reaction test detection materials,
protective equipment for health-care personnel and
biological safety cabinets for the safe handling and
analysis of samples.
Secondly, in the area of health care, we want to
highlight the improvements we were able to make in
the quality of radiological medical treatments through
dosimetry services. The Agency provides technical
guidance on the safe administration of radiotherapy
and certification of medical physicists who ensure the
quality of these cancer treatments. El Salvador was
subject to 10 audits of this nature for radiotherapy
during 2021, ensuring that quality medical assistance
was provided in the fight against cancer in accordance
with the highest international standards. Thirdly, our
country has greatly benefited from technical training
courses in regulatory control for radiotherapy practices.

09/11/2022

which aims to improve national radiological capacities
and strengthen resources dedicated to cancer treatment.
I should say that all of these points are only a small
sample of the work of the IAEA, an organization
that El Salvador supports and with which it hopes to
continue working closely. I would also like to take this
opportunity to highlight and express our gratitude for
the valuable work that our Permanent Mission in Vienna
is doing to make all of this possible in our country.
Mr. Bandiya (Nigeria): The delegation of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria welcomes the 2021 annual
report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) (see A/77/308 and A/77/308/Add.1). We would
like to affirm our support for the work of the IAEA and
confirm our sponsorship of draft resolution A/77/L.9.
My delegation has also taken note of the comments of
the Director General of the IAEA, Mr. Rafael Mariano
Grossi, and appreciates the continuing work that he and
his staff have been doing in spite of the challenges posed
by the coronavirus disease pandemic of 2020. Nigeria
particularly appreciates the tangible programmes that
the Agency introduced during that period.

Lastly, I want to mention food production, with a
focus on resilience in the face of climate change. The
Agency, in coordination with the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, has provided
assistance to Member States with respect to innovative
nuclear technologies to develop new plant varieties. El
Salvador, along with other countries in the region, has
been part of this initiative.

Among other things, its mobilization of resources
and effective implementation of the Interregional
Technical Cooperation Project, INT 0098, through
which reverse transcription polymerase chain-reaction
test equipment and technical knowledge were provided
to more than 128 countries, demonstrate the uses of
nuclear and nuclear-derived techniques that Member
States can benefit from through the Agency. Nigeria
also welcomed the take-off of the Zoonotic Disease
Integrated Action (ZODIAC) initiative, which is
assisting Member States in reducing the risk of the
next zoonotic disease becoming another pandemic. The
ZODIAC programme is working to appropriately equip
and build developing countries’ capacities in readiness
for future pandemics.

Through these small examples we want to highlight
the relevance of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as
well as the impact that they have on technical training
programmes and technology transfers for developing
countries like mine. We also emphasize the Agency’s
relevance in the work it is doing with other agencies
and entities in the United Nations system. We want
to thank countries that make all of this possible and
encourage as many others as possible to join this cause.
As my country said at the most recent IAEA General
Conference, we are very interested in being part of the
Agency’s initiative Rays of Hope: Cancer Care for All,

My delegation aligns itself with the theme of
building resilience through hope and reiterates its
commitment to the work of the IAEA. The report
illustrates the work of the Agency in all aspects of its
mandate. Nigeria particularly appreciates the value of
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the socioeconomic
development of countries. We note that in line with the
IAEA’s mandate and pursuant to article 2 of its statute,
the Agency has continued to support Member States in a
variety of ways, including cancer control, soil and water
management, the detection of zoonotic diseases and
power generation. My delegation welcomes the portions

10/17

22-68288

09/11/2022

A/77/PV.32

of the annual report detailing the work of the IAEA
in delivering support to Member States through the
Technical Cooperation Programme, as well as the efforts
of the Director General to strengthen the Programme.

role as the main international mechanism for assisting
countries of the world in accessing the benefits of
peaceful nuclear energy in such areas as energy, food
production, health care and climate change.

The Agency’s work in nuclear safety and security,
as well as in the areas of safeguards, verification
and monitoring, also contributes significantly to
international peace, and has Nigeria’s full support. We
are hopeful that the Agency’s projects in Nigeria under
the initiatives Developing Safety Infrastructure for
Regulating Nuclear Power Plants and Developing Safety
Infrastructure for Regulating Non-Power Nuclear
and Radiation Applications will enhance the capacity
of our staff to regulate power plants. My delegation
further hopes that the projects will strengthen Nigeria’s
national infrastructure for radiation protection, nuclear
safety, emergency planning and radioactive waste
systems in relation to exploration, mining, the milling
of radioactive ores and other ores associated with
radioactive material.

We are pleased to note that Belarus and the IAEA
have been actively developing and expanding their
cooperation in connection with the implementation of
our national nuclear energy programme. We greatly
value the support we have had in the past year in the
area of additional professional training of the staff
of Belarus’s nuclear power plant as well as in other
measures for enhancing its operational safety. Belarus’s
experience testifies to the specific practical use of the
Agency’s instruments and services aimed at supporting
countries in developing their nuclear energy sector. In
Belarus, all of the key IAEA missions recommended
for countries building their first nuclear power plants
have been conducted. Of the three missions carried
out last year, two were repeats directly related to
issues of nuclear security, and the plans approved as a
result have either been fully implemented or are about
to be fully implemented. International experts have
confirmed this fact as well as Belarus’s strict adherence
to the maintenance of nuclear and radiation security. I
would like to point out that missions recommended for
countries that are starting out are no less relevant for
countries that have abandoned nuclear power and are
beginning to decommission their nuclear plants.

The outcome of the twenty-seventh Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, which just concluded,
further underlines the urgency of the work that the
IAEA undertakes to ensure that our planet can remain
sustainable, in line with our Sustainable Development
Goal commitments.
In conclusion, Nigeria welcomes the report,
supports the recommended actions and requests the
Secretary-General to continue efforts to strengthen
the relationship of the United Nations with the IAEA
within the framework of the agreement that governs it.
Mrs. Kavaleuskaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus fully supports the activity of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and has joined the
sponsors of draft resolution A/77/L.9. Today almost
all international organizations, including the IAEA,
are affected by the growing intersection between acute
geopolitical crises and transnational threats. There
is a great temptation for many countries to politicize
the Agency’s work and use it for their own political
purposes that have nothing to do with strengthening
nuclear safety and security and expanding the peaceful
use of nuclear energy. We firmly believe that nothing
good can come of that and that political problems should
be resolved in the relevant political formats. The IAEA
should remain on the sidelines of global politics and be
strictly guided by its mandate. It should continue its

We condemn the calls by some countries for
limiting certain States’ participation in the IAEA’s
Technical Cooperation Programme in various ways.
There is no question that such politicized approaches
only undermine the effectiveness of the Agency’s
activities and the foundations of the non-proliferation
regime. With regard to international cooperation in the
framework of the IAEA, I should point out that Belarus
is fulfilling its obligations, including those related to the
safety of the Belarus nuclear power plant, while dealing
with unprecedented economic sanctions imposed by
Western States. Despite the outside pressures, we will
continue to fulfil our obligations, but we stress how
damaging that approach is to the efforts of any State to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, including
in the area of nuclear security.
In connection with the comments made by the
representative of Lithuania, we would like to say that
the accusations about the lack of safety of the Belarus
nuclear power plant are unfounded and biased. Belarus
is a leader among IAEA member States in the number of

22-6828811/17

A/77/PV.32

Agency verification missions conducted and requested,
the conclusions of which have been published and have
repeatedly confirmed our adherence to the highest
possible international nuclear safety standards. We urge
everyone to refrain from using the General Assembly
or the IAEA as a platform for political attention-getting
on issues of bilateral relations and instead to make use
of bilateral channels. The topic of nuclear and radiation
security is a very important long-term aspect of nuclear
cooperation between Belarus and Lithuania, not only in
the context of our nuclear power plant but also in the
decommissioning of the Ignalina nuclear power plant
at the Belarusian border and accompanying projects for
handling and buryingn spent nuclear fuel and radioactive
waste.
In conclusion, we firmly deny that Belarus is a
participant in Russia’s special military operation in
Ukraine. Belarus has consistently supported the peaceful
resolution of the conflict by diplomatic means and is
doing everything it can to achieve it.
Mr. Kim (Republic of Korea): We thank the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for
this year’s annual report (see A/77/308 and A/77/308
Add.1) and the representative of the Czech Republic for
introducing draft resolution A/77/L.9, which we were
pleased to sponsor.
The IAEA’s annual report is a good illustration of
the ways in which the Agency’s activities contribute to
the work of the United Nations in providing solutions to
global challenges, including by advancing the Sustainable
Development Goals. Following its chairmanship of the
Board of Governors of the IAEA from September 2021
to September 2022, the Republic of Korea has remained
a staunch supporter of the Agency’s mandate to promote
atoms for peace and development. As a major producer of
nuclear energy, we have actively contributed to expanding
the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy by
supporting a number of IAEA Technical Cooperation
Programmes, such as the Zoonotic Disease Integrated
Action initiative and the Peaceful Uses Initiative. We
will spare no effort to promote international cooperation
aimed at advancing nuclear technologies such as small
modular reactors, and we will cooperate with the IAEA
in standardizing the design of small modular reactors
and developing appropriate regulations.
The Republic of Korea believes that securing the
highest standards of nuclear safety and security is a
prerequisite for expanding the peaceful uses of nuclear
12/17

09/11/2022

energy. In that context, we have been one of the main
contributors to the IAEA’s Nuclear Security Fund and
its activities, such as the establishment of the Nuclear
Security Training and Demonstration Centre at
Seibersdorf. We are gravely concerned about the situation
of the nuclear facilities in Ukraine in the context of the
war started by the Russian Federation. My Government
fully supports the efforts of the Director General and
staff of the IAEA to ensure the security and safety of
Ukraine’s nuclear facilities. To that end, the Republic
of Korea has pledged to donate $1.2 million and will
continue to join with the international community in its
efforts to support Ukraine.
The IAEA safeguards are central to the global
nuclear non-proliferation regime. We support the
IAEA’s efforts to universalize the comprehensive
safeguards agreements, the additional protocols and the
revised small quantities protocols, and we urge every
country that has not yet done so to conclude and bring
those key instruments into force without delay. It is
vital that all countries fully implement their safeguards
obligations. In that regard, we look forward to a speedy
resolution of all the outstanding safeguards issues
related to undeclared locations in Iran and encourage all
the parties to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
negotiations to find a path back to mutual compliance
with that milestone agreement.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
development of a nuclear programme continues to be
a high-priority non-proliferation issue. In that regard,
we welcomed the adoption of a resolution on the
implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) safeguards agreement
between the Agency and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea by consensus at the sixty-sixth
session of the IAEA General Conference. Through that
resolution, 175 IAEA Member States spoke with one
voice in deploring the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s ongoing nuclear activities, as also pointed
out in the IAEA 2022 annual report, and in support
of diplomatic engagement to achieve the complete
denuclearization of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and sustainable peace and security on the
Korean peninsula.
My Government will continue to work with
the international community towards the complete
denuclearization of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and sustainable peace on the Korean peninsula,
based on my Government’s Audacious Initiative. We
22-68288

09/11/2022

urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
cease all its destabilizing actions in violation of relevant
Security Council resolutions, respond positively to our
proposal and return to a path of dialogue and to the
NPT and IAEA safeguards regime. In that regard, we
commend the IAEA’s efforts to maintain and enhance
its readiness to play its essential role in verifying the
nuclear programme of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea when a political agreement is reached. In
conclusion, we affirm our strong support for the work
of the Agency and for draft resolution A/77/L.9, entitled
“Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency”.
Mr. Al Ashkar (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic attaches great
importance to the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA)’s fulfilment of its mandate in accordance with
its statute. My country acceded to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in 1969
and signed its Safeguards Agreement with the Agency
in 1992. We have consistently supported the right of all
Member States to the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
The Israeli aggression that targeted a building in
the Syrian governorate of Deir ez-Zor in September
2007 was a violation of Syria’s sovereignty and a
flagrant violation of international law. Instead of being
unequivocally condemned, that violation was used as
a platform to promote false allegations against Syria,
distorting its image and seeking to put political pressure
on it. The item being discussed by the IAEA’s Board
of Governors regarding Syria’s implementation of its
Safeguards Agreement is one of the negative aspects
of how some countries manipulate the Agency to serve
their political agendas. In that regard, I would like to
note the following points.
First, the Agency’s statute required that the United
States report to the Agency the information it had prior
to the destruction of the building in Deir ez-Zor rather
than eight months after Israel destroyed it. The same
applies to Israel, which disregarded the need to provide
the Agency with the information it had and carried out
an insidious military aggression against the sovereignty
of Syria’s territory.
Secondly, Israel’s official acknowledgement of
its responsibility for that aggression requires that it
cooperate with the Agency in revealing the nature of
the contamination caused by the missiles used in its
aggression. As long as Israel, the aggressor, fails to
cooperate with the Agency in that regard, any discussion
of the subject remains futile.

A/77/PV.32

Thirdly, most of the Agency’s conclusions about
the destroyed building in Deir ez-Zor were based
on images and analysis provided by the Central
Intelligence Agency. That raises many questions
regarding the credibility of the information that the
Agency received, especially in the light of the United
States’ earlier aggression against Iraq, which was
launched on the pretext of a misleading dossier about
the alleged existence of weapons of mass destruction.
Fourthly, Syria cooperated positively and
constructively with the Agency and allowed its team to
visit the targeted site in Deir ez-Zor in June 2008 and
collect samples. Syria also reached an agreement for an
action plan with the Agency in October 2011, including
a solution for all pending matters. However, pressures
by some Member States hindered that endeavour.
Some countries continue to question my
country’s cooperation with the Agency while they
violate their obligations under the NPT by turning a
blind eye and protecting Israel, which has continued
to maintain its nuclear programme without any
international supervision. Those countries have even
been strengthening their cooperation with Israel
by allowing it to develop its military capabilities,
especially by providing it with the expertise, materials
and technology necessary to develop and manufacture
nuclear weapons. Israel’s hostile conduct in the region,
as well as its nuclear capabilities, which remain outside
the framework of the NPT and the scope of the Agency’s
safeguards agreements, represent a real threat to the NPT
in the Middle East. Israel rejects all initiatives calling
for the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons
and weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
It also refuses to subject its nuclear facilities to the
Agency’s safeguards system. That constitutes a serious
threat to regional and international peace and security
that should not continue to be met with silence but
should be brought to an end. To tackle that challenge,
the international community should act swiftly by
taking practical deterrent measures that would compel
Israel to join the NPT and enable the establishment of
a zone in the Middle East free of nuclear weapons and
all other weapons of mass destruction, keeping in mind
the fact that every country in the region except Israel is
committed to achieving that objective.
In conclusion, my delegation rejects the accusations
that we are not in compliance with the NPT and
reiterates that Syria has never ceased to cooperate with
the Agency. The reports on the implementation of the

22-6828813/17

A/77/PV.32

relevant safeguards are evidence that Syria has never
failed to abide by its legal obligations in accordance
with its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and
the NPT, and that we have met all requests for regular
inspections on time, despite the difficulties we have
been dealing with in the past few years owing to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and various
countries’ hostile policies towards my country. Syria
has cooperated with the IAEA with total transparency
and flexibility and has made every possible effort to
settle pending issues, including agreeing on an action
plan to resolve them. The Agency’s annual reports on
the implementation of its safeguards, most recently
this year, testify to Syria’s full implementation of
its commitments.
Mr. Moharram (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
The delegation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia would
like to thank the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and its Director General, Mr. Rafael Grossi, for
his tireless efforts, which are outlined in the Agency’s
report (see A/77/308 and A/77/308/Add.1).
We reaffirm Saudi Arabia’s firm position
with regard to the importance of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which is
the basis of a world free of nuclear weapons, as well
as on the balance that should be established among
the Treaty’s three pillars and the important role of
the IAEA in the area of monitoring and verifying the
obligations of States pursuant to international treaties
and conventions within the jurisdiction of the Agency.
My country attaches great importance to the
peaceful use and development of nuclear energy as one
of the basic pillars of the NPT. We affirm the inherent
right of States parties to benefit from the development,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, and from the safe and secure exploitation of
natural resources at the national level. Saudi Arabia’s
national policies are committed to atomic energy and
the strictest norms of transparency, safety and security
in developing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
in various areas, in conformity with the relevant
international treaties and conventions. Furthermore,
Saudi Arabia cooperates with the IAEA in verifying the
integration of operational measures with our national
atomic energy project. And we cooperate with many
States and experienced actors in the nuclear arena in
order to benefit from their expertise and experience in
implementing our national atomic energy project and
ensure its success.
14/17

09/11/2022

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia underscores the
importance of the IAEA comprehensive safeguards
system and comprehensive safeguards agreements,
pursuant to article III of the NPT. We signed and
ratified our Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement
in 2009, because we believe in the importance of the
comprehensive safeguards system for achieving the
universality of the NPT. At the same time, we stress
the voluntary nature of the IAEA additional protocol
and the importance of not creating obstacles to States’
ability to harness nuclear energy for peaceful uses,
or imposing additional commitments other than those
established by the Agency. We call on the international
community to compel Israel to subject its nuclear
facilities to the IAEA’s comprehensive safeguards
system and join the NPT.
My delegation is concerned about the fact that
according to the IAEA’s report, Iran is not cooperating
with the Agency’s monitoring and verification
activities related to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, or those related to Iran’s implementation of
its commitments under its Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement. The Agency says it is unable to verify
the nuclear activities of Iran in accordance with the
agreement, which has led it to confirm that it cannot
be sure whether the Iranian nuclear programme is truly
aimed at peaceful purposes. We therefore call on Iran
to cooperate with the Agency.
We reaffirm Saudi Arabia’s position in support of
the establishment of a zone in the Middle East free of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery systems. The 1995 resolution on the
matter remains valid until that zone is created, as well
as until all nuclear facilities in the region are subjected
to the Agency’s safeguards system and the absence of
any clandestine nuclear activities or programmes is
ascertained. In that regard, we commend the efforts
undertaken during the first and second meetings of
the Conference on the Establishment of a Middle East
Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of
Mass Destruction, and hope for positive results at the
third meeting. We also hope for the participation of all
States parties as well as the States that sponsored the
resolution on the establishment of such a zone.
In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms Saudi
Arabia’s support for the promotion of the role of
women in the area of disarmament and the achievement
of employment parity between men and women. We
support the appointment of women to leading roles
22-68288

09/11/2022

within international organizations in the area of
disarmament. My country will continue to support
the appointment of Saudi women in the disarmament
arena at the United Nations and in relevant
international organizations.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to the observer of the Sovereign Order
of Malta.
Mr. Beresford-Hill (Sovereign Order of Malta):
Since 1957, the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) has continued to champion its mission of
promoting the peaceful and responsible use of nuclear
energy across our planet. The Sovereign Order of Malta
acknowledges the importance of that much-needed
devotion and dedication to combating one of the biggest
challenges the world continues to face.
Today the nuclear-weapon stockpile currently
stands at more than 13,000 nuclear warheads, and now,
while various arguments have been made about the
necessity of such weapons, we must open our eyes to
the most recent developments we have witnessed at the
multilateral level of diplomacy. The failure in August
of the parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons to reach consensus, along with the
rising global nuclear tensions, has cast a dark shadow
over the current geopolitical landscape. Greater
surveillance of the production and intent of nuclear
weapons should be respected by all Member States
unanimously and without obstruction. As Cardinal
Parolin said, as long as nuclear weapons exist, we
cannot rule out the possibility of their use, which
threatens any possible future for our common home, as
well as humankind’s very existence.
The Sovereign Order of Malta strongly believes
that the transparent picture presented by the IAEA’s
Country Nuclear Power Profiles remains one of the best
solutions available to the international community in
advocating for the total elimination of nuclear weapons
on our planet. The sobering reality of the cost of
nuclear weapons remains harrowing. The International
Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons estimates that
nine nuclear-armed States spent $82.4 billion on their
nuclear weapons in 2021 alone. Those expenditures
were made during a global pandemic, rising global
food insecurity and an ongoing humanitarian crisis.
To put that into perspective, the cost of feeding a child
for an entire school year through the Mary’s Meals
charity stands at only $18 per child. That is for one

A/77/PV.32

year. Nuclear expenditure is money that is needed and
deserved elsewhere. We have only to listen to the voices
of the nations of the Vulnerable 20 Group in Sharm ElSheikh this week, calling for climate reparation funds
and for honouring the pledge of $100 billion in funding
to deal with climate change — which is only a bit more
than the cost of one year of nuclear proliferation.
Archbishop John Wester of Santa Fe, in his pastoral
letter “Living in the Light of Christ’s Peace”, reminds
us that during his presidency, Ronald Reagan spoke
directly to the people of what was then the Soviet
Union. He said that there was one sane policy for
their country and one sane policy for his to preserve
our civilization in the nuclear age. What was it? It was
that a nuclear war can never be won and therefore can
never be fought, and that the only value in two nations
possessing nuclear weapons is to make sure they will
never be used. But then would it not be so much better
to do away with them?
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker on this agenda item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.9, entitled “Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed
in document A/77/L.9, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Latvia, Lesotho, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, the Russian
Federation, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,

22-6828815/17

A/77/PV.32

Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Türkiye, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United Republic of Tanzania and the United States
of America.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that the General Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/77/L.9?
Draft resolution A/77/L.9 was adopted
(resolution 77/9).
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
exercise of the right of reply has been requested. I would
like to remind members that statements in the right of
reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention
and five minutes for the second, and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kalmar (Israel): I am compelled to exercise our
right of reply in response to remarks about my country
by Iran and Syria. As on many other occasions, the
representatives of those two countries have stood here
again today to perpetuate lies and false accusations.
However, the clear facts must not be ignored.
Iran and Syria, knowingly and deliberately, have
continued to violate and undermine the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as they seek to
destabilize the Middle East and threaten its inhabitants.
They must immediately and unconditionally provide
answers to the International Atomic Energy Agency
regarding the violations of their safeguards agreements.
Mr. Rosinas (Lithuania): I will be brief. I want to
exercise my right of reply in response to the statement
by the representative of Belarus.
Lithuania fully respects the right of every country
to develop nuclear energy. At the same time, any
country embarking on a nuclear energy programme
has the obligation to abide by the highest international
standards for nuclear safety and has to take national
decisions in consideration of a broader context of
possible transboundary implications. The issues
that Lithuania has raised here and in Vienna are of a
technical character. They are related to safety and to a
responsible approach to the implementation of a nuclear
power plant project, and they range from site selection
to issues related to commissioning.
We have been closely following the development of
the Belarusian nuclear power plant project, and in the
process we have witnessed a selective approach to the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and other
16/17

09/11/2022

modern nuclear safety standards and recommendations.
We have also witnessed a disregard for the requirements
set by the conventions of the Economic Commission for
Europe and a lack of transparency and openness. Our
grave concerns are based on those particular questions,
and that is why we have chosen to address them in
the framework of the consideration of the IAEA’s
annual report.
Mr. Balouji (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
compelled to take the floor to reject the allegations
made by the representative of the Israeli regime about
my country.
Israel is in flagrant violation of international law
and has continued its malicious behaviour through
its illegal and illegitimate acts in the territories it
has occupied, as well as through its assassinations
of scientists, its acts of sabotage and its cyber and
kinetic attacks on other countries. With respect to
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, it is
an undeniable fact that the Israeli regime is the only
culprit in this area in the Middle East, and it continues
to defy all international rules governing weapons of
mass destruction by refusing to adhere to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention.
Israel’s frequent and consistent negative votes
in the First Committee and other forums against the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East, proposed by Iran in 1974, continue to
hamper this long-overdue objective. It has refused to
participate in the Conference on the Establishment
of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and
Other Weapons of Mass Destruction. There can be no
excuse for objecting to or taking any hostile positions
on the establishment of such a zone in the Middle East.
Indeed, nuclear weapons in the hands of this regime
pose the most serious threat there is to the security of
all States in the Middle East and to the non-proliferation
regime. Despite that, and together with some other
States, it has attempted to distort Iran’s exclusively
peaceful nuclear programme, which is under extremely
robust verification by the International Atomic Energy
Agency, in what is nothing but a deceitful move to
distract attention from the real danger that the Israeli
regime poses to regional peace and security, particularly
through its nuclear-weapon arsenals and its clandestine
and unsafeguarded nuclear installations and activities.
22-68288

09/11/2022

Mrs. Kavaleuskaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to comment on the statement by the
representative of Lithuania. We want to reiterate that
ensuring nuclear safety and security is a task that
requires daily practical efforts on the part of every
State and constructive and focused cooperation in
specialized international platforms. In cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency and other
international partners, Belarus is working responsibly
to ensure the greatest possible safety and security
of the Belarusian nuclear power plant and is taking
every necessary step to ensure the transparency of its
construction and operation. We regularly participate in
reviews under international conventions on ensuring
nuclear safety and security, such as the Joint Convention
on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the
Safety of Radioactive Waste Management and the
Convention on Nuclear Safety. Our national reports can
be found on the Internet. It is also well known that we
are working in the same way at the regional level. Just
as is done with nuclear power plants in the European
Union, we have conducted voluntary stress tests and
a partner assessment of our nuclear power station.
We once again affirm that Belarus is interested in
more active and constructive cooperation in ensuring
nuclear safety and security on a bilateral level and in

A/77/PV.32

establishing direct, constructive contacts between
Belarus and Lithuania with the Government bodies and
organizations concerned.
Mr. Al Ashkar (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor again, but I wish
to respond to the statement made by the representative
of Israel. I will be brief. Israel’s position is weak. The
representative of Israel is resorting to false allegations
in order to distract attention from the fact that it has an
arsenal of weapons of mass destruction and refuses to
adhere to any disarmament treaties or conventions. It
is high time that the international community opposed
those grave actions and took firm action to bring Israel
into the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons as a non-nuclear State, while submitting its
nuclear facilities to the International Atomic Energy
Agency’s comprehensive safeguards system.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in exercise of the right of reply.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 89?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

22-6828817/17
