56

General AHembly-Twentieth Se&Sion

3. Recommends the Security Council to consider
this situation as a matter of urgency.
1375th plenary meeting,
11 November 1965.

2063 (XX). Question of Basutoland, B~huanaland and Swaziland
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories of Basutoland, I3echuanaland and
Swaziland, 8
Having examined further the report submitted by
the Secretary-Gencral9 pursuant to the request made
by the Special Committee in its resolution of 2 November 1964,10
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling further its resolutions 1654 (XVI) of
27 November 1961, 1817 (XVII) of 18 December
1962 and 1954 ( XVIII) of 11 December 1963,
Noting the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its first regular session in July
1964, and the Declaration adopted by the Second Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries in October 1%411 to the effect that
the United Nations should guarantee the territorial
integrity of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland
and should take measures for their speedy accession
to independence and for the subsequent safeguarding
of their sovereignty,
Noting with deep concern the economic and social
situation prevailing in the three Territories and their
imperative and urgent need for United Nations
assistance,
Having regard to the grave threat to the territorial
integrity and economic stability of these Territories
constituted by the policies of the present regime in the
Republic of South Africa,
Regretting that the administering Power of these
Territories has not taken effective and complete steps
to implement General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV),
1817 (XVII) and 1954 (XVIII),
1. Approves the chapters of the reports of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories of Basutoland, Bechuanaland
and Swaziland, and endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland to freedom
and independence;
8 /bid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter VIII; ibid., Twentieth Session Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/fiOOO/Rev.l) chapter

VII.

9 Jbid.,

'

Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 23, document A/5958.
10 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter VIII, para. 365.
11 See A/5763.

3. Once again invites the administering Power to
take urgent steps to implement fully General Assembly
resolutions 1514 (XV), 1817 (XVII) and 1954
(XVIII) in conformity with the freely expressed
wishes of the peoples of the three Territories;
4. Renews its request that the administering Power
should take immediate steps to return to the indigenous
inhabitants all the land taken from them, whatever
the form of or pretext for such alienation;
5. Requests the Special Committee to consider, in
co-operation with the Secretary-General, what measures
are necessary for securing the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of liasntoland, neclmanaland and Swaziland, ;md to report to the General As:,embly at its
twenty-first session;
6. Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General
for his efforts and endorses the recotrnnendations contained in his report ;
7. Decides to establish a Fund for the Economic
Development of Basntoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland, to be made up of voluntary contributions and
to be administered by the Secretary-General in close
consultation with the Governments of the three Territories and with the co-operation and assistance of the
Special Fund, the Technical Assistance Board, the
Economic Commission for Africa and the specialized
agencies concerned;
8. Considers that the efforts to provide economic,
financial and technical assistance, through United
Nations programmes of technical co-operation and the
specialized agencies, should continue in order to remedv
the deplorable economic and social situation of the thre~
Territories;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint resident representatives in the three Territories, as recommended in paragraph 22 of his report, and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session on
the. operation of the Fund established under paragraph 7
above.
1398th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2064 (XX). Question of the Cook Islands
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Recalling its resolution 2005 (XIX) of 18 February
1965, authorizing the Secretary-General to appoint a
United Nations representative to supervise the elections
to be held in the Cook Islands under New Zealand
administration and to observe the proceedings concerning the Constitution in the newly elected Legislative Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Cook Islands, 12 including the statements made
in the Special Committee by the Premier of the Cook
Islands,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Representative for the Supervision of the Elections in
12 Official Rtcord.s of the General Assembly Nineteenth
Session, Anne_x~s, annex. No. 8 _(part I) (AiSSOO/Rev.l).
chapter ?{V; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to
agen<la item 23 (A/6000/Rev.l), chapter VIII.

57

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

the Cook Islands 13 and the information on subsequent
developments, 14
Having heard the statements made by the United
Nations Representative for the Supervision of the
Elections in the Cook Islands and the representative of
New Zealand,
Noting that, under the Constitution which came into
force on 4 August 1965, the people of the Cook Islands
have reserved their right to move to a status of complete
independence,
1. Approves the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Cook Islands;
2. Notes the findings and conclusions of the United
Nations Representative for the Supervision of the Elections in the Cook Islands and expresses its high appreciation to the Representative and his staff;
3. Expresses its appreciation of the co-operation extended to the United Nations by the Government of
New Zealand in the study of the question of the Cook
Islands;
4. Notes that the Constitution of the Cook Islands
came into force on 4 August 1965, from which date
the people of the Cook Islands have had control of
their internal affairs and of their future;
5. Considers that since the Cook Islands have attained full internal self-government, the transmission
of information in respect of the Cook Islands under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations is
no longer necessary ;
6. Reaffirms the responsibility of the United
Nations, under General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), to assist the people of the Cook Islands in the
eventual achievement of full independence, if they so
wish, at a future date ;
7. Expresses the hope that the United Nations Development Programme and the specialized agencies will
endeavour to contribute in every way possible to the
development and strengthening of the economy of the
Cook Islands.
1398th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2065 (XX}. Question of the Falkland Islands
(Malvinas)
The General Assembly,
Having examined the question of the Falkland
Islands ( Malvinas),
Taking into account the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), 1 ~ and in particular the conclusions and recommendations adopted
by the Committee with reference to that Territory,
Considering that its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960 was prompted by the cherished aim of
bringing to an end everywhere colonialism in all its
13 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda items 23 and
24, document A/5962.
14 Ibid., document A/5961.
15 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter XXIII; ibid., Twentieth Session Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter

XXII.

forms, one of which covers the case of the Falkland
Islands ( Malvinas),
Noting the existence of a dispute between the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning sovereignty over the said Islands,
I. Invites the Governments of Argentina and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
to proceed without delay with the negotiations recommended by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples with a view to finding a peaceful solution
to the problem, bearing in mind the provisions and
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations and of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the interests of the population of the Falkland Islands
(Malvinas):
2. R('quests the two Governments to report to the
Special Committee and to the General Assembly at its
twenty-first session on the results of the negotiations.
1398th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2066 (XX). Question of Mauritius
The General Assembly,
H a-zn·ng considered the question of Mauritius and
other islands composing the Territory of Mauritius,
lI aving examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Mauritius,1 8
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Regretting that the administering Power has not
fully implemented resolution 1514 (XV) with regard
to that Territory,
Noting with deep concern that any step taken by
the administering Power to detach certain islands from
the Territory of Mauritius for the purpose of establishing a military base would be in contravention of the
Declaration, and in particular of paragraph 6 thereof,
1. Approves the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Mauritius, and endorses the
conclusions and recommendations of the Special Committee contained therein ;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory of Mauritius to freedom and independence
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
3. Invites the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to take effective
measures with a view to the immediate and full implementation of resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Invites the administering Power to take no action
which would dismember the Territory of Mauritius
and violate its territorial integrity;
16 lbid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter XIV: ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6000/Rev.1) chapter

XIII.

'
