148

General Assembly-Tblrty-fomtb Session

tion 33/198 of 29 January 1979, an assessment of the
situation of the least developed countries as well as a
review of the implementation of the special measures
called for in the present resolution.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/211.

Proposals for the new international development strategy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September
1975 on development and international economic cooperation,
Recalling also its resolution 3 3/ 136 of 19 December
1978 on the acceleration of the transfer of real resources
to developing countries,
Recalling further resolution 129 (V) of 3 June 1979
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,222
Noting with concern the unprecedented widening of
the gap between developing and developed countries, as
a consequence of the continuing deterioration of the
economic situation in the developing countries, made
worse by the effects of the crisis which the present system
of international economic relations is undergoing,
Taking note of the Arusha Programme for Collective
Self-Reliance and Framework for Negotiations, 223
adopted by the Fourth Ministerial Meeting of the Group
of Seventy-seven, held at Arusha, United Republic of
Tanzania, from 12 to 16 February 1979,
Convinced that the development of developing countries requires, inter alia, a massive transfer of financial
resources as a vital contribution to their economic and
social development,
Convinced also that a substantial increase in the financial and other flows for development, supporting the national priorities and plans of developing countries, will
be a significant help in the effective restructuring of the
world economy, with beneficial consequences for all
countries,
Taking note of the Economic Declaration adopted
by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana from
3 to 9 September 1979, 224
Recalling also its resolution 33/193 of 29 January
1979 on the preparations for an international development strategy for the third United Nations development
decade,
Welcoming the proposals formulated by heads of State
or Government during the general debate of the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session for quickly and
substantially improving the economic conditions which
confront developing countries,
222 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
part one, sect. A.
223 Ibid. (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
annex VI.
224 A/34/542, annex, sect. IV.

l. Reaffirms its resolution 33/193, in which it decided, inter alia, that the new international development
strategy should address itself, among its priority objectives, to increasing substantially the flow of resources in
real terms to the developing countries on a predictable,
continuous and increasingly assured basis;
2. Refers, in this context, to the Preparatory Committee for the New International Development Strategy
consideration of all aspects of the proposal presented in
this connexion to the General Assembly at its thirtyfourth session concerning the transfer to developing
countries of an additional amount of $300 billion in the
form of financial resources, material resources and technical assistance during the 1980-1990 decade, as a contribution to development, of which yearly commitments
of at least $25 billion should be made during the early
years of the third United Nations development decade;
3. Agrees that the Preparatory Committee for the
New International Development Strategy should consider the feasibility and the ways and means of implementing those proposals within the framework of the
third United Nations development decade.

109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/212.

Implementation of section I of the annex to
General Assembly resolution 32/197 on the
restructuring of the econontic and social sectors of the United Nations system

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 197 4, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, by which it, inter alia, established the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic
and Social Sectors of the United Nations System for the
purpose of preparing detailed action proposals with a
view to initiating the process of restructuring the United
Nations system so as to make it more fully capable of
dealing with problems of international economic cooperation and development in a comprehensive and effective manner, and to make it more responsive to the
requirements of the provisions of the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order as well as those of the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 32/197 of 20 December
1977, by which it, inter alia, endorsed the conclusions
and recommendations of the Ad Hoe Committee,
Recalling further its resolution 33/202 of 29 January
1979, in which it, inter alia, requested certain actions
and measures within the framework of the implementation of the conclusions and recommendations of the Ad
Hoe Committee,
Reaffirming that the process of restructuring the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system is
an integral part of the efforts required to ensure the
equitable, full and effective participation of the developing countries in the formulation and application of all
decisions within the United Nations system in the field
of development and international economic co-operation,

V.

ResolutioDB adopted on the reporfll of the Second Committee

Recalling also, in particular, section I, paragraphs 3
and 4, of the annex to General Assembly resolution
32/197,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolutions 1979/1 of 9 February 1979, 1979/41 of 10 May
1979 and 1979/69 of 2 August 1979 on control and
limitation of documentation and General Assembly resolution 34/ 50 of 23 November 1979 on the same
subject,
1. Decides to maintain on the agenda of its Main
Committees during its regular sessions the item entitled
"Report of the Economic and Social Council" but, in the
light of the decision contained in paragraph 5 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 / 41, to consider the chapters of the report of the Council under the
relevant items of its agenda;
2. Recommends to the Secretary-General that the
items of the agenda which are normally allocated for
consideration to the Second Committee should in future
be drawn up within the indicative framework outlined
in the annex to the present resolution;
3. Recommends also that the Second Committee
should organize its programme of work and the substantive debates on the agenda items allocated to it taking into account the regrouping and reorganization of
items outlined in the above-mentioned annex;
4. Decides that all introductory statements to be
made in the Second Committee on behalf of the organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system
should normally be made during the first two weeks of
the substantive work of the Committee, in order to
facilitate maximum utilization of the remaining time in
the manner most convenient for Member States;
5. Decides that the Second Committee, in setting
deadlines for submission of proposals, should allow for
the possibility of addressing discussions on various items
to proposals submitted under those items, as envisaged
in paragraph 3 (c) of the annex to General Assembly
resolution 32/ 197;
6. Decides to review at its thirty-fifth session, with
a view to minimizing delays in the submission of documentation in all the working languages, the requirements in respect of document symbols, covers and related procedures in respect of reports for different intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations, and requests
the Secretary-General to submit recommendations in that
regard;
7. Also decides to consider at its thirty-fifth session
the possibility or desirability of examining some of the
items of its agenda allocated to the Second Committee
on a biennial basis, including the possibility of assigning
some items to the Economic and Social Council for consideration and final decision;
8. Further decides to review at its thirty-fifth session, in the light of experience, the arrangements outlined in paragraphs 2 to 4 above.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979
ANNEX
Indicative reorganization of agenda items to be allocated
to the Second Commlttee225
1. Development and international economic co-operation:
(a) International development strategy;
2 25 The items listed in this annex are based on the agenda of
the thirty-fourth session; future changes within the broad framework outlined are not excluded.

149

(b) Round of global negotiations relating to international
economic co-operation for development;
(c) Trade and development;
(d) Industrialization;
(e) Science and technology for development;
(/) Natural resources;
(g) Food and agriculture;
(h) Transfer of real resources to developing countries;
(i) Financial, monetary and related matters;
(j) Economic and technical co-operation among developing
countries;
(k) Restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the
United Nations system;
(I) Environment;
(m) Human settlements;
(n) Effective mobilization and integration of women in
development.
2. Report of the Economic and Social Council.
3. Operational activities for development:
(a) United Nations Development Programme;
(b) United Nations Capital Development Fund;
(c) United Nations Revolving Fund for Natural Resources
Exploration;
(d) United Nations Fund for Population Activities;
(e) United Nations Volunteers programme;
(f) United Nations Special Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries;
(g) United Nations Special Fund;
(h) United Nations Children's Fund;
(i) World Food Programme;
(j) Technical co-operation activities undertaken by the
Secretary-General.
4. Training and research:
(a) United Nations Institute for Training and Research;
(b) United Nations University;
(c) University for Peace;
(d) Unified approach to development analysis and planning;
(e) Examination of long-term trends in economic development.
5. Special economic and disaster relief assistance.
6. Other matters brought to the attention of the General
Assembly.

34/213.

Implementation of section V of the annex to
General Assembly resolution 32/197 on the
restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, by which it, inter alia, established the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic
and Social Sectors of the United Nations System for the
purpose of preparing detailed action proposals with a
view to initiating the process of restructuring the United
Nations system so as to make it more fully capable of
dealing with problems of international economic cooperation and development in a comprehensive and
effective manner, and to make it more responsive to the
requirements of the provisions of the Declaration and
