S/2014/699

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 September 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 15 of Security Council
resolution 2158 (2014), in which the Council requested me to keep it informed of
the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM) every 120 days. The report covers major developments that
occurred from 1 May to 31 August 2014.

II. Political and security developments
A.

Political situation
2.
Overall, there has been positive progress on the political track, albeit
punctuated by some worrying developments. In May and June, tensions between
State institutions threatened to derail political progress when a group of
parliamentarians petitioned the President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, to resign. They
accused him of failing to implement the Federal Government’s six -pillar policy, now
known as “Vision 2016”, and of not consulting widely. The President’s address to
the Federal Parliament on 16 June helped to defuse the situation.
3.
The Federal Government issued a revised version of Vision 2016 (a plan for
the political transformation of Somalia) on 30 June. It is committed to the
implementation of the plan with wider Somali buy-in.
4.
The formation of regional administrations began gathering pace. On 23 June,
the Federal Government brokered an agreement on south-west Somalia between the
two rival political initiatives based in Baidoa to establish an interim south -west
administration, encompassing the regions of Bay, Bakool and Shabelle Hoose.
Ethiopia, as chair of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
signed the agreement as a witness, while UNSOM, the African Union, the European
Union and the IGAD special envoys signed as observers. Key figures in the
six-region state initiative continue to oppose the agreement, however. The Federal
Government, the parties to the agreement and supporting elders plan to launch a
reconciliation initiative later in 2014 to promote an inclusive process.
5.
There were positive developments in the implementation of the Addis Ababa
Agreement of 27 August 2013. The militia leader, Barre Adan Shire (“Hiralle”),

14-61207 (E)

290914

*1461207*

S/2014/699

returned to Mogadishu from the outskirts of Kismaayo on 30 August. About
118 members of his militia also returned and surrendered their weapons to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The Kismaayo reconciliation
conference will open on 16 September and the selection process for the Juba
regional assembly will run in parallel with it.
6.
In the central regions, the Federal Government held consultations with
representatives of the “Regional State of Galmudug”, the “Administration of Himan
and Heeb” and the leadership of Ahlus Sunnah wal Jamaah. This led to the signing
of an agreement on 30 July by which those entities, with the exception of the
“Administration of Himan and Heeb”, committed themselves to forming an
administration for Mudug and Galguduud in a consultative and inclusive manner.
The United Nations, the European Union, IGAD and the African Union signed the
agreement as witnesses. The “Himan and Heeb” leaders signed on 6 August. The
process of selecting a technical committee is under way. The Federal Government is
also consulting on the creation of an interim regional administration for the Hiraan
and Shabelle Dhexe regions.
7.
Tension in the disputed Sool region grew when “Somaliland” forces seized the
town of Taleex on 12 June and disrupted a conference organized by leaders, elders
and supporters of the self-declared “Khatumo State”. The tension escalated when the
Government of Puntland reinforced its military presence in the contested region.
On 26 June, “Somaliland” forces withdrew fro m Taleex, leaving behind a
pro-“Somaliland” Dhulbahante militia. The “Khatumo” leaders relocated to
Saaxdheer, an area in the Sool region near the Ethiopian border, from where one of
the “Khatumo” founders and a parliamentarian, Ali Khalif Galayr, was elected the
new President of “Khatumo” on 14 August. On 27 August, “Somaliland” forces
captured Saaxdheer and have since occupied the area.
8.
Although relations between the Federal Government and Puntland remained
strained, some ministerial visits and technical meetings were conducted in relation
to the New Deal Compact process. On 21 May, the Government of Puntland hosted
a donor round table in Garoowe in which the participants, including the Federal
Government, discussed the development priorities of Puntland and its participation
in the New Deal aid architecture. Subsequently, Puntland dispatched ministerial
delegations to the meeting of the Steering Committee of the Somalia Development
and Reconstruction Facility on 12 June and to the executive meetings of the
High-level Partnership Forum on 9 May and 12 June, in Mogadishu. Relations faced
a setback, however, when, on 31 July, the Puntland authorities announced a freeze
on all cooperative relations and activities with the Federal Government in reaction
to the signing of the agreement on state formation in Galguduud an d Mudug without
consultations with them. On 18 August, the Government of Puntland offered a
30-day consultation period between Garoowe and Mogadishu in an effort to resolve
differences.
9.
Progress was made in the constitutional review process. On 29 May, the
Council of Ministers approved the nominations of five individuals to serve as
commissioners on the Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation
Commission. The Federal Parliament approved the nominations on 19 June. The
Commission is a body of legal and technical experts that will focus on the drafting
of proposed constitutional amendments under the political supervision and guidance
of the parliamentary Provisional Constitution Review and Implementation Oversight
Committee.

2/18

14-61207

S/2014/699

10. On 30 June, the Federal Parliament passed the Judicial Service Commission
Law. The Commission is the supreme administrative organ of the Somali judiciary
and is a prerequisite for the establishment of a constitutional court as the country’s
highest court. The Commission’s most important responsibilities include appointing,
promoting, transferring, dismissing and disciplining the members of the judiciary.
11. In line with Vision 2016, an ad hoc parliamentary electoral committee was
established on 19 May to draft a bill on a national independent electoral commission
and to review comparative electoral systems. It draws members from both the
Federal Parliament and the Federal Government. It has yet to agree on the
legislation to establish the commission. The legislative age nda for the coming
parliamentary session is crowded and, according to Vision 2016, the lower chamber
of the Federal Parliament is expected to endorse the bill in November.
12. “Somaliland” continued to prepare to hold presidential and parliamentary
elections in 2015. The authorities there are looking into the legal framework for the
voter registration process and replacing the current electoral commission, whose
mandate expires on 29 October. Meanwhile, the opposition political parties have
vowed not to accept any delay in holding the elections.
13. Following an invitation by “Somaliland”, my Special Representative, Nicholas
Kay, visited Hargeysa on 18 and 19 August. The visit opened a new chapter in
relations between the “Somaliland” authorities and UNSOM , with the former
expressing interest in engaging with UNSOM in the areas of good offices, rule of
law, human rights, media capacity-building and gender mainstreaming.

B.

Security situation
14. The overall security situation in Somalia remains volatile. In Mogadishu, the
number of incidents attributed to Al-Shabaab abated during May and June, but
incidents during Ramadan increased as expected. On 24 May, Al-Shabaab fighters
stormed the Federal Parliament building. Three AMISOM and 11 Somali troops
were killed, while more than 20 others were injured, including a parliamentarian.
Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility and vowed more attacks against the Federal
Government and those it termed “invaders”, including the United Nations.
15. In July, Mogadishu experienced a surge in targeted assassinations. The victims
comprised members of the Somali security forces and civilians, including two
parliamentarians. Small-scale explosions also increased. On 8 July, Somali troops
foiled a complex attack inside Villa Somalia at the early stages of its execution.
Another attack at the Federal Parliament building on 5 July failed when Somali
police officers fired at a suspicious vehicle, which detonated, killing the suicide
bomber and five officers. On 30 August, Al-Shabaab attacked a National
Intelligence and Security Agency prison in Mogadishu, resulting in the deaths of
seven attackers and three Agency personnel.
16. Following the attack of 8 July, the Federal Government replaced several senior
security officials, including the Minister of National Security, the Police
Commissioner and the Director General of the National Intelligence and Security
Agency. After Ramadan, AMISOM and the Somali security forces launched a series
of disarmament operations in Mogadishu in an attempt to improve the security
situation.

14-61207

3/18

S/2014/699

17. In southern and central Somalia, Al-Shabaab continued to exert pressure. In
the Galguduud and Hiraan regions, it intensified guerrilla activities around the
former strongholds of Ceel Buur and Buulobarde. On 2 6 June, insurgents carried out
a complex attack against a Djiboutian base in Buulobarde, killing two Somali troops.
18. While Shabelle Dhexe was comparatively quiet, Shabelle Hoose remained
volatile, in particular around Afgooye, Marka and Qoryooley. Clan conflict between
Biimaal and Habar Gidir militias also resurfaced, with fatal clashes, abductions and
killings reported every week in June and July.
19. On 10 May, Waajid, Bakool region, experienced its first terrorist attack since
being recovered by AMISOM and the national army, when an explosion outside a
restaurant caused five casualties. On 12 May, a suicide car bombing in Baidoa, Bay
region, killed 19 bystanders and injured 13 others. On 27 May, fierce fighting
between Al-Shabaab, AMISOM and clan militias in Ato, Bakool region, resulted in
more than 40 reported fatalities.
20. Kismaayo remained relatively calm, although underlying clan tensions
sporadically escalated into armed violence among the Interim Juba Administration
security forces. Kenyan forces launched air strikes in support of AMISOM around
Jilib, Juba Dhexe, on 18, 20 and 24 May and 16, 22 and 24 July, as well as around
Badhaadhe, Juba Hoose, on 21, 23 and 24 June.
21. Puntland experienced fresh Al-Shabaab activities. On 8 May, Al-Shabaab
fighters clashed with Puntland security forces in Feloja, Bari region. On 4 August,
the Police Commissioner for the Bari region was killed in a suicide bombing in
Boosaaso and, on 7 August, the Chair of the Military Court survived an
assassination attempt along the road between Garoowe and Boosaaso, in the Galgala
area. In Gaalkacyo, two roadside bombings and three grenade attacks in July
confirmed the presence of Al-Shabaab supporters in the town.

III. United Nations support to peace consolidation
A.

Good offices and political support
22. My Special Representative, Nicholas Kay, continued to provide advice and
good offices to the Federal Government on state formation. He advocated the
resumption of cooperative relations between the Federal Gove rnment and Puntland
and encouraged the leadership of the Federal Government to visit Puntland. On
17 and 18 August, he visited Garoowe and met the President of Puntland, Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali Gaas, and senior officials, in addition to holding consultations with
traditional leaders and civil society groups, including women and young people.
23. My Special Representative also met the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
“Somaliland” in London and the President of Puntland in Nairobi, urging the two
sides to reduce tensions and seek a political solution through dialogue. Coordinating
closely with international partners, he also engaged with the various parties to state
formation in south-west and central Somalia in support of the Federal Government’s
efforts to establish inclusive processes. On 20 May, for example, he met leaders of
the six-region state initiative in Mogadishu to urge them to support the process led
by the Federal Government that is bringing together all the parties.

4/18

14-61207

S/2014/699

24. Members of the Security Council made a landmark visit to Somalia on
13 August to review progress made by the Federal Government and to demonstrate
the international community’s continued support for the country’s efforts to achieve
sustainable peace.

B.

Support to peacebuilding and State-building
Development of a federal system and constitutional review/democratic politics
and governance
25. The United Nations continued to provide strategic policy advice in support of
the state formation process in Somalia. UNSOM provided support to the Kismaayo
reconciliation conference, working closely with the technical committee to create a
road map for state formation.
26. In support of the Federal Government’s progress towards the implementation
of Vision 2016, UNSOM and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
with support from the Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of Political
Affairs of the Secretariat, deployed a chief electoral adviser and a senior electoral
affairs officer to Somalia. Their role is to provide technical advice to the Federal
Government and UNSOM leadership on electoral priorities and legislation.
27. UNSOM and UNDP are providing advice and technical support to the
Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission. The United
Nations provided funds for the renovation of the office building for the Commission
and was represented at a technical retreat organized by the Federal Government to
devise a workplan for the Commission.
Security sector and rule of law
Security sector reform
28. UNSOM supported efforts to align international assistance for a national
security architecture framework with the consultative process led by the Federal
Government, which includes the President and Prime Minister. The focus is on the
areas of counter-insurgency, joint intelligence analysis, arms and ammunition
management and maritime security, including coordination structures within the
regions.
29. UNSOM conducted a baseline survey of small arms and ammunition in
Mogadishu in support of the Federal Government. Its results were included in the
Federal Government’s report to the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. The survey
was extended to the army facilities in Beledweyne and Baidoa. A meeting of the
Arms and Ammunition Steering Committee of the Federal Government was held on
27 August in Mogadishu.
30. Licences for 25 private security companies expired in June, but the Federal
Government extended the licence of a company used by the United Nations for
convoy services in Mogadishu until 25 October. In this regard, UNSOM submitted a
draft development framework for a diplomatic police unit to the Federal
Government for consideration.

14-61207

5/18

S/2014/699

31. UNSOM participated in the AMISOM after-action review of Operation Eagle,
held in Addis Ababa on 28 and 29 May. AMISOM, with support from UNSOM,
continues to provide refresher training, especially on human rights, with more than
5,500 army personnel having been trained to date.
32. The Defence Policy Working Group, led by officials from the Ministry of
Defence, developed a draft defence strategic plan for the period 2014 -2016 and
submitted it to the Federal Government for review and finalization. UNSOM
participated in a security sector reform meeting in Istanbul, Turkey, held on 10 July,
to align its work for upcoming meetings, one in London on security sector reform
and the other in Copenhagen on the High-level Partnership Forum.
33. Joint efforts by UNSOM and the World Bank to assist the Federal Government
to undertake a public expenditure review of the security sector progressed with the
preparation of technical assessments in the areas of public financial management,
funding flows and the political, security and justice context.
Disengaging fighters
34. Supported by UNSOM, the Ministry of National Security convened on 10 July
in Mogadishu the first meeting of the Disarmament, De mobilization and
Reintegration Working Group. It was attended by representatives of Member States,
AMISOM and implementing partners, such as the International Organization for
Migration, the Serendi Rehabilitation Centre and the International Development
Law Organization. The participants agreed upon the importance of the continued
implementation of the national programme for the treatment and handling of
disengaged combatants and expressed the need for a revision based on the new
realities.
35. UNSOM supported the opening and occupation of the rehabilitation facility in
Baidoa. It is also coordinating efforts to establish the first transitional facility for
female disengaged Al-Shabaab members in Baidoa.
Police
36. The United Nations rule of law team, comprising UNSOM and United Nations
country team staff, continued to support the Ministry of National Security in
implementing peacebuilding and State-building goal 2 of the Somali Compact.
Police working group meetings were held on 6 May and 24 July. Ei ght strategic
planning team members were hired to support the Somali police in the
implementation of the strategic action plan for the period 2013 -2017 devised by the
Ministry and the police.
37. From 1 to 5 June, UNSOM and AMISOM jointly facilitated a hu man rights
training-of-trainers course for 25 Somali police officers. The twenty-second stipends
payment cycle for police officers in southern and central Somalia was completed.
Nearly 1,000 police officers in southern and central Somalia remain to be regi stered.
38. On 13 June, the Government of Japan approved the use of $4.5 million from
the Trust Fund for Peace and Reconciliation in Somalia for a police utility, mobility
and infrastructure project. United Nations police officers, through the joint globa l
focal point arrangement, supervised the rehabilitation of four police stations and
handed over the rehabilitated Boosaaso central police station on 20 July. UNSOM
also secured funding to build an operations centre within the police headquarters
and equipment to permit the police to be operational at all times.

6/18

14-61207

S/2014/699

39. UNSOM is currently supporting the Somali police in the recruitment of some
500 cadets in Mogadishu. The UNSOM rule of law team, with support from the
United Nations Office for Project Services and with government stakeholders, began
rule of law infrastructure assessments in southern and central Somalia to inform
future programming support for construction and rehabilitation projects under the
proposed joint rule of law programme.
40. The Explosive Ordnance Disposal Unit of the Somali police, supported by the
United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), responded to 935 call -outs and
identified and destroyed 996 items of unexploded ordnance in Mogadishu and
Baidoa. UNMAS, with funds from the Government of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, is equipping and training officers to provide the
Somali police with improvised explosive device defeat capacity. The team will be
operational by the end of 2014. Teams from AMISOM formed police units from
Nigeria and Uganda were trained by UNMAS in explosive ordnance disposal,
enabling joint AMISOM and Somali police operations to be conducted in Mogadishu.
Justice and corrections
41. The UNSOM rule of law team continued to support the implementation of
peacebuilding and State-building goal 3 of the Somali Compact, in particular by
strengthening the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs through the
recruitment of 28 Somali advisers and by supporting legal policymaking and the
drafting of key priority laws. Coordination of international assistance continues,
with support provided for the development of the Somali rule of law programme
priorities, which were endorsed by the Steering Committee of the Somalia
Development and Reconstruction Facility on 31 August. This provides the
foundation for the development of the joint rule of law programme for 2015 -2016,
to be funded from the Multi-Partner Trust Fund for Somalia.
42. A pilot project at the Banadir Regional Court complex in Moga dishu is under
way to put in place measures to provide essential security arrangements for judicial
actors through infrastructure improvements and protection by police and custodial
corps officers. As part of continuing advocacy efforts for a moratorium on the death
penalty and the application of fair trial standards, UNSOM began discussions with
the newly appointed Chief Justice of the Military Court and continued to garner
support from international partners.
Maritime security
43. On 30 June 2014, the President of Somalia issued a proclamation to define the
country’s exclusive economic zone, including a list of geographical coordinates of
points defining the limits of that zone. One State has objected to the limits. Under
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, coastal States have sovereign
rights in the exclusive economic zone with regard to natural resources and some
economic activities and exercise jurisdiction over marine science research and
environmental protection.
Mine action
44. UNMAS continued to provide technical advice and financial support to the
Somali Explosive Management Authority and the mine action centres in
“Somaliland” and Puntland, supporting national capacity to coordinate explosive

14-61207

7/18

S/2014/699

hazard management throughout Somalia. It provided training on how to mark
weapons and keep records to 10 army personnel from 3 to 8 June, supporting the
Federal Government in increasing transparency and accountability in accordance
with the modified arms embargo.
45. Battle area clearance by UNMAS resulted in the destruction of 749 items of
unexploded ordnance, thereby preventing their use in improvised explosive devices.
From 28 April to 1 May, UNMAS conducted training of trainers for police officers
in Kismaayo on explosive ordnance disposal and improvised explosive device
awareness.
46. UNMAS facilitated 15 joint Somali police and AMISOM explosive dog
detection searches, including, and at the request of the Federal Government,
pre-emptive venue and vehicle searches in Kismaayo, Baidoa and Mogadishu. All
United Nations Guard Unit personnel received awareness training on improvised
explosive devices as part of the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM
(UNSOA) training package.

C.

Human rights and protection
Human rights
47. UNSOM initiated a process to harmonize the support provided by the United
Nations to the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development, while
continuing to offer technical assistance to the Ministry on the implementation of the
post-transition human rights road map and the establishment of an independent
human rights commission. UNSOM provided technical assistance in the form of
training to the Puntland parliamentary committee on human rights and supported the
establishment of the Office of the Human Rights Defender in Puntland.
48. In July and August, nine people were executed by firing squad in Mogadishu
after having been found guilty of terrorism and murder in the military justice
system. To date in 2014, 14 people have been executed by the Federal Government.
UNSOM has continued to raise concerns over due process and the quality of justice
delivered by the military courts.
49. Civilians continued to suffer human rights violations and abuses linked to
conflict in many regions of southern and central Somalia. A human rights
assessment carried out in Shabelle Hoose indicated that 75 civilians had been killed
and 14 women raped during inter-clan fighting in May and June. In July, inter-clan
violence in the Hiraan region reportedly resulted in the deaths of at least six
civilians. In both situations, soldiers from the national army were involved in the
fighting.
50. In Mogadishu, more than 10,600 internally displaced persons received eviction
notifications during the reporting period. Most have already b een evicted. According
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
people concerned were notified orally of the impending eviction in almost all cases.
Internally displaced persons were forcefully evicted mainly from pub lic land that is
now claimed by private persons in the districts of Hodan, Xamar Jajab, Wadajir,
Shibis and Xamar Weyne.

8/18

14-61207

S/2014/699

51. More than 2,980 Somalis were deported to Somalia from Saudi Arabia from
May to July, while 198 Somalis were deported from Kenya to Mogadishu by air in
May. UNHCR further recorded six cases of refoulement of registered refugees and
asylum seekers and sought their readmission to Kenya on their behalf.
52. Al-Shabaab reportedly carried out at least 21 public executions during the
reporting period, notably in the Bay and Bakool regions, of people whom they
accused of either spying for the Federal Government or breaking regulations that the
group had imposed in areas under its control.
53. As attacks continued in Mogadishu, public officials and media workers were
among those targeted. On 21 June, a well-known journalist, Yusuf Keynan, was
killed in an attack using a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device. On 25 July,
another prominent journalist, Mohamed Abdullahi Haji, survived a simi lar attack.
UNSOM has expressed concern about continuing violations of the right to freedom
of expression, in particular in the context of the forced closure of media outlets and
the detention of journalists.
Child protection
54. A total of 166 cases of grave violations affecting 154 children (112 boys and
42 girls) were documented.
55. The children and armed conflict working group co -chaired by the country task
force on monitoring and reporting and the Ministry of Defence held its bimonthly
meeting on 14 April and discussed the establishment of a child protection unit
within the army. On 27 May, the Ministry nominated members of the unit at the
headquarters level, with military liaison officers for the sectors to be identified
subsequently. A mobile screening team was set up on 14 May to systematically
screen army and police units in order to separate any children found. On 29 June
and 12 July, 250 soldiers and 900 new recruits were screened at Jazeera Training
Centre. No children were found.
56. From 16 to 21 August, my Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Leila Zerrougui, visited Somalia and Nairobi. She met the President, the
Prime Minister and key ministers, who reiterated their commitment to implementing
relevant action plans on children and armed conflict, supporting the global
campaign “Children, Not Soldiers” and ratifying the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. She also met senior officials of UNSOM and AMISOM, the Interim Juba
Administration in Kismaayo and the United Nations country team and visited a
reintegration centre supported by the United Nations Children’s Fund and the
Serendi Rehabilitation Centre.
Gender mainstreaming and empowerment of women
57. On 3 May, my Special Representative met 12 women civil soci ety
representatives, including journalists and students, to discuss their views on the
political situation and the future of Somalia. They raised concerns about
preparations for the elections to be held in 2016, the security situation and the
delays in political processes, such as state formation and constitutional review.
58. On 24 June, a workshop was jointly organized and led by UNSOM and the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women in
Mogadishu with 40 women civil society leaders from the Banadir, Puntland, Bay,

14-61207

9/18

S/2014/699

Juba Hoose, “Galmudug”, Galguduud and Hiraan regions to plan their involvement
in the upcoming political processes. The event was preceded by meetings within
each of the regions to discuss best practices and lessons learned. In closing the
workshop, the President reiterated his support for the promotion of women into
leadership positions. As a result of the workshop, a core group of women civil
society leaders, within the framework of the Somali Women Leadership Init iative,
have been meeting UNSOM weekly to review the mobilization and management of
women’s participation in political processes.
59. On 19 July, UNSOM and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women supported the Ministry o f Women and Human Rights
Development in undertaking consultations for the 20 -year review of the Platform for
Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women. The event was attended by
60 participants from civil society and the Federal Government and will re sult in a
comprehensive report on the situation of women in the 12 areas of concern of the
Platform. The Ministry also continued its efforts to coordinate support for the
finalization of the national gender policy and submitted a draft action plan for
consideration by donors on 23 July.
Sexual violence in conflict
60. The Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development used the report of the
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict as the
evidential base for tackling sexual violence in Somalia. The Ministry, with the
support of the United Nations and the Government of the United Kingdom, held
consultations from 12 to 17 May on four themes: civil society, service delivery,
uniformed services and access to justice. They were aimed at reaching agreement on
aims and objectives with all government line ministries and hearing the views of
those delivering front-line services.
61. Following the consultations, the Federal Government developed a national
action plan on sexual violence in conflict that is fully aligned with the New Deal
Compact and agreed upon by multiple government line ministries, including those
of defence and justice, the army and the police. Civil society organizations were
extensively consulted. The Federal Government presented the draft plan, which will
be finalized following regional consultations, to the international community during
the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict, held in London from 10 to
13 June. The progress made was welcomed by the key actors, the United Nations
and the donor community, with pledges made to support the implementation phase.

D.

Humanitarian situation
62. Somalia is experiencing one of the most serious humanitarian crises in the
world. About 3 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance, including an
estimated 1.1 million people internally displaced by recurrent droughts, floods and
conflict. Some 73,000 people have been displaced by insecurity since March,
following the launch of the first joint army and AMISOM military operations
against Al-Shabaab. Most have not yet returned to their place of origin.
63. After two years of incremental improvements, the food security situation in
Somalia has, according to projections by the Food Securi ty and Nutrition Analysis
Unit — Somalia, seriously deteriorated. For the first time since the famine of 2011,

10/18

14-61207

S/2014/699

the number of people who cannot meet their daily food needs over the coming six
months has increased from 857,000 to 1.1 million. This is due to drought, continued
conflict, the restricted flow of commercial goods in areas affected by military
operations, increasing malnutrition and surging food prices. Drought conditions
were present in southern, central and north-eastern Somalia from July, with overall
rainfall recorded at less than half of normal levels during the main rainy season
(from April to June).
64. Acute malnutrition levels have also increased, in particular in parts of the
north-west, southern and central regions. There are more than 218,000 acutely
malnourished children in Somalia, of whom 44,000 are severely malnourished and
at risk of death. Overall, 3 in 4 acutely malnourished children are found in southern
and central Somalia, many living in areas in which road access is blocked by armed
groups. The most alarming malnutrition rates have been observed among displaced
communities, with global acute malnutrition rates up to 18.9 per cent (the
emergency threshold is 15 per cent) in seven urban displacement settlements:
Dhobley, Doolow, Dhuusamarreeb, Garoowe, Gaalkacyo, Kismaayo and Mogadishu.
65. The outbreak of measles has persisted, with around 6,000 suspected cases
reported between January and July, more than double the number of cases in the
same period in 2013. In some areas in central and southern S omalia, immunization
coverage is as low as 15 per cent owing to access and funding constraints. Intensive
vaccination campaigns notwithstanding, four new cases of wild polio virus were
confirmed in 2014, bringing the number of those affected to 198 since t he outbreak
began in May 2013, most of them children. If drought conditions persist, the
already-high incidences of diarrhoea and other diseases will increase as people are
forced to resort to unsafe water sources.
66. Violence and conflict continue to take a heavy toll on civilians, mainly in
southern and central Somalia. In May and June, some 1,200 weapon -related injuries
were treated in eight hospitals in Mogadishu, Kismaayo, Mudug and Baidoa, with
more than 100 deaths reported.
67. Humanitarian access remains difficult, given that high levels of insecurity
prevail in most districts of southern and central Somalia. Access to the newly
recovered towns has relied heavily on air services, which renders humanitarian
action expensive, unreliable and unsustainable.
68. The challenging operating environment notwithstanding, aid organizations
continued to provide assistance during the reporting period. Some 1.4 million
people received food and livelihood relief, with 97,000 children treated for
malnutrition. Almost 500,000 people were supported with temporary or permanent
access to safe water and 160,000 people were provided with latrines. Another
315,000 people were supported with hygiene promotion packages. Some
500,000 people were provided with essential health services, with a campaign to
vaccinate 520,000 against measles conducted in July and August. In addition,
3.4 million children under 5 years of age were vaccinated against polio in May and
June. Some 15,000 people received emergency assistance packages and household
items, including plastic sheeting, blankets and mattresses, while 54,000 others were
provided with transitional shelter. Around 4,400 survivors of protection violations
were provided with support, with 383 children formerly associated with ar med
groups benefitting from community-based reintegration programmes. With regard to
education, 232,000 learners were supported through teacher training and incentives.
Humanitarian partners also assisted 155 separated and unaccompanied children,
including those deported from Saudi Arabia.

14-61207

11/18

S/2014/699

69. On 19 August, the Prime Minister conducted the first visit of a Somali prime
minister to the Dadaab refugee camp in Kenya. A day earlier, the participants in a
ministerial-level meeting on Somali refugees, held in Addis Ababa and attended by
UNHCR, my Special Representative for Somalia and ministers from Djibouti,
Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Uganda and Yemen, which together host nearly 1 million
Somali refugees, reaffirmed the commitment of host countries to finding sol utions.
The participants welcomed the provision of asylum space to refugees and agreed
that conditions for mass return had not yet been met in Somalia.

E.

Stabilization
70. Efforts to establish caretaker administrations and provide urgent security,
livelihood and humanitarian assistance continued. In July, the Federal Government
reported that training for all caretaker administrations had been completed through
the Somalia Stability Fund in partnership with the Government of Sweden.
Administrations have been established in Xuddur, Waajid, Warsheikh, Qoryooley
and Buulobarde. However, access remains a key obstacle to deploying the remaining
administrations and delivering other stabilizing assistance.
71. International planning and coordination also co ntinued. At the strategic level,
the President convened an inaugural high-level meeting with representatives of
AMISOM, UNSOM, UNSOA and government officials on 16 August to review
planning for the second phase of operations, including stabilization activi ties. A
proposal for $3.5 million from the Peacebuilding Fund was finalized in partnership
with the Federal Government and submitted to the Peacebuilding Support Office for
appraisal and approval.

F.

Socioeconomic recovery and development
72. On 29 May, the Financial Governance Committee held its third meeting in
Mogadishu, the first at which all six members were present. Secretariat support
provided through the World Bank arrived on 7 June, enabling the Committee to
identify technical assistance requirements and initiate more systematic communication
with key stakeholders and the Somali public. On 12 June, the Steering Committee of
the Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facilit y welcomed its progress. On
16 July, the Committee released a progress report in which it highlighted key
achievements, including the endorsement of the procurement amendment bill and
the audit bill by the Council of Ministers, the preparation of financial statements by
the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance and the Co mmittee’s review of six
concession contracts with technical input from the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. On 17 July, the Federal Government requested the Committee
to oversee and monitor the future national asset recovery programme, in close
cooperation with the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative.
73. Efforts are under way to strengthen the role of Somalia in the global trading
system. On 17 June, the Prime Minister signed a formal request to the executive
secretariat of the Enhanced Integrated Framework for Trade-related Technical
Assistance to Least Developed Countries to include Somalia in the programme. The
Enhanced Integrated Framework promotes the mainstreaming of trade into the
development agenda of least developed countries and allows a ccess to international
trade-related technical assistance through Aid for Trade programmes.

12/18

14-61207

S/2014/699

G.

Targeted sanctions
74. During the informal consultations of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, held on
15 May, the Somali National Security Adviser provided a briefing on the efforts of
the Federal Government to meet the requireme nts of resolution 2142 (2014) and
implement the recommendations of the assessment mission that I deployed to
Somalia pursuant to paragraph 10 of the same resolution. The Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea is finalizing its report on Somalia and will present its findings
to the Committee early in October.

H.

Coordination of international efforts
75. Executive meetings of the High-level Partnership Forum were held on 9 May
and 24 June, co-chaired by the President and my Special Representative. The need
for urgent delivery on the New Deal Compact commitments and for improvement in
the transparency of international assistance was emphasized. The Steering Committee
of the Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility held meetings on 12 June
and 31 August, chaired by the Prime Minister. Discussions focused on current aid
flows to Somalia and the engagement of States and regions in the implementation of
the Compact.
76. Sector-level coordination continued through the working groups on the
peacebuilding and State-building goals. They are currently finalizing their planning
frameworks and identifying key gaps and support needs until 2016.

IV. Implementation of Security Council resolution 2124 (2013)
77. As one of its priorities, UNSOM continues to work with its partners on
implementing the human rights due diligence policy in Somalia. It provided human
rights input into pre-deployment training for AMISOM contingents in Bujumbura
and Kampala. It also provided training in human rights and international humanitarian
law to AMISOM, the army and the police in Mogadishu and Baledogle, Shabelle
Hoose. It is finalizing the risk assessments of AMISOM and the army while
continuing to monitor the human rights situation in the newly recovered areas.
78. Somali troops have also been undergoing “fit for combat” training, which
includes a module on human rights and humanitarian law, delivered by Ethiopian
and Djiboutian trainers in sectors 3 and 4. In total, 2,747 and 1,000 troops have been
trained in sectors 3 and 4, respectively. Other troops also underwent training in
sectors 1, 2, 5 and 6.
Logistical support to the African Union Mission in Somalia and the army
79. UNSOA continued to provide its logistical support package to AMISOM and
the army, as authorized by the Security Council in its resolution 2124 (2013) and the
revised AMISOM concept of operations. Owing to bad weather and insecure major
supply routes, UNSOA had to deliver rations by air to forward locations in sectors 2
to 5, putting considerable pressure on UNSOA utility air assets and restricting air
movements for other tasks. UNSOA put in place the arrangements necessary to
support the second joint AMISOM and army offensive, “Operation Indian Ocean”,
which began in the last week of August.

14-61207

13/18

S/2014/699

80. UNSOA also continued its engineering and construction work in all sectors in
support of AMISOM, including constructing accommodation and offices, defence
walls and level II medical facilities, drilling wells for water and providing sanitation
facilities. It completed terrestrial trunked radio tactical communication hubs in
sectors 2 and 4 and at the sector Kismaayo headquarters. In addition, it provided
pre-deployment, in-mission and other training support to 562 AMISOM personnel,
bringing the total number of personnel trained since April 2009 to 9,476.
81. UNSOA supported and participated in the joint verification of Ethiopian troops
in sectors 3 and 4 in July. AMISOM also participated. Relief in place operations
between sector 2 and sector Kismaayo have not been completed owing to concerns
that are currently being dealt with by the African Union Commiss ion. The rotation
of Sierra Leonean troops that was initially scheduled to begin in July 2014 was
postponed owing to the outbreak of Ebola virus disease in Sierra Leone.
82. UNSOA operates hub-and-spoke air services with fixed-wing aircraft between
the six sector hubs and helicopters within each sector. The air logistics support
concept is based on a centralized operations system, with the main logistics bases in
Mogadishu, and decentralized execution, feeding the other five sector logistics/
tactical hubs (Baidoa, Beledweyne, Kismaayo, Jawhar and Dhobley). This is
augmented by administrative and medical/casualty evacuation support from Nairobi.
In total, UNSOA has deployed nine utility helicopters and three fixed -wing aircraft.
Currently, six helicopters are based in Mogadishu, one in Wajir (Kenya) and two in
Baidoa. There are also two fixed-wing aircraft in Mogadishu and another in Nairobi.
UNSOA plans to deploy a C-130 heavy cargo aircraft to meet new demand for
transportation of rations, supplies and cargo.
83. As a component of the UNSOA logistical support package, UNMAS continued
to provide explosive management training, equipment and mentoring to joint
AMISOM and army operations in southern and central Somalia. In July, it
facilitated the deployment of AMISOM explosive ordnance disposal teams to
Jawhar to clear the Afgooye-Marka road, which had been prone to improvised
explosive device attacks against AMISOM and the local population. A convoy route
survey, in the context of explosive hazards, was provided for the delivery of rations
to Beled Amin in the Bay region and Marka and facilitated the movement of several
hundred AMISOM troops from Mogadishu to Jawhar. UNMAS provided medical
backup to AMISOM explosive ordnance disposal teams and facilitated medi cal care
for the army, AMISOM and the local population in Shalambot in Shabelle Hoose
and Beled Amin.
84. During the reporting period, support to the army was mainly focused on
assisting it to meet the preconditions for UNSOA logistical support, in line w ith
resolution 2124 (2013).
85. UNSOA has to date spent $2.1 million of the total contributions of
$8.3 million to the United Nations Trust Fund for the Somali National Army. An
amount of $1.627 million has been earmarked for the purchase of critical supplies
for the army. In addition to contributions from the Governments of Italy, the United
Kingdom and the United States of America, some $750,000 has been pledged by the
Governments of Ethiopia and New Zealand. The contributions still fall below the
estimated $19.6 million required for the initial year, however. The balance in the
United Nations Trust Fund in Support of AMISOM currently stands at $4 million,
following the recent contribution by the Government of Australia of $1 million.

14/18

14-61207

S/2014/699

V. United Nations presence in Somalia
Expansion of the presence
86. The reoccupation of international compounds along the road to Mogadishu
International Airport, closed after the attack of 19 June 2013, began on 2 4 April
with the United Nations common compound. Over the period, in -country staff
figures averaged 330 international staff and 990 national staff, with an average of
190 international staff in Mogadishu. Of those staff, the UNSOM deployment
strength stands at approximately 60.
Integration
87. The integrated strategic framework, which also serves as the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework, was endorsed by the United Nations presence
in Somalia at a United Nations country team retreat held on 3 July. It was further
fine-tuned in discussion with the United Nations Development Group and the donor
community before being formally endorsed by the Integrated Task Force on Somalia
in New York on 27 August. The final step in the United Nations Devel opment
Assistance Framework process is the presentation of the integrated strategic
framework to the Federal Government in September.
Staff safety and security
88. During the reporting period, there were no significant security incidents
affecting United Nations staff, programmes or assets. Security within Mogadishu
International Airport was bolstered with the deployment of the United Nations
Guard Unit, the advance elements of which arrived on 6 and 7 May. The Unit’s first phase deployment of 332 personnel within the main compounds at the airport was
completed on 15 June. The second-phase deployment of 78 personnel was
completed on 8 and 9 July, thereby achieving the mandated strength of 410 troops.
The second-phase personnel are to deploy to the proposed new UNSOM
headquarters. The amendment to the status-of-mission agreement, aimed at
facilitating the Unit’s operations, remains under negotiation with the Federal
Government. Memorandums of understanding are also under negotiation with the
African Union and the Federal Government, aimed at coordinating the Unit’s
operations with those of AMISOM and the Somali security forces.

VI. Observations
89. As we approach the midpoint of the four-year term of the Federal Government
in September, I remain cautiously optimistic about progress in the political process,
the many risks ahead notwithstanding. International attention and support will
continue to be critical as the Federal Government and people of Somalia work
towards their shared goals of State-building and peacebuilding. The historic visit of
the Security Council in August has given a strong signal of the sustained
commitment of the international community to supporting the process.
90. The past months have seen growing momentum towards realizing the vision of
Somalia as a federal State. I welcome Vision 2016, which has helpfully clarified the
roles of federal institutions in the process and set out key principles of
inclusiveness, transparency and Somali ownership, in addition to clear timelines. I

14-61207

15/18

S/2014/699

welcome the agreement to establish an interim south-west administration and the
agreement of intent to form an interim administration for Galguduud and southern
Mudug. I call upon the Federal Government to ensure that the processes are further
developed in an inclusive manner, in line with the provisional Federal Constitution,
and encourage all stakeholders to engage. I am concerned that progress could be
jeopardized by current inter-clan tensions, in particular in Shabelle Hoose, and urge
all parties to seek a peaceful solution to their concerns within the context of the
federal vision as a whole. I welcome the commitment of the Interim Juba
Administration to a fully inclusive State-building process. I encourage the parties to
the Addis Ababa Agreement to swiftly implement outstanding commitments,
especially holding a reconciliation conference and integrating militias operating
outside Kismaayo.
91. Time is now extremely tight to realize the constitutional review and electoral
preparations if the deadline of 2016 is to be respected. Unity among federal
institutions will be crucial. The Federal Parliament has a critical role to play and the
coming parliamentary session will be decisive if the benchmarks in Vision 2016 are
to be met. I welcome the formation of the Independent Constitution Review and
Implementation Commission and encourage the Federal Parliament to move swiftly
also to form a boundaries and federation commission. A broad -based constitutional
review process should get under way rapidly, fully involving the regions of Somalia
and addressing critical federal issues, including the future structure of the security
sector.
92. I am especially concerned about the slow progress in electoral preparations.
An independent national electoral commission must be established without delay if
the target is to remain within reach. I encourage Somali and international partners to
work together in a coordinated manner to support the development of credible,
transparent institutions capable of administering an ele ctoral process.
93. The recent escalation in tensions between Puntland and “Somaliland”,
including the deployment of military forces in the border areas, is of concern. I
repeat my earlier calls upon the two parties to exercise maximum restraint and to
take steps towards de-escalating the situation. My Special Representative continues
to engage the parties through his good offices, in coordination with regional and
international partners.
94. I commend the continued efforts of the army and AMISOM to advan ce
military operations against Al-Shabaab, including through the launch of “Operation
Indian Ocean”. They have shown great courage and perseverance in the face of
extremely dangerous conditions. I urge Member States to assist AMISOM in
deploying the air assets authorized in resolution 2124 (2013) and to contribute to the
United Nations Trust Fund for the Somali National Army as soon as possible.
95. It is essential that military operations be followed immediately by efforts to
establish or improve governance structures in the recovered areas and by the
delivery of basic services, including security. Failure to consolidate the gains in
those areas could also derail the broader political process. I call upon the
international community to rally behind the Federal Government to meet this urgent
priority.
96. I am extremely concerned that the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate. After the gradual rebuilding of livelihoods since the famine of 2011 t hat
cost more than a quarter of a million lives in excess mortality, fragile gains are now
being eroded and malnutrition rates are again on the rise. The difficulties in access

16/18

14-61207

S/2014/699

notwithstanding, humanitarian agencies have been able to reach some of those in
need, but are constrained by their lack of resources. The consolidated appeal for
2014 remains severely underfunded, at just 32 per cent (a gap of $637 million). I
urge partners to help to fill the gap and caution that a humanitarian crisis in Somalia
would be likely to severely hamper hard-won gains on the political and security
fronts.
97. Securing the main supply routes is critical to offering safe access for civilians,
commercial activities and humanitarian actors, to peacebuilding and to enabling the
efforts of UNSOA, which is doing its utmost to support the operations. I support the
President’s calls for the military operations to accord priority to this task.
98. I welcome the steps taken by the Federal Government to comply with the
sanctions regime imposed by the Security Council, including implementing the
recommendations made in my letter of 3 April to the President of the Council
(S/2014/243). I encourage partners to support efforts to develop the ca pacity of the
Somali authorities in this regard and urge the Federal Government to continue and
enhance its compliance efforts. Meanwhile, I am concerned about the continuing
export of Somali charcoal in violation of the ban imposed by the Council in its
resolution 2036 (2012) and request the Federal Government, AMISOM and recipient
countries to coordinate their efforts to implement the ban.
99. I urge the Federal Government to tighten financial governanc e procedures, in
particular regarding funding flows relating to the security sector. I am encouraged
that a joint public expenditure review of the security and justice sector by the World
Bank and the United Nations is in progress.
100. I am extremely concerned about the targeted killings of Somali public
officials, including five legislators, two judges and 31 police officers. I urge the
Federal Government to investigate all criminal activities and bring the perpetrators
to justice.
101. I remain concerned about the human rights and protection situation in areas
affected by conflict, including as a result of inter-clan violence. I am particularly
concerned about reports of grave violations against women and children. I again
urge the Federal Government to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
the Optional Protocols thereto. I also urge the Somali authorities to implement a
moratorium on the death penalty.
102. I continue to be concerned about the underrepresentation of Somali women in
peacebuilding, especially in the current process for the formation of regional
administrations. I urge the Somali authorities not to miss the current opportunity to
ensure the full representation of women in political processes, in line with Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). Special attention should be given to supporting
women in the newly recovered areas, where they will play a key role in rebuilding
war-torn societies. I call upon the Somali authorities to ratify the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
103. I pay tribute to my Special Representative, Nicholas Kay, his deputies and the
members of staff of UNSOM, UNSOA and the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and other international and regional organizations in Somalia for their
continued hard work under challenging conditions. I also thank the African Union,
AMISOM, IGAD, the European Union and other development partners for their
sustained support to the search for peace in Somalia. We must continue to strengthen
our partnership in the quest for lasting peace and stability.

14-61207

17/18

S/2014/699

18/18

14-61207
