United Nations

S/PV.5539

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5539th meeting
Friday, 29 September 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vassilakis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Greece)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Gayama
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Christian
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Ruiz Rosas
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Bolton

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 25 September 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/760)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-54337 (E)

*0654337*

S/PV.5539

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 25 September 2006 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2006/760)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Ziade
(Lebanon) and Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic)
took seats at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Commissioner of the International Independent
Investigation Commission.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Brammertz to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/760, which contains a letter dated 25
September 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting
the report of the International Independent
Investigation Commission.

2

I now give the floor to Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Commissioner of the International Independent
Investigation Commission.
Mr. Brammertz: I am grateful for the
opportunity to present the report of the International
Independent Investigation Commission (S/2006/760,
annex). Like the previous reports, this report provides a
snapshot of the Commission’s work over the past three
months and of its ongoing activities. It gives only as
much detail as is possible in view of the underlying
need to preserve confidentiality and investigative
leads.
The reporting period was marked by the conflict
in Lebanon. As a result, and in accordance with United
Nations security regulations, the Commission’s
international personnel were required to leave Lebanon
on 21 July 2006. The Commission relocated to a
temporary base in Cyprus, where activities resumed
almost immediately upon arrival. The gradual process
of returning international personnel to Lebanon has
already started.
Despite this situation, the Commission has made
progress in its investigation of the killing of former
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 others and in the
expanded technical assistance it provides to the
Lebanese authorities in the investigation of certain
other crimes.
In the Hariri investigation, 20 major investigation
and analysis projects are ongoing. The previous report
(S/2006/375, annex) concentrated on the extensive
forensic examination of the crime scene and of the
blast that killed Mr. Hariri and 22 others. Over the past
month, the focus has been on consolidating the results
of that examination and on conducting a significant
number of interviews with a view to identifying the
perpetrators at all levels.
The DNA analysis conducted on the human
remains found at the crime scene produced crucial
results. Several of these remains appear to correspond
to the person that allegedly detonated the improvised
explosive device, a man in his early twenties. Further
forensic tests are taking place to possibly establish the
regional origin of that person; his DNA is being
compared with existing DNA databases in several
countries. Independent tests carried out in two separate
environments earlier this year, as well as scaling
explosion experiments have corroborated the findings

06-54337

S/PV.5539

of the Commission with regard to the characteristics
and nature of the explosion of 14 February 2005.
In its previous report, the Commission indicated
that the minimum quantity of explosives used was
1,200 kilogrammes. Subject to final results, it is now
estimated that the quantity of explosives used would
have been closer to 1,800 kilogrammes. The
Commission has also reached preliminary conclusions
about a number of issues that were previously unclear.
For instance, two sounds were heard by some witnesses
on 14 February, while there was, according to our
findings, only one explosion. There are scientific
explanations for this phenomenon.
The Commission continues to investigate the
modus operandi used by the perpetrators. It is
examining information suggesting that Rafik Hariri
was the subject of earlier surveillances and possibly of
earlier attempts to kill him. It is likely that the alleged
bombing team knew that electronic countermeasures
were in place to protect the convoy and Rafik Hariri
and that they chose a method of attack that would not
be impeded by such countermeasures. The reduced
security arrangements for Rafik Hariri after his
resignation as Prime Minister created a number of
vulnerabilities enabling the attack to be perpetrated
more easily.
As a priority, the Commission is analysing and
investigating the communications traffic relevant to the
case and its international aspects. They demonstrate a
complex network of telecommunications traffic
between a number of individuals relevant to the
investigation. Thanks to its communication analysis,
the Commission understands better the preparatory
aspects of the attack, notably of the activities and
locations of the six SIM card holders alleged to have
been part of the bombing team. This work remains
ongoing and is one of the areas where comparative
analysis with the 14 other cases is being pursued.
The Commission’s strategic objectives for the
coming months are to undertake approximately 50 key
linkage-related interviews, collect and analyse a large
amount of already identified electronic data, technical
intelligence and documentation and develop its
communication and further sensitive sources.
In Security Council resolution 1686 (2006), the
Council expanded the Commission’s mandate in
relation to the technical assistance it provides to the
Lebanese authorities in 14 other cases. The

06-54337

Commission has increased the resources it devotes to
this technical assistance and has concentrated on three
main areas.
The first area is in forensic investigation and
analysis for each case to establish the nature and
location of the explosive devices used. Forensic
evidence in these cases is being compared with that of
the Hariri case, for example by using common
fingerprint and DNA databases.
The second area is, as already mentioned, the
communications analysis. The objective is to lift, from
the vast amount of communications traffic in Beirut
during the period of the attacks, those numbers
common to some of the attacks, and to link other
relevant numbers.
The third area concerns the conduct of interviews
where the interviewees can provide information on
individual cases as well as on multiple cases’
commonalities. As a result of the work done during the
reporting period, the Commission has strengthened its
preliminary conclusions that the 14 cases were not
commissioned and executed by 14 disparate and
unconnected persons or groups with separate motives.
The Commission anticipates that further links between
these cases will become evident upon further collection
of information and evidence.
The Commission has continued to interact closely
with the Lebanese authorities — the Government of
Lebanon, the Prosecutor General and his senior staff,
the investigating judges assigned to the cases, as well
as with the liaison officer appointed by the Internal
Security Forces. The Commission has continued to
share with the competent Lebanese judicial authorities
all relevant documentary, testimonial and physical
information obtained in the course of its investigation,
including information relevant to individuals who are
detained and the assessment of the credibility of
witnesses. The Commission is grateful to the Lebanese
authorities for the outstanding support and work
undertaken, especially considering the particularly
difficult circumstances that marked the reporting
period.
The Commission requires the assistance and full
support of States on technical, legal and judicial
matters relevant to the investigation. Between 15 June
and 15 September 2006, a total of 39 new formal
requests for assistance were sent to 12 different
Member States and international institutions. Most

3

S/PV.5539

Member States responded in a positive and prompt
manner to the Commission’s requests, providing
forensic technical assistance, technological support and
tracking and analysis of telephone communications and
facilitating witness interviews.
Pursuant to the common understanding reached
between the Commission and the Syrian Arab Republic
earlier in the year, Syria’s cooperation with the
Commission has continued to be timely and efficient.
During the reporting period, the Commission submitted
11 formal requests for assistance to Syria, seeking
information and documentation about certain
individuals and groups. Syria also provided
documentation relating to experiments it conducted
concerning the properties and impact of various
controlled explosions. Follow-up meetings have taken
place with experts from the Commission to discuss
these experiments. The level of assistance provided by
Syria during the reporting period remains generally
satisfactory.
The Commission is satisfied with the progress
made so far in the investigations and will continue to
obtain the best possible results throughout the next
reporting period and until the end of the current
mandate in June 2007. These results can be achieved
only with the continued support of all States. In this
context, three areas are of particular importance.
The first area is requests for assistance. During
the last six months, more than 70 requests were sent to
States for their assistance, and the Commission
anticipates sending more such requests. Timeliness of
answers by States remains of paramount importance,
especially in light of the time constraints the
Commission faces.
The second area is witness protection. Witness
protection measures are crucial to the further
development of the investigations. The Commission is
putting in place such mechanisms in order to allow
more individuals with appropriate knowledge to step
forward and assist it in this sensitive area of its work.
The third area of particular importance is
resources.
Strengthening
the
Commission’s
institutional capacity is critical. Recruiting and
retaining competent personnel remains a concern, as
this affects the Commission’s ability to fulfil its
mandate in a timely manner. The Commission trusts
that the Security Council and all States will continue to
support it in managing these and other challenges.

4

The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We come
to the Security Council once again to debate the report
of the International Independent Investigation
Commission (IIIC) on the assassination of the martyred
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri. We must renew our thanks
and appreciation to the Council for having so closely
followed this question since the first days following the
major earthquake of the assassination of the late Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri.
Allow me to express our thanks also to the IIIC,
to its Commissioner and its members. We commend
their tireless efforts and their perseverance. Allow me
to pay special tribute to Mr. Serge Brammertz, who
enjoys wide respect and appreciation.
We believe that the report before us reflects
professional, precise work. We welcome the progress
on the various aspects of the investigation into the
assassination of Mr. Hariri, as well as the other crimes
within the Commission’s terms of reference. We hope
that progress in the investigation will continue and that
cooperation with all relevant parties will strengthen
and improve.
With
the
continuing
investigation,
the
Government of Lebanon, in cooperation with the
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, Mr. Nicolas
Michel, and his assistants, is working to set up a court
with an international character, which we hope will
find support and assistance from the Council. The idea
of such a court enjoys firm and wide unanimity in
Lebanon and is of utmost importance to the Lebanese
people. Lebanon hopes that it will no longer be a place
for political assassination, a situation that we have long
suffered.
Finally, I should like to renew our thanks to
Mr. Brammertz and his assistants. We stress that just as
Lebanon was able, with the help of the Council, to rid
itself of Israeli aggression, it will continue to insist on
the complete uncovering of the truth of this major
crime of the killing of Prime Minister Hariri and his
companions, as well as crimes before and following
that assassination. The prosecution of those implicated
in the assassination of the late Prime Minister in a
court with an international character is desirable. We
rely once again on the will and insistence of our people
as expressed in its Government and on the Security
Council and all those who uphold justice in the world.

06-54337

S/PV.5539

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the manner with which you have
steered the work of the Security Council this month,
including your sincere efforts that led to the holding of
a ministerial-level meeting on the Arab initiative to
revive the peace process in the Middle East. There is a
need to revive the peace process in the Middle East
because of Israel’s refusal to implement resolutions of
international legitimacy.
I would like to welcome among us Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Commissioner of the International
Independent Investigation Commission, who has just
presented his third periodic report. We have taken note
of the contents of Mr. Brammertz’s procedural report,
as well as his working methods, professionalism and
expertise.
The report refers to the significant and positive
milestones represented by Syria’s efforts to fulfil its
obligations and to continue to cooperate with the
Commission in an effective manner on all levels. Syria
continues to respond to every demand of the
Commission, providing all the information it needs in a
timely manner according to the deadlines agreed
between the two parties. That fact was emphasized in
the statement we have just heard from Mr. Brammertz.
I would once again like to reaffirm that the
cooperation of the Syrian Arab Republic with the
Investigation Commission is based on my country’s
keen desire to help to find the truth in the crime of the
assassination of Rafik Hariri, former Prime Minister of
Lebanon, as well as to determine the parties
responsible.
The report before the Security Council includes a
periodic explanation and description of the technical
aspects on which the Commission is working within its
competence, whether in terms of the scene of the crime
or the alleged tools utilized in the crime. We hope that
the investigation, which is based on the two previous
periodic reports, will reveal the real perpetrators of this
crime.
In that context, we repeat what we have said on
previous occasions, that one of the most dangerous
things faced by the investigation is the ongoing
exploitation by some parties, within or outside our

06-54337

region, of what is in the investigation to jump to
premature conclusions not based on any evidence or
clear proof. The same is true with regard to the attempt
by some parties to provide uncorroborated information
to be used for purposes different from the real purpose
for which the Commission was established. For those
parties, one such purpose is to continue to pressure my
country. I wish to underscore that the report continues
to point out that, as regards uncovering the truth, the
Commission will still have to make great efforts before
it reaches a final conclusion.
Allow me to address briefly some of the points
contained in the report before the Security Council,
without going into the report’s substantive details, in
order not to interfere with the investigation. We in
Syria believe that it is important that the investigation
be independent, impartial, objective and free from any
political influence or interference.
First, the report noted that Syria’s cooperation
with the Commission was satisfactory and effective.
Mr. Brammertz has just reaffirmed that once again
before the Security Council. In that connection, we
would like to state that Syria continues to cooperate
fully with the International Independent Investigation
Commission, and has done so since the Commission
began its work. Syria had hoped that the report would
have pointed to the extent of other States’ cooperation
with the Commission.
We would like to emphasize that the ad hoc
judicial commission established in Syria oversees
coordination and cooperation with the International
Independent Investigation Commission and responds to
all the Commission’s requests for assistance. The
accuracy and clarity of the requests made to Syria’s ad
hoc commission has enabled it to continue to provide
the
International
Independent
Investigation
Commission with information in record time.
Secondly, in the context of cooperation between
Syria and the International Independent Investigation
Commission, the report refers to Syria’s response to the
Commission’s requests for information and documents.
The report also points out that Syria has provided
timely assistance to the Commission, and refers to the
satisfactory timeliness in which Syria has responded to
the Commission’s requests for setting up interviews
with witnesses and for putting in place security and
administrative measures needed to conduct those
interviews.

5

S/PV.5539

Thirdly, Syria has taken note of the importance
that the Commission attaches to exploring new
hypotheses as to the way the assassination of the late
Mr. Hariri was committed. Syria would like to
underscore the importance of scrutinizing all evidence
accurately and carefully and in a way that adheres to
international criminal investigative procedures and
criteria. That is especially so with regard to evaluating
false testimonies previously presented by witnesses
before the International Independent Investigation
Commission for well-known political purposes. Those
who are providing such testimonies should come
before legal authorities for misleading the legal process
and be ordered to reveal the political groups or persons
who forced them to give false testimony.
Fourthly, Syria has noted that the Commission
has made great efforts, as part of its expanded mandate,
to investigate terrorist crimes committed in Lebanon
since 1 October 2004. In that regard, we wish to point
out that many people, in Lebanon in particular and in
the region in general, would have expected the Security
Council to attach similar importance to the war crimes
and crimes against humanity perpetrated recently,
namely Israel’s bombardment of Lebanon, given that
the evidence is clear and the persons responsible are
well known to all.
We believe that it is important that the
Investigation Commission also focus on the crime of
the assassination of the two Majzoub brothers, so as to
clarify the relationship between that and other crimes.
We would point to the statement distributed by the
Permanent Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations
on 21 June 2006, which stated that the terrorist group
that carried out the assassination of the two Majzoub

6

brothers on 26 May 2006, as well as other terrorist
groups, were working for the Israeli Mossad. That
statement also said that the group had carried out
exercises in and outside of Israel. We hope that the
Commission’s mandate will include that and similar
terrorist crimes.
Fifthly, we note with satisfaction that the
principle of secrecy in the investigation continues to be
upheld in a professional manner. We welcome that
professionalism and hope that it will continue.
In conclusion, Syria believes that we should give
the investigation the time and resources necessary to
allow it to pursue its work and to uncover genuine
evidence quite independently from politicization, false
hypotheses and all interpretations irrelevant to the true
investigation. We stress yet again that Syria will
continue to cooperate actively, through its ad hoc
judicial committee, with the International Independent
Investigation Commission and to provide it with all the
information at its disposal and the results of its own
investigations concerning the assassination of the late
Rafik Hariri.
We reaffirm once again that Syria — eager in its
own core interests to continue uncovering the truth —
is fully committed to cooperating so long as the
international investigation is pursued professionally
and expertly.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I should now like to invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

06-54337
