-

F

United Nations
Page

235151

PLENARY MEDlNG

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

•

THIRTIETH SESSION

[OS,

Oflkitll Records

OF
511

515
518
521

CONTENTS

Agenda item I:
Opening of the session by the Chainnan of the delegation
of Algeria
.
Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditation

.

Address by Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, Temporary President
and Chainnan of the delegation of Algeria
.

~ER

VB-

533

ela)

538
540

) .. 545
Hau
549
553
557
560

Agenda item 3:
Crederitials of representatives to the thirtieth session of
the General Assembly:
(a) Ap!lOintment of the Credentials Committee

2

Agenda item 4:
Election of the President

3

Address by Mr. Gaston Thorn, President of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly ... . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

Agenda item 22:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations:
(a) Special report of the Security Council (A/I0179,
A/I0238);
(b) Other reports of the Security Council

6

Temporary President: Mr. Abdelaziz
BOUTEFLIKA (Algeria).
President: Mr. Gaston THORN
(Luxembourg).

AGENDA ITEM 1

Opening of the session by the Chairman
of the delegation of Algeria
I. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French): I declare open the thirtieth regular
session of the General Assembly.

NG

569

NEW YORK

experience, and I should like at once to thank you
from the bottom of my heart.
4. The task of a President is not easy when he refuses
to seek refuge in an unimaginative attitude. This
might give one a feeling of false confidence and of
deceptive equilibrium. We have in fact all elected to
respond in conformity with the ideals of the Charter
of the United Nations to the fundamental questions
posed by the urgency of the affairs of the moment,
which weigh so heavily on the fate of the international
community.
5. The pending problems, by reason of their number
and gravity, and the violation of the fundamental
rights of peoples in the Mediterranean and in the
mountain ranges of the Andes, which endanger peace
and security throughout the world, make complacency
impossible and demand constant watchfulness.
6. Now, even those peoples who are far removed
from the decision-making centres, because of their
increased collective awareness, bring to bear their
full influence on the fate of mankind, thus making an
original and positive contribution wh;' z rejecting
outmoded concepts and patterns of domination.
7. It is in the area of decolonization that this evolving
process is particularly apparent. Were it necessary
to give an illustration of the foregoing, the problems
of Palestine and South Africa would undoubtedly
be the most striking examples. In fact, the consistent
manner in which the General Assembly has dealt
with the affairs of Palestine and South Africa, and
the decisions taken in regard to their respective status,
bear witness to the progress achieved in the realization of the principles of the Charter and give proof of
the determination of the Assembly fully to discharge
its responsibilities, with all the seriousness and urgency
demanded by the plight of peoples who have been
kept unjustly away from the mainstream of the international community.

Address by Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, Temporary
President and Chairman of the delegation of Algeria

8. The effects of decolonization are already noticeable as we look at the composition of the Assembly,
with the admission of Guinea-Bissau to the United
Nations and the expected entry of Mozambique,
Sao Tome and Principe, Cape Verde and Angola.
This last country is at present living through tragic
times. The case of Angola is, moreover, symptomatic
of a new imperialist offensive in that part of Africa,
where the liberation of the peoples of South Africa,
Zimbabwe and Namibia is hind,~red by a whole series
of acts of political, economic and military interference
in an attempt to thwart their aspiration to freedom
and independence.

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French); I trust this Assembly will be indulgent
of me if, transgressing the traditional rules of reserve,
I yield to a natural impulse to tell you of my recent

9. To oppose those aspirations is to assume the
responsibility of confronting the African peoples with
new challenges. In any event; the ideal of liberation
will triumph in the end. The will of peoples has always

AGENDA ITEM 2

Minute of silent prayer or meditation

571
575
579
581

Tuesday, 16 September 1975,
at 3 p.m.

2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French): I invite representatives to stand and
observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The representatives stood in silence.

A/PV.2351

General Assembly-Tbirtietb Sessio_P!eD2J'y Meetings

determined the course ofhistory and ifproofis required
it is clearly to be found in \.he history of the peoples
of Indo-China.
10. It was precisely in the Indo-Chinese peninsula
that the impotence of the United "Nations to master
or to ancitipate events was clearly shown. And yet,
in this case, the elements of the solution to the problem were very much within the grasp of the United
Nations, which could have affirmed more clearly its
mission of peace had it not been paralysed by an
obstructive policy the rule of which is to use the United
Nations rather than serve its objectives of justice and
progress. Be that as it may, we must pay a tribute to
the contribution made by the peoples of Indo-China
to the consolidation of international security, particularly at a time when they are getting read" to bring
to peace the greatness of spirit and moving genius
which in war have aroused the respect and admiration of all. This new face of Indo-China, its appeal
for co-operation, its will to participate in the efforts
of the community in order to create a more just and
humane world, deserve the full consideration of the
entire international community.
11. The return of the legitimate Cambodia, so long
excluded from this body, which I have the honour
to welcome on behalf of the Assembly, is a sharp
reminder of the opportunities of playing its true part
missed by the Organization and enjoins me to bring
solemnly to the Assembly's attention the past mistakes which led to the deadlocks of which we are
all aware and compels me to request that you ponder
the possibility of their recurrence which would inevitably lead to the same difficulties.
12. By the defiance of the will of the international
community to welcome as full Members the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South
Viet Nam, the Organization is being deprived once
again of its vocation of universality and the possibility
offulfilling its first duty, that of assisting that martyred
region of the world to heal the wounds of a devastating
war.
13. The interest of the United Nations demands this,
as it demands, moreover, that we pursue our ~fforts
to create propitious conditions for the peaceful reunification of Korea. We hope that the days of rancour
are oyer and that lucidity, which generates hope,
may open the way for the great meeting of the peoples.
14. On the solution of the political problems we are
to confront depends the credibility of this Organization and, therefore, its power to give to its decisions
all the weight they need to bring about qualitative
changes in an ever more interdependent world.
15. The United Nations in fact has arrived at a
crossroads in its orientation, and, since its very destiny
is at stake, we must together seek out common and
appropriate lines on which to ensure its reconversion,
with a view to overcoming the political and economic
uncertainties of our time and reducing antagonisIns.
16. True, the machinery with which our Organization is endowed does not work well. The institutional imbalance between the principal organs of the
United Nations and the hypertrophy ofpowers inherent
in abuses of the use of the veto have accentuated
this anomaly to the extent that the balance in their
relations as originally defined is upset and no longer

corresponds to the reality of the new forces that have
emerged since 1945. The world has witnessed the
emergence of forces whose constant will has been to
propose for the good of all solutions capable of doing
away with the serious distortions affecting all international political and economic relations. In this
connexion the twenty-ninth session, like the seventh
special session, is the result of a long and patient
search for a dialogue designed to overcome the contradictions, too long ignored, in various international
meetings.
17. The cohesion and the careful solidarity of the
developing world have imposed a global vision of the
problems of the world and paved the way for a new
world order. For their part, the wealthy countries
appear today to recognize that the maintenance of
their own peace demands that the arguments of their
less privileged partners concerning the necessary
reform of a system in a critical condition no longer
be rejected. It was precisely this attitude which made
it possible for first the Declaration and Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order [resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-Vl)] and then the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States [resolution 328/ (XXIX)] to appear.
Nevertheless, we still have to promote political conditions favourable to the establishment of a new
international economic order.
18. Perhaps we should also say that the countries
of the third world, which possess neither military
nor economic power, today have the historical privilege of contributing by their moral force to the realization of the ideals 01 the Charter.
19. The wr- ..... of the thirtieth session of the General
Assembly begins with the questions included on an
especially heavy agenda, while the activities of the
United Nations have certainly known no respite,
since the seventh special session has just ended and
the twenty-ninth session closed only a moment ago.
This increase in work which, I am sure, is felt by all
will in any event have the merit of showing more
clearly what the various positions on the questions
before us are and what course future debates will
follow. But, since we are faced with the burning
problems of today, we shall be led to confirm this
will to reflect the changes that are shaping the new
face of mankind. We should like to believe this, and
we hope that we shall embark on this course.

AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the thirtieth session
of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the Cmlentials Committee

20. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation
frl}m French): Rule 28 of the rules of procedure proVides that the General Assembly at the beginning of
each. session shall appoint, on the proposal of the
PresNlent, a Credentials Committee consisting of
nine members.
21. Accordingly, I propose that, for the thirtieth
session, the Credentials Committee should consist of
th.e foll~wing Member States: Belgium, China, Costa
Rica, Libyan Arab Republic, Mali, Mongolia, Union

235lst meeI.1q--I6 September 1975

of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Stales of America
and Venezuela.
22. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
countries I have mentioned are hereby appointed
members of the Credentials Committee.
It was so decided.

forces that have
, witnessed the
,viii has been to
:apable of doing
fcting all interations. In this
ike the seventh
mg and patient
:ome the contraliS international

AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President

olidarity of the
lal vision of the
way for a new
a1thy countries
maintenance of
uments of their
the necessary
lition no longer
Ide which made
lnd Programme
w International
i-VI) and 3202
mic Rights and
1X)] to appear.
e political conlent of a new

23. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interp;-etation
from French): I now invite the members of the General
Assembly to proceed to the election of the President
of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
the election will be held by secret ballot.
At· the invitation of the Temporary President,
Mr. lamal (Qatar) and Mr. Datcu (Romania) acted
as tellers.
A vote was taken by secrei' ballot.
Number of ballot papers:
137
Invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
137
Abstentions:
0
Number of members voting:
137
Required majority:
69
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Thorn (Luxembourg) . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius)
I
Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia)
, 1
Having obtained the required majority, Mr. Gaston
Thorn (Luxembourg) was elected President of the
thirtieth session of the General Assembly.
24. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call on the representative of
Mauritius.
25. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): The election of the
President of this Assembly is held by secret ballot;
I therefore feel it would be improper for me to explain
my vote or to comment on the general voting. However, I would lii<e to state that I am not at all amused
by the delegat'..,Il which voted for the representative
of Mauritius; I find it rather embarrassing.
26. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Mr. Gaston Thorn of Luxembourg
has been elected nearly unanimously. By electing
Mr. Gaston Thorn of Luxembourg with virtual unanimity to preside over th~ thirtieth session, the General Assembly has just reached a wise and important
decision.
27. Our friendship for him is thereby corroborated.
Because of that friendship and because we are familiar
with the virtues of this statesman, I should like, on
behalfof the General Assembly and on my own behalf,
to extend our heartiest and most sincere congratulations to our new President, out of our conviction that
the mission which has just been entrusted to him will
be carried Olit successfully.
28. I invite him to assume the presidency ..,f the
thirtieth session of the-General Assembly.
Mr. Thortl (Luxembourg) took the Chair.

t the countries
leither military
historical privie to the realizaof the General
included on an
ctivities of the
vn no respite,
just ended and
!l moment ago.
'e, is felt by all
showing more
I the questions
'e debates will
:h the burning
o confirm this
laping the new
:lieve this, and
:ourse.

hirtieth session

Ilmittee

(interpretation
procedure prole beginning of
roposal of the
consisting of
,r the thirtieth
ould consist of
, China, Costa
Jngolia, Union

Address by Mr. Gaston Thorn, President
of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly
29. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
It was with genuine emotion that I followed the Chief
of Protocol as he conducted me a moment ago to this
rostrum. You have just chosen for the thirtieth time,
from among yourselves, the one to whom you have
decided to entrust the responsibility of directing
your important deliberations in the coming months.
I wish sincerely to express to you my deep appreciation for this. 1 consider my election, and the confidence which it demonstrates, primarily as a tribute
to the country which I have the honour to represent
and which, in its foreign policy, has always worked
for a better understanding among all nations; a tribute
to a country which, since the founding of the Organization, has been the advocate here of conciliation
and co-operation.
30. I wish this tribute to be shared by the group of
Member countries with which Luxembourg maintains
and is developing very special links of political kinship,
or even of integration, the countries in fact which
proposed my candidacy.
31. My admiring thoughts turn next to the great
statesmen who have preceded me in this high office,
all of whom have brought great credit to cur world
Organization. I am thinking in particular of my immediate predecessor, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Algeria, my great friend, Mr. Bouteflika. He has
presided in an outstanding manner, often in difficult
circumstances, over both the twenty-ninth session
and the recent seventh special session of the General
Assembly. I, for my part, wiH try to draw inspiration
from the best examples set by those who have occupied
this position before me.
32. It is reassuring for me to know that in our work
we shaH be able to count on the full support ?~i:d the
self1ess and untiring devotion of the Secretary-General
and all his colleagues. They will bring us the benefit
of the enormous store of wisdom and experience in
international relations which they have accumulated
over the years.
33. The responsibility which has fallen to me by
virtue of your choice is a very heavy one-I am perfectly aware of it-and I will endeavour to prove
myself worthy of the great trust that you have been
kind enough to place in me. My dearest wish is to do
everything I possibly can to ensure that this jubilee
Assembly will produce effective results for the good of
mankind. it goes without saying that this difficult
task far exceeos the capacity of one person or even
of a group of persons, and it is clear that we can make
true progress only through the effective collaboration
of all delegations.

34. It is now 30 years since the United Nations
was founded in the aftermath of the cataclysm of
the Second World War. In his report, the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, reviews remarkable
chculges which have taken place during the last three
decades. I fully endorse his statement that:
"The evolution of the post-war world-including
the introduction of nuclear weapons, the establish-'
ment of regional military pacts, the accelerated
pace of decolonization, the extraordinary advances

'- '

">""''-'~'''''';::''~''''''':::~':'''~~~!::~::-.:'::;-:'":''.':''{'2.",'L"";::.'J''':'~~:'''C:'':!.:,' ",':2:'r'??--<",. ': ': <\'l: : z_~: :,_-_~ "~.=..'.:';-:.: ':"-:.-: "-;-=:">-i: ,-",;:; ; a:".~ I:.l.t;; ;;:~.--~~.

::0'''''''0;::rill-

~' .'OIS"=-=
__;;';'f"':-;;,;'

..

4

General Allembly-TbIrtIetb SessIon-PItlW")' Meetinp

of applied science aD.<1 technology, dramatic increases in population and the emergence of a large
group of independent developing nations-has
created a new geopolitical structure in the past
30 years. Thus the basis of power, both political
and economic, in the world as a whole has changed
radically in a way which could not be foreseen
at San Francisco." [A/JOOOJ /Add.J. sect. J]
35. The United Nations has contributed, often
'al
h d I
I h
.
. d
su b stantl Iy, to t e eve opments
ave Just cIte.
This is an achievement which we all too often tend
to forget. In fact, we have thus been able to confirm
that the aims of our Organization coincide with the
aspirations of the growing number of Member States,
and that its basic rules are sound and its structures
sufficiently flexible to be able to adapt to new demands.
36. The slow but steady progress towards universality has without doubt been the most striking and
satisfying development of this period. There were
only some 50 of us founder Members in 1945. If the
Assembly so decides, in a few moments we shall be
more than 140 Member States, representing in this
Hall more than 95 per cent of the population of the
world.
This essential development, I wish to stress,
has not come about by chance. It is the reflection of
a resolute political will. We must do everything we
can to carry it to a conclusion and avoid anything
which might jeopardize it.
38. We know that we do not all share the same view
of political life; that, unfortunately, our ideological
struggles still all too often sow the seeds of mistrust;
that our economic interests, although interdependent,
often diverge; and that too many differences still
make understanding difficult. However, it is here,
in this Hall, that we have all come together-that we
must al. come together-to make known our differences, examine our motivations and, if possible,
find solutions. For there are, beyond all that can
divide us, common purposes, common objectives,
to which we have all promised to adhere and which
O"f Charter proclaims in Article 1 in an order which
it IS worth recalling on this thirtieth anniversary.
39. We have in fact solemnly undertaken to "maintain international peace and security", to "develop
friendly relations among nations" and to "achieve
international co-operation".
37.

-+0. The maintenance of international peace and
security is a necessary conditiOlJ for all progress.
Wars, be they declared or undeclared, always cost
lives, resources and energy. They are always destructive.
41.

On various occasions the United Nations has
played an important role in the maintenance of peace
in the world. I am thinking in particular of the Middle
East and Cyprus. It is true that success has not been
total, a fact we must recognize, since the disputes
are far from settled.
42. Thus the problem of the Middle East remains,

unfortunately, one of the permanent items on our
agenda. However, i am most happy to note that,
thanks to the joint efforts made through United States
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger by the leaders
of Egypt and Israel, considerable progress has been
achieved just recently by the conclusion of new disen-

gagement agreements. They do not yet concern more
than very partial aspects of this dispute. It is my
most sincere wish that the Assembly, without of
course infringing the statutory prerogatives of the
Security Council, may contribute to a peaceful and
lasting solution. Such a solution, as we are all aware,
may be built only on respect for the rights of the Palestinians and for the right ofthe peoples of all the States
of the region to live in peace within secure and recognized borders. May the dialogue among all the
parties concerned, for which this Assembly is providing
an opportunity, serve to reconcile the viewpoints on
these two aspects of the question. That is my desire.
43. ~/ith regard to the problem of Cyprus, the United
Nations is on the spot and is playing a particularly
active role in a settlement thanks to the good offices
of the Secretary-General, under whose auspices
the intercommunal negotiations are being held. From
this rostrum I should like to thank Mr. Kurt Waldheim
for the devotion he has shown and to encourage him
in the difficult task that still lies ahead. I am sure that
the Assembly will do everything in its power to support
him. It is particularly important that the intervals
that inevitably occur from time to time between the
negotiations do not serve to harden attitudes but
rather that they be put to good use to clarify the positions and to make serious preparations for subsequent
stages which should lead to a peaceful solution in the
not-too-distant future.
In the meantime, the presence of an international
force on the spot, in both cases, is unquestionat:/
helpful, since it separates the belligerents, if only by
a very thin line, and because it ensures a minimum
checl<. on compliance with the agreements that have
been reached.

44.

The success of these peace missions is all too
often not recognized in the world. Every human life
is precious and ~very war brought to an end or halted
temporarily represents progress in mankind's arduous
struggle to ensure a worth-while life for all.
46. It is regrettable that the Security Council has
never been able to set up a real international force,
one which would be available in case of need, as
provided for in Article 43 of the Charter. Pragmatic
solutions can certainly-and happily-be found, but
I wonder how the United Nations would be able to
play this role if the various States concerned with
these conflicts. were not full-fledged Members of our
Organization and if, in particular, their presence
among us in this Assembly did not provide the international forces with indispensable moral support.
45.

Peace must be accompanied by security, that is
to say, above all mutual trust as to our intentions in
the medium term and even in the long term, so that
the inevitable political developments, the pressing
social adjustments and the onerous task of economic
restructuring can take place in a calm and tranquil
atmosphere, and not amidst violence and disorder.

47.

If we are really looking to solve political problems
by peaceful means, we must not abandon the hope
that the participation of all concerned in our debates
win c ~ d"y truly bear fruit.

48.

There is, of course, yet another test of our peaceful intentions, namely, disarmament. I must note with
regret that our Organization cannot report any real

49.

progress in t
nature of th
spheres of a
It is true that
less, the co
aggressive i
to persuade
henceforth w
security. Ne
that armame
resources an
piling and on
50. That is
friendly relal'
the principle
of peoples.
51. Just loo
realization th
its convictio
its hopes.
52. As we
months ever
among oursel
course of dis
better. Even
even through
represent is t
no longer ig
mately meet
53. The fact
an instrumen
foremost to t
ization and i
tion, work w
pleted.
54. We mu
pletely intole
ern Africa.
vigorously te
ensuring that
rights of hu
anteed. The
very forcefull
that the right
this region to
of progress
will gain in st
thus begun ~
reasonable pe
wise for the
situation to IT
own interest.
55. I hope I
aspects nor tl
the second ge
one of concili'
ability of eac
been amply
and of econo
the folly of c
will make a de
enjoins them
solving intern
From th
a special effo

56.

2351st meeting-I' September 1975

progress in this field. I am well aware of the complex
nature of the problem-the modalities, control and
spheres of application-and I will not dwell on them.
It is true that a lack of trust which is not always groundless, the continuing rivalry of ideologies and the
aggressive impatience of many aspirations do little
to persuade States that they will be able to dispense
henceforth with the means of safeguarding their own
security. Nevertheless, it is rather discouraging to see
that armaments are proliferating, to see so many
resources and so much energy expended on stockpiling and on developing systems of destruction.
50. That is why the Charter enjoins us to develop
friendly relations among nations based on respect for
the principles of equal rights and self-determination
of peoples.
51. Just looking around this Hall brings home the
realization that all mankind is represented here-with
its convictions, with its contradictions, but also with
its hopes.
52. As we meet together here for more than three
months every year and as we establish relations
among ourselves, even if they are only formal, in the
course of discussions, we get to know one another
better. Even through the' most virulent criticism,
even through condemnation, this humanity which we
represent is trying to find itself. In any event we can
no longer ignore each other. Perhaps we shall ultimately meet and be reconciled.
53. The fact that this Assembly has gradually become
an instrument of universal dialogue is due first and
foremost to the success of the work done by the Organization and its Members in the field of decolonization, work which regretfully still remains to be completed.
54. We must note once again this year that completely intolerable situations -.:ontinue to exist in southern Africa. It is essential for the United Nations
vigorously to pursue its activities with a view to
ensuring that in southern Africa too the fundamental
rights of human beings and peoples are finally guaranteed. The General Assembly has consistently and
very forcefully expressed its determination to ensure
that the right of self-determination is implemented in
this region too. May we hope that. the still faint signs
of progress we have detected these past few months
will gain in strength and scope and that the movement
thus begun will lead to the desired result within a
reasonable period of time? It would in any event be
wise for the authorities who still hold the key to the
situation to make the necessary concessions in their
own interest.
55. I hope I am not wrong in stressing these positive
aspects nor too optimistic in daring to believe that
the second generation of the United Nations will be
one of conciliation-an era in which, once the vulnerability of each and the interdependence of all have
been amply demonstrated in the matter of security
and of economic and social development, and once
the folly of confrontation has been exposed, States
will make a determined effort to achieve, as the Charter
enjoins them to do, "international co-operation in
solving international problems".
56. From the vel y outset our Organization has made
a special effort to co-operate in the field of human

5

ri~hts. First, we had the ambitious Universal Declara-

ti . I of Human Rights, and later the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. Unfortunately, the Declaration has no binding
force. As for the Covenants, they have not yet received
a sufficient number of accessions to enter into force.
Their provisions are often considered not far-reaching
enough. Even though a number of countries, such
as mine, for example, belong to an effective regional
system of surveillance over the implementat!on of
human rights, much still remains for our Organization
and for those who subscribe to its principles to do in
this field. Moreover, our citizens are well aware of the
fact that in their day-to-day life the instruments in
this field are less important than the actual behaviour
of States.
57. One particular aspect of human rights, namely,
the role and status of women in society, was the
subject this year of a major world conference held
in Mexico City a few months ago. It will be for this
Assembly to provide the necessary impetus to ensure
that the results of the conference will be rapidly translated into reality.
58. International economic co-operation has been
slower in stl1l1ing and the aims of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade are far from being achieved.
More than half of the world's inhabitants still live in
want and millions of human beings remain condemned
to absolute poverty. Although world food producti"n
is steadily increasing, the balance between supply,
which is still dangerously subject to climatic fluctuations, and demand, which is continuously inflated
by the growth in the world's population, remains
extremely precarious.
59. The soaring rise in oil prices, which began
scarcely two years ago, has dealt a severe blow to
the expansion of the world economy. Concurrently
-and I must point this out without going into either
the scope or diversity of its causes at this junctureinflation has gathered spe""d at an alarming pace in
all countries.
60. The continuing dislocations in the international
monetary system are a further element of insecurity.
The decrease in world demand and the consequent
slowing down of production have led to a massive
rise in unemployment.
61. Owing to the interdependence of national economies, it is the non-oil-producing developing countries
which, faced with a fall in their export earnings that
are often based on one or a few commodities, are
feeling the full weight of and suffering most from the
slowing down of economic activity in the world.
62. This balance sheet of the situation is far from
encouraging and hardly conducive to optimism.
Nevertheless, for many years great efforts have been
made to remedy this highly unsatisfactory state of
affairs: at the sixth special session of the General
Assembly, at the World Food Conference and at the
Second General Conference of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization [UN/DO], to
mention only a few examples.
63. Finally, after long weeks of absorbing discussions and negotiations characterized by the earnest-

6

General Assembly·-Thirtieth Session-P[~/Iary Meetings

ness and determination of the participants, the seventh
special session of the General Assembly, devoted to
development and international economic co-operation,
has just ended. At that session the facts of the world
economy were thoroughly re-examined.
64. The idea of a far-reaching and necessary transformation of the international economic structures
has just been given practical expression in terms of
a highly important political undertaking bearing on a
coherent set of policies and actions which open up the
way to a more equitable sharing of the world's riches
and herald the striking of a new balance of interests
between industrialized countries and developing
countries in favour of the latter.
65. Thus the United Nations is once again demonstrating its capacity to adjust to challenges of a hitherto
unknown magnitude.
66. The constructive climate in which the negotiatio'1s have been held constitutes a triumph for the
spirit of conciliation and international co-operation.
It was created partly by the new political will and
partly by a clearer comprehension and a more unconditional acceptance of the economic int~rdependence
of all States.
67. All the participating countries deserve equal
credit for the unique and sometimes unexpected
efforts they contributed to the success of the seventh
special session.
68. After the Lome Convention, signed on 28 February of this year between 46 African, Caribbean and
Pacific countries, t after the opening of the EuropeanArab dialogue, the European Economic Community
has found here a further opportunity to confirm its
dedication to and desire for co-operation with the
countries of the third world.
69. I \Vas pleased to hear that the President of the
French Republic, Mr. Valery Giscard d'Estaing, had
decided to convene a new preparatory conference
of industrialized and developing countries on 15 October at the latest in Paris.
70. The Group of77, which originated the idea of the
new international e::onomic order and promoted it
with determination and conviction, has, by the maturity and sense of responsib!lity it has shown here,
established itselfas a new force, as a factor for progress
and peace, dedicated to the cause of development.
71. The thirtieth session of the General Assembly
will have the difficult task of maintaining, if not intensifying, the impetus of transnational solidarity and
of furthering the cause of justice among nations with
a view to ensuring that the work begun at the seventh
special session is translated into reality through
specific and tangible actions for the benefit of all the
developing countries, especially the least developed
among them.
72. The development strategy must be viewed as a
whole. It cannot be reduced to a redefinition, however fundamental, of the economic relations among
States. To be really effective, world economic action
calls for indispensable concurrent measures at s\~veral
levels. To begin with the international level, the
strategy must be supplemented by urgent and unflagging efforts to check and control the population explosion in the regions of the world in which it i<: ')CCUrr!Iig

at a particularly dramatic pace. Thanks also to particular initiatives taken during the present year, the
improvement in environmental and housing conditions will help substantially to raise the living levels
of our populations. Furthermore, at the national level
also, far-reaching and often radical changes are to be
promoted to ensure a fairer redistribution of wealth.
The reform of social structures, the expansion and
extension of rural development and the implementation of action programmes to combat poverty and
under-employment are among the decisions which
must be given absolute priority.
73. All these problems, which I have been able only
to enumerate, all these activities which I have at most
outlined, are, in the final analysis, linked to the essential objective, which is, as I have already said, to
enable the inhabitants of the world to live better, in
greater dignity and in greater freedom, as should not
be forgotten. We shall achieve this only through the
co-operation of all our peoples. This co-operation
demands that trust, peace and security should prevail
among States.
74. Otherwise, this statement is only a recapitulation
of the Charter. I have quoted some of its provisions
and referred to others. My main idea has been to
show that, although there have been failures, although
the successes have often been only partial and although
the work still to be done is immense, we have found
over the past 30 years constant inspiration and effective
guidelines in our basic texts.
75. Our exacting and often tedious daily work should
not make us forget this. All Member States have
acceded to the Charter freely and in full knowledge
of the facts. It is the Charter which must continue
to guide our actions, both yours and mine. Only thus
can the Organization, and more particularly the General Assembly, really become the "centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of
these common ends".
76. That is, in any event, as I am quite convinced,
what is expected of us by all the peoples of the world,
whose eyes will be turned towards us in the days and
weeks to come. I call upon you to ensure that we do
our utmost not to disappoint the great hopes placed
in our work. I for my' part am resolved to do this.
AGENDA ITEM 22

Admission of uew Members to the United Nations:
(0) Special report of the Security Council (A/I0179,

A/I0238);
(b) Other reports of the Security CouncU

77. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
In accordance with the procedure followed in the
past, I should now like to invite the General Assembly
to consider, und~r agenda item 22, the positive recommendations by the Security Council in documents
A/10187, A/IOI88 and A/IOI89 for the admission to
membership in the United Nations of the Republic
of Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome
and Principe and the People's Republic of Mozambique.
78. This special procedure has been applied previously in order to give States recently recommended

by the S
ization t
favourab
outset in
79. In
attention
the Presi
observer
and the
follows:
"On
Gove
and of
of Vie
the qu
South
of Vie
session
as the
Securit
Cape
latest,
"We
in the
on the
of Sout
of Viet
"We
letter
session
80. As
of the G
meeting t
subject 0
rity Cou
suggest t
with resp
Tome an
request c
be referre
tomorrow
81. I sin
Assembly
I havejus
that there
It was s
82. The
In docurr
Security
of the Re
lic of Sao
lic of Mo
resolution
Members
Add.I, A
83. We
and Add.
United N
84. May
the reco
adopts th

The dra
(XXX)).

ill

I 11

2351st meeting-16 September 1975

by the Security Council for membership in our Organization the opportunity, if the General Assembly acts
favourably on their requests, to participate from the
outset in the work of the session.
79. In this connexion, I should like to draw the
attention of the Assembly to a letter addressed to
the President of the thirtieth session by the permanent
observers 01 the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam
and the Republic of South Viet Nam, which reads as
follows:
"On behalf of the Provisional Revolutionary
Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam
and of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of Viet Nam, we have the honour to request that
the question of the admission of the Republic of
South Viet Nam and of the Democratic Republic
of Viet Nam should be discussed at the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly at the same time
as -the consideration of the recommendation of the
Security Council on the admission of Mozambique,
Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe or, at the
latest, several days afterwards.
"We also request you to invite each of us to speak
in the General Assembly when the debate is opened
on the question of the admission of the Republic
of South Viet Nam and of the Democratic Republic
of Viet Nam.
"We would be grateful if you would have this
letter circulated as a document of the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly." [AI /0238.]
80. As you are aware, it has become a tradition
of the General Assembly to admit at the opening
meeting those S~, tes whose admission has been the
subject of a positive recommendation from the Security Council. If Members agree, the Chair would
suggest that we proceed in the traditional manner
with respect to the admission of Cape Verde, Sao
Tome and Principe and Mozambique and that the
request contained in the letter that I have just read
be referred to the General Committee, which is meeting
tomorrowafternoon.
81. I sincerely appeal to all Members of the General
Assembly to allow me to proceed in the manner
I have just explained. If there is no objection, and I see
that there is none, we shall proceed accordingly.
It was so decided.
82. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
In documents A/I0187, A/10188 and A/10189 the
Security Council has recommended the admission
ofthe Republic of Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe and the People's Republic of Mozambique to the United Nations. The draft
resolutions concerning the admission of these new
Members are contained in documents AIL. 760 and
Add.l, A/L.761 and Add.1 and A/L.762 and Add.1.
83. We shall consider first draft resolution AIL.760
and Add.1 on the admission to membership in the
United Nations of the Republic of Cape Verde.
84. May I take it that the General Assembly accepts
the recommendation of the Security Council and
adopts the draft resolution unanimously?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution. 3363
(XXX».

7

85. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I declare the Republic of Cape Verde admitted to
membership in the United Nations.
The delegation of the Republic of Cape Verde was
escorted to its place in the General Assembly Hall.
86. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
We turn now to draft res.:Jlution A/L.761 and Add.•
on the admission to membership in the United Nations
of the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe.
87. May I take it that the General Assembly a~cepts
the recommendation of the Security Council and
adopts the draft resolution unanimously?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 3364
(XXX».
88. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I declare the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and
Principe admitted to membership in the United
Nations.
The delegation of the Democratic Republic of
Sao Tome and Principe was escorted to its place in
the General Assembly Hall.
89. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
We turn now to draft resolution A/L.762 and Add.l
on the admission to membership in the United Nations
of the People's Republic of Mozambique.
90. May I take it that the General Assembly accepts
the recommendation of the Security Council and
adopts the draft resolution unanimously?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 3365
(XXX».

91. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I declare the People's Republic of Mozambique
admitted te membership in the United Nations.
The delegation of the People's Republic of Mozambique was escorted to its place in the General Assembly Hall.

92. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
Several representatives have expressed a desire to
speak at this juncture, after the admission of new
Members. I call first on the representative of Portugal.
93. Mr. da COSTA LOBO (Portugal): Mr. President, the Portuguese delegation today is delighted
at your election to the presidency of the thritieth
session of the General Assembly and notes with
pleasure the fact that circumstances have enabled
it to be the first delegation to present to you its sincere
felicitations. One of the reasons for the satisfaction
which I have just expressed lies in the fact that Luxembourg and Portugal maintain close ties, based on
common cultural traditions and reinforced during
the last few years by human factors which have given
a new dimension to the relations between our two
countries. Furthermore, we are confident that your
personality and experience will constitute valuable
assets favouring the smooth progress and efficiency
of the work of this Assembly. My delegation wishes
you the greatest success in the fulfilment of your
functions and promises yOU its loyal co-operation.
94. We are present today at the entry of three new
States, Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and
Principe, into the United Nations.

'r~- , ...

",. '.

':;,&.10 iR..

8

.co i t

.X lzi. 4. ; gAIA:.;;;.t..@j..

) 11. $

( .11 .OM i@

Jb

: LGIU; i3

sLE

UJkildi2UiLti

4 £.2 . .1 J ilLii una Jt1

General Assembly-Thlrtietb Session-Plenary Meetings

To the peoples of these States, this event represents an important step in the path to accession to
their rightful place within the international community
and, to the United Nations, it marks an advance of
equal importance with respect to its objective of
universality. Thus, if on the one hand, the States
joining this Organization gain new opportunities for
action and new means to defend their interests, the
United Nations, on the other hand, acquires greater
legitimacy to represent humanity as a whole, as well
as larger prospects for success in its activities.
96. It is with natural satisfaction that Portugal participates in the first actions of independent life of the
Territories for whose administration it was responsible
until a few months ago; and it is particularly gratifying
to note that ~his new life has begun in a climate of cooperation and friendship with the Portuguese people.
97. At this time, I should like to render homage to
the intelligence and clear vision of the leaders of the
new nations, who, in their attitudes towards Portugal,
were able to distinguish between the temporary and
the permanent, between the consequence of the
erroneous policy of a Government and the true sentiments of the great majority of the Portuguese people,
and between the episodes that could divide us and the
spontaneous friendship and common aspirations that
should unite us.
98. I have no doubts that. thanks to the weight
that history always lends to that which is permanent
over that which is temporary, a closeness between
Portugal and its ex-colonies, sooner or later, will
become inevitable. But the fact that co-operation
based on friendship has been initiated by the new
States since independence is due in large part to their
leaders.
95.

99. Perhaps it would not be inappropriate at this
time to point out that once the colonial policy of Portugal was radicaHy changed by the revolution of
25 April 1974 the decolonization of the three countries
just admitted into the United Nations took place in a
relatively short period of time, in accordance with
the principles and provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the resolutions of the Assembly
and with total respect for the agreements reached
between the Portuguese Government and the liberation movements.

100. I do not wish to suggest that, in execution of
the policy initiated on 25 April, we were doing a favour
for which we now seek thanks, for in reality we were
complying with an obligation. However, it would
perhaps be fair to acknowledge that it was not an easy
policy; and, in spite of this, at no moment was our
determination to follow that policy to its fioal consequences weakened. For this very reason I believe
that our sincerity in following this same policy with
regard to the Territories in which the decolonization
process has not yet been completed cannot be doubted.
101. The first of the three new Member States to
obtain independence was Mozambique. The fundamental step in this process was the signing of the
Lusaka Agreement with the Frente de Liberta9ao de
M09ambique [FRELlMO] on 7 September 1974.
It was thus that the date for independence was set
and the institutions on which political and administrative life would be based during the transitional

period were determined. The establishment of such
institutions was based on co-operation between the
Portuguese authorities on the one hand and FRELIMO
on the other. It is with pleasure that we note that
such co-operation was possible, was efficient and
was friendly. Mozambique, because of its natural
resources, its geographic position and the qualities
of its people, will surely have an important role to
play in the international community, which in turn
should assist it to overcome the natural initial difficulties of the post-independence period. We are
convinced that its admission to the Unitt:o Nations
will enable it to give full expression to this potential.
102. With respect to Cape Verde, the final step in
its decolonization was set forth in the Agreement
signed at Lisbon between the Portuguese Government and the Partido Africano da Independencia da
Guine e Cabo Verde [PAIGC] on 18 December 1974.
In this case also, and in accordance with tne terms of
the Agreement, political and administrative life were
based on co-operation between the Portuguese authorities and the local liberation movement, in this case,
the PAIGC. As the mission of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples which visited
Cape Verde last February can testify, the collaboration between the parties took place without problems, although severe difficulties arising from the
precarious economic situation of the archipelago had
to be confronted. The distinct causes of this situation
have been explained on other occasions. At this
time, and with an eye on the future, it seems to me
that it is most important to emphasize the necessity
that, by international co-operation, the people of
Cape Verde be assisted to create an economic structure that can allow it to overcome its difficulties in a
stable manner.
103. The last of the three countries to achieve independence was Sao Tome and Principe, in accordance
with the Agreement signed by the ~ortuguese Government and the Movimento de Liberta9ao de Sao Tome
e Prfncipe [MLSTP] at Algiers on 26 November 1974.
Again, with respect to this territory, the final step
took place in accordance with the stipulations of
the pact, enabling Sao Tome and Principe to accede
to independence on 12 July 1975. In the economic
field, Sao Tom~ will have to overcome the difficulties
inherent in a monoculture, a situation which unfortunately afflicts so many countries in the third world.
Thus, also in this case, we believe in the indispensability of international assistance directed at the
creation of a more diversified economy, and therefore
one less subject to variations of climate and market
fluctuations.
104. Please permit me to make a brief~side. I should
like to take advantage of this opportunity to transmit
the congratulations of my country to the people and
Government of Papua New Guinea, which today
achieved independence and which we hope to see as a
Member of the United Nations in the near future.
105. Portugal feels particularly happy at the entry
into the United Nations of the Member States whose
admission was approved a few moments ago. We
judge it opportune to note that the number of Portu-

gueserises fi
106.

brothe
people
expres
and c
our re
107.
charac
We be
operati
than 0
it see
United
should
charac
and di
global
It is wi
ation
tions 0
Princi
108.
me firs
high p
the sa
tion fo
ninth
Boutefl

109.
States
The ve
Assem
Membe
satisfac
the Uni
mento
grows s
110.

new, 10
Mozam
cipe to
and pe
me con
Govern
whose r
anew
colonial
domina
ago fro
a social
with th
Membe
ways, c
the true
be the
in isola
liberatio
of progr

II I. T
and, at
aligned
new or
the grou

Ub2.

235lst meeting-16 September 1975

guese-speaking delegations to this Assembly now
rises from three to six.
106. My delegation confidently hopes that the
brotherly relations existing between the Portuguese
people and the peoples of the new States will also be
expressed within the framework ofthe United Nations
and concretized in the close co-operation between
our respective delegations.
107. We are dealing here with countries of different
characteristics, problems and geographic locations.
We believe, however, that the possibilities for cooperation depend less on similar points of departure
than on agreement on final objectives. Furthermore,
it seems to us to be significantly important for the
United Nations that the common action of countries
should not be based systematically on their identical
characteristics but should be a combination of unity
and diversity, which ensure, as far as possible, a
global view of the objectives of this Organization.
It is within this perspective that we view the co-operation of the Portuguese delegation with the delegations of Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and
Principe.
108. Mr. PETRIC (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, let
me first of all congratulate you on your election to the
high post of President of the General Assembly. At
the same time, I should like to stress our great admiration for the way in which the President of the twentyninth and seventh special sessions, Ambassador
Bouteflika, guided us through those historic sessions.
109. Again this year we have admitted three new
States to membership in our world Organization.
The very fact that almost no regular session of the
Assembly can pass any longer without some new
Members joining us is already a cause for the deepest
satisfaction, as it is unassailable proof not only that
the United Nations is an irreplaceable and vital instrument of the community of nations but that it constantly
grows stronger, and is needed more all the time.
110. This time our Organization has again taken a
new, long step towards full universality by admitting
Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe to membership. On behalf of the Government
and peoples of socialist, non-aligned Yugoslavia, let
me congratulate the peoples, liberation movements,
Governments and leaders of those three countries
whose revolutionary liberation wars have contributed
a new glorious page in the history of struggle against
colonialism, imperialism and any other form of foreign
domination. My country, which itselfemerged 30 years
ago from a liberation war that was at the same time
a socialist revolution, maintained the closest links
with the liberation movements of those three new
Members and endeavoured to help them in all possible
ways, conscious of the debt of solidarity. For, whiie
the true liberation of every people and country must
be the result of their own struggle, no one can fight
in isolation, and every true revolution, every true
liberation war, enjoys the sympathies and support
of progressive freedom-loving humanity.
Ill. This day is a great one for the United Nations
and, at the same time, it is a great day for the nonaligned movement. It is no accident that almost every
new or newly liberated State wants to join, and joins,
the group of non-aligned nations. Non-alignment, as

9

a world policy, is an answer to the most crucial requirements of international relations in our age. These are,
among others, the sovereign equality and independence of nations, the democratization of international
relations where all are sovereign and none is subordinate. It is for that reason that the policy and posture
of non-alignment naturally offers a most viable position and framework for most. Therefore, it is not
accidental that the increase in the membership of the
United Nations in the last several years meant an
increase in the number of non-aligned countries
generally, and in their number and role in the United
Nations particularly.
112. By the same token, their individual and joint
responsibility for the progress and effectiveness of
the United Nations in finding common solutions for
mankind is commensurately greater. The recent nonaligned meetings at Havana and Lima pronounced
themselves on that subject very specifically. We have
no doubts that the presence in our ranks of Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe, their
gifted peoples and cadres, steeled by the struggle of
liberation and socialism, will be a major contribution
in that direction.
113. I would only like to state here that we very
much hope that very soon we shall be in a position
to admit to our membership the Republic of Angola,
a country whose liberation movement has been waging
a heroic struggle for so long, a struggle that must be
permitted to culminate in the complete independence
and territorial integrity of that important State, without any foreign interference whatsoever.
I!4. We cannot but address ourselves to what can
be called the second part of item 22-"Admission
of new Members to the United Nations"-of this
thirtieth regular session, which is the right of admission of the Republic of South Viet Nam and the Democratic Republic of North Viet Nam.
115. The position of my delegation, a position of
full and unwavering support for their due and speediest
entry into our ranks, was fully explained in our statement in the Security Council,2 and I do not need to
repeat it here. It was most unfortunate and unjust
that the veto of a single delegation prevented the
representatives of the two Vietnamese States, of their
heroic peoples who suffered so much in achieving
their historic victory, to assume their rightful place
among us. They cannot be long denied their right,
a'i no stand against the tide of history can long endure.
I 16. They are supported by an overwhelming number
of States from all groups. The Lima Conference of
the Foreign Ministers of the non-aligned countries
has indeed decided on behalf of the group of nonaligned countries to move a resolution by which
this Assembly would request the Security Council
to reconsider the matter. Our position is that neither
the action of this General Assembly nor that of the
Security Council-which will meet during this Assembly's session-should be unduly delayed.
117. I cannot conclude my statement without
expressing our greatest pleasure at seeing the Royal
Government of Cambodia, after their tremendous
victory, resume their rightful place in the world Organization.

10

General Assembly-ThIrtieth Sessio_PIenary Meetings

118. Mr. SAUDE MARIA (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation jrom French): The thirtieth session is taking
place in a period of great change in international
relations. We welcome the efforts ofthe international
community to eliminate various sources of tension
in Asia, Mrica and the Middle East. Although our
Organization, during the 30 years of its life, which
have been filled with much experience, has demonstrated failings which are characteristic of any human
undertaking, we must unanimously acknowledge that
it has striven to create a better climate of peace, secu··
rity and co-operation among nations.
119. Mr. President, speaking today in this Assembly,
we wish first to congratulate you very warmly on
your election to the presidency of the thirtieth session.
We wish also to congratulate all the other members
of the General Committee and to express our wishes
for your success in the new tasks which you have
just undertaken.
120. We express also to your predecessor, our
brother, Mr. Abdelaziz Boutetlika, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic People's Republic
of Algeria, our best wishes for success in his career
as a politician and a diplomat. He had the difficult
mission of presiding over the twenty-ninth session
of the General Assembly, which he did with his customary skill, bringing to bear the great qualities which
we recognize in him.
121. The Secretary-General is a fighter for peace who
has worked unstintingly for its maintenance' and
continues to do so with great vigour, courage and
perseverance. We pay a tribute to him and express
our best wishes for good health and long life in his
service to the great international community.
122. Inasmuch as Mr. Luiz Cabral, President of
the Council of State of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau,
will in a few days' time be making a statement on
behalf of our Government, on the international situation, we shall make but a brief statement today. We
wish to say on this occasion that it is with great joy
and pleasure that we welcome the admission to membership of the People's Republic of Mozambique, the
Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe and
the Republic of Cape Verde in our international
Organization.
123. The year 1975 will surely go down in the annals
of the history of the struggle of peoples for independence. In Africa, and particularly in the Portuguese
colonies, a fresh wind has swept away oppression,
bringing with it freedom. Mter many long years of
war imposed by the Portuguese colonialists and
requiring enormous sacrifices, the peoples of the
Portuguese colonies, with an unshakable will to liberate their homeland, have won their independence,
thereby contributing to the struggle of the peoples
for freedom, peace and progress in the world.
124. Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe and the
Cape Verde Islands, following Guinea-Bissau, have
joined the other free peoples of the world and have
taken their rightful place in the family of nations.
125. We have a common past of suffering and struggle, and now that we are sovereign nations, and are
facing the great task of national reconstruction in our
respective countries, we are well aware that our
destiny requires that we strengthen further the bonds

\\ hich we have always shared. It is for this reason
that our delegation warmly welcomes the admission
of these fraternal countries, and we reaffirm our
determination to work for the objectives which we
have set for ourselves.
126. We are aware of the spirit underlying our struggle, and the victory of the peoples of the Portuguese
colonies is, we believe, also the victory of all the
peoples of the world who love peace, justice and
freedom and who will close ranks and join with all
those fighting for a better world notably in the international community.
127. Notwithstanding the tragic and complex situation in Angola, total liberation, even more than decolonization, is inevitable, for the Angolan people, who
have already made so many sacrifices and shown
such selflessness during the many long years offighting
colonial domination, will, with faith and honour,
assume their historic responsibility.
128. We wish to take this opportunity to say that
we are pleased that the new Portuguese authorities
have respected their commitments to their former
colonies. The process of decolonization has proceeded
according to schedule, and it is our hope that, in spite
of certain difficulties which exist in Angola, that
country will attain independence in November next
and will be seated with us in the international community.
129. In Asia, with the end of the war in Cambodia
and in Viet Nam, international tension has been greatly
reduced. While we are encouraged by that situation,
our concern has not diminished, because of the veto
against the admission of North and South Viet Nam
to the United Nations. That country has experienced
all manner of suffering in the name of the same peace
for which we fought, for which we yearn, and we
cannot imagine that the Vietnamese people will be
denied their rightful place. That people have acquired
great experience over many years of war, especially
in the search for peace, and that experience might
make a major contribution to the attainment of the
objectives of our Organization. That people, then,
must take their place in the United Nations.
130. Our delegation once again reaffirms its unfailing
solidarity with the valiant and heroic people of Viet
Nam, and it is with much regret that we see that that
sovereign and independent people cannot join our
international Organization, which is contrary to the
objectives of the' United Nations.
131. In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm here and
now our determination to work unstintingly for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
we wish our Assembly every success in the work that
lies ahead.
132. The PRESIDENT (interpretationjrom French):
I now call on the representative of Egypt, who will
speak on behalf o~ the African Group.
133. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (interpretation
jrom French): Mr. President, before I make my statement on the admission of the three sister nations,
I wish to convey to you my most heartfelt and sincere
congratulations on your election to the post of President of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly.
My Foreign Minister will express to you personally

and
tion

136.
Sao
this
path
whi
alre
stru
peo
for t
had
in t
the
confi
bodi
all tt
liber
coun
worl
that
Unit,
and
work
co-o
field
137.
entl
into
strat
colo
of A
138.
bers
Thos

2351st meellng-16 September 1975

n
m

Jr

e

~­

e
e
d
II

r-

a-

J-

10

In
Ig

r,

at
es
er

:d

te
at

l't
nla

Iy
n,
to
m
~d

;e
~e

,e
~d

ly
ht

le
n,
19

et
.at
ur
~e

ld
~e

lid
lat

I):

'ill
m

:eIS,

re
:8-

y.
lly

and later in the general debate the official congratulations of the Arab Republic of Egypt.
[The speaker continued in Arabic.]
134. It gives me pleasure on behalf of the African
Group, which Egypt has the honour of presiding over
in the current months, to welcome the three sister
States of the People's Republic of Mozambique, the
Republic of Cape Verde and the Democratic Republic
of Sao Tome and Principe as new, full members of
the international community, on their attainment of the
political independence for which their peoples fought
so long. Many victims fell on the battlefield. The
memory of those heroes will remain a symbol for
their African brothers who have fought for the dignity,
liberty and independence of the continent. The three
States which have just been admitted by the Assembly
need no introduction. We all know a great deal about
them, thanks to the numerous documents prepared
by the United Nations during the long years of struggle.
Those documents were used in drafting a number of
recommendations aimed at creating the situation in
which we find ourselves today.
,135. We are fully convinced that the peoples and
Governments of Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao
Tome and Principe will contribute, together with the
other peoples and Governments of the international
community, particularly those belonging to the Mrican
Group and the developing countries, in playing a
constructive role in the field of economic, social and
cultural development in order to strengthen international security and in the interest of the welfare
and prosperity of mankind.
136. The presence of Mozambique, Cape Verde and
Sao Tome and Principe among us today, and during
this session, can be considered as a landmark on the
path towards the liquidation of colonialism, a path
which was not hit upon accidentally but, as I have
already said, was opened up by a long and bitter
struggle. That path is marked by the sacrifices of the
peoples of those three sister States. Had it not been
for their convictions, their objectives, their principles,
had it not been for the world-wide support embodied
in the numerous resolutions of the United Nations,
the Organization of African Unity [OA U] and the
conferences of the non-aligned countries and other
bodies, along with the moral and material support of
all the peoples of the world and, finally, the wind of
liberty which began to blow in Portugal when that
country at last responded to the conscience of the
world, nothing would have been possible. The fact
that the three States have become Members of the
United Nations is proof that we are on the right road
and that it is possible, within the international framework, to arrive at an acceptable form of international
co-operation in the economic, social and cultural
fields, in the interests of the welfare of mankind.
137. The independence of Mozambique and its
entry into the United Nations should be duly taken
into account in any United Nations resolutions or
strategies drafted with a view to overcoming the
colonialism and racism which still disfigure that part
of Africa.
138. The admission of the three new States to membership in the United Nations is of great significance.
Those States need international economic and tech-

11

nical support in ordp,r to enable them to stand on their
own feet. The period of transition must be very short
-and I am speaking of the period which generally
follows political independence. Mozambique, with
all its endowments in the way of natural resources,
also needs the support and assistance of the Organization and its specialized agencies, as well as that
of Member States.
139. On behalf of the Mrican group I should like
on this occasion to emphasize the positive role played
by the Portuguese Government in recent times in
responding to the struggle of the peoples who have
in the past been under its domination. The participation of Portugal with the other sponsors in the drafting
of the various resolutions submitted to the General
Assembly today is a direct result of the wind of liberty
which is blowing over Portugal and which heralds a
spirit of constructive co-operation that will bring
together Portugal and the African States.
140. I do not doubt for a moment that Portugal will
continue to play that role until complete independence has been attained by Angola and its people in
spite of the difficulties, which we hope will disappear,
difficulties between brothers who are struggling and
between the three national liberation movements which
are fighting for the freedom of Angola. We have great
hopes that Angola will attain independence at the
date fixed, at any rate before the end of this calendar
year, and that we shall see Angola among us as a full,
active Member of this Organization in the very near
future.
14I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call upon the representative of Turkey, who
will speak on behalf of the group of Western European
and other States.
142. Mr. TURKMEN (Turkey) (interpretation from
French): The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey,
in his capacity as head of our delegation, will within
a few days have an opportunity of expressing to you,
Mr. President, his congratulations and good wishes
on your election to the presidency of the General
Assembly. However, at this stage I should like personally to extend to you my warmest congratulations.
143. On behalf of the group of Western European
and other States may I say that it is with great happiness and emotion that we welcome the Republic of
Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome
and Principe and the People's Republic of Mozambique as Members of the United Nations. We pledge
them our full support in the efforts that we shall be
called upon together to deploy in order to achieve the
objectives of our Organization.
144. With the decisions we have adopted today the
United Nations has taken a new step towards the
achievement of universality of the Organization and
recognition of the right of all peoples to be represented
in this Assembly. The process towards universality
in our Organization is an irreversible one in contemporary history, exerting a profound influence on the
march of world events. We are convinced that, in
this context, the new Members will contribute new
ideas and initiatives to the United Nations.
145. The group of Western European and other
States is gratified at the admission of Cape Verde, the
Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe and

General Assembly-Tblrtleth Session-Plenary Meetings

the People's Republic of Mozambique. Their admission represents the crowning of the efforts of those
countries and a new stage in the decolonization
movement.
146. May I add here on behalf of Turkey that it is
with special joy that we welcome the new Members,
which have taken their places as sovereign States
after a struggle fraught with great sacrifice. We wish
them every success at this turning-point in their history.
147. The PRESIDENT (interpretation!rom French):
I now call on the representative of Uganda, who
will speak on behalf of the Organization of Mrican
Unity.
148. Mr. ABDALLA (Uganda): I should like to take
this opportunity, Sir. to congratulate you on your
election to the high office of President of the Genera;
Assembly during its thirtieth session. Your election
to this office is a clear indication of the confidence
the General Assembly has in your personal qualities
as a statesman. and a great honour to your country.
Your long experience in international affairs will no
doubt facilitate our deliberations. May I assure you,
Mr. President, that we shall fully support and cooperate with you as you steer the deliberations of this
Assembly.
149. Allow me to pay a special tribute to the outgoing President, Mr. Bouteflika, whose untiring
efforts in guiding the work of the twenty-ninth session
of the General Assembly and the seventh special
session, which has just ended, will go down in the
history of H~is Organization as a great achievement
by that valiant son of Mrica; our continent will remain
proud of him.
150. I should like to pay a tribute to the SecretaryGeneral, whose diHgence in the conduct of the work
of the Secretariat of the United Nations, regular
visits to hotbeds of tension, and contribution towards
peace-keeping and peace-making missions have won
him a reputation among, and the respect of, the Member States of this world body.
151. The thirtieth session is taking place at a historic
moment when the world is undergoing tremendous
political, economic and social changes. In the giant
continent of Africa we are witnessing the beginning
of the end of the shameful colonial system that has
for centuries subjugated the Mrican peoples and
plundered their wealth. May I in this respect pay a
special tribute to the valiant freedom fighters in
Mozambique, the Cape Verde Islands and Sao Tome
and Principe, who by their courageous struggle
regained their human dignity and in so doing made a
remarkable contribution to the reinforcement of the
noble ideals embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations and gave great hope and encouragement to
those still struggling against colonial domination on
our continent. We are proud of ·these young and
dynamic Mrican nations, and we take great pleasure
in welcoming them to this world body. We also assure
them of our co-operation in the important role which
they will be playing in shaping a better world for
ourselves and future generations.
152. In celebrating the well-deserved victories of
these young nations we should not forget our sisters
and brothers who are still languishing under aOOmi-

nable colonial and racial domination in Zimbabwe,
Azania, Namibia, so-called French Somaliland, the
so-called Spanish Sahara and Palestine.
153. It is our conviction that there can be no lasting
peace in the Middle East unless the usurped rights of
the Palestinians are restored. We note with satisfaction
the admission of the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO] as a full-fledged member of the nonaligned movement. We also recall with pride the
admission of the PLO to the United Nations with
observer status and we are looking forward to the
day when it will become a full member of this world
body. Uganda has always supported and will continue
to render every possible support to all oppressed
peoples, be they in Africa, Asia or Latin America.
154. Perhaps at this juncture we should remember
and adhere to the dictum of that brilliant son of Africa,
the late Kwame Nkrumah, that "no Mrican nation
can consider itself completely free and independent
until the whole Mrican continent has been liberated".
We firmly believe that as long as millions of innocent
people continue to suffer under the outdated and
inhuman systems of colonialism, imperialism, racism
and zionism, justice, equality and other noble ideals
will never have any meaning.
155. We are also aware of the intrigues and manoeuvres being engineered by the imperialists with
the aim of restoring neo-colonialism in those parts
they have been forced to leave. It is with this in mind
that we should like to warn our brothers and sisters
in the newly liberated nations against wolves that
might knock at their doors dressed in sheep's clothing.
This warning also applies to those now fighting for
their freedom: they must guard against the same
imperialist manoeuvres, designed to confuse and divide
·them.'
156. Uganda's experience, like that of many other
independent States, has proved that gaining political
independence is difficult, but maintaining it is even
harder and calls for determination and sacrifices.
In this connexion, may I, on behalf of the Chairman
of the OAU, Mr. Idi Amin Dada, extend our gratitude
to the Secretary-General for his valuable contribution
to the process of de~olonization. Our thanks go also
to the socialist countries and the peace- and freedomloving nation's which have rendered m"ral and material
support to the liberation struggle of the newly independent nations in Africa and elsewhere.
157. Having endorsed the admission of these countries. we should not sit back and relax. The world
community. the United Nations specialized agencies
and private organizations should continue to render
economic and technical assistance to our new brothers
who have just regained their independence. The world
should know that these countries have had terrible
wounds inflicted on their economies. Their natural
resources have been depleted for so long that if we
do not extend a helping hand to them they will not
be able to stand on their feet. We must patch up these
wounds.
158. The OAU has already taken the lead in assisting
these countries by creating a special fund to render
economic assistance to them, and it is our hope that
the United Nations specialized agencies and all Member States will continue to foster efforts to attain the
goal of economic development of these new States.

23511t meetiDl--I6 September 1975

abwe,
d, the
asting

~hts of

faction
Organe nonle the
s with
to the
world
mtinue
lressed
lca.
lember
Africa,
nation
endent
I'ated" .
nocent
:d and
racism
• ideals

Id mats with
~ parts
nmind
sisters
~s that
othing.
ing for
: same
Idivide
{ other
lolitical
'IS even
:rifices.
lairman
'atitude
'ibution
go also
eedomnaterial
y inde~ cOlln: world
gencies
render
'rothers
e world
terrible
natural
Lt if we
.vill not
ip these

ssistiug
render
lpe that
11 Memlain the
tates.

159. I would like to reiterate here that Uganda has
always given material and moral support to these
emerging States and that we shall continue to support
them in their efforts to consolidate their political
and economic independence. I would like to assure
our brothers that Uganda will not falter in this task.
160. Our welcome is also extended to those brothers
of Indo-China whose indomitable fight against imperialist machinations has gone a long way towards
bringing about peace in that part of the world.
161. To our friends in Papua New Guinea we extend
congratulations on their hard-won independence and
welcome them to this family of nations. We look
forward to their contribution to the objectives of this
Organization
.
162. In conclusion, while we welcome the initiatives
that Portugal has so far taken in granting independence to its former Territories, we would like to
sound a warning to those divisive imperialist forces
that continue to meddle in the affairs of Angola to
stop this practice immediately, and we hope that
nothing will stop the people of Angola from attaining
their well-deserved freedom and independence as
scheduled.
163. As far as the OAU is concerned, Portugal is
responsible for the administrative malaise that has
sprung up in Angola in recent months and it holds
Portugal responsible for the current events in that
Territory.

164. Mr. RAE (Canada)(interpretationfrom French):
Mr. President, on behalf of the Canadian delegation,
I wish to congratulate you most warmly on your
election and to assure you of the fullest co-operation
of the Canadian delegation in the execution of your
important functions. We feel confident that your
presidency will prove to be an important element in
the further development among Member States of
working practices of co-operation and conciliation
on the important political, economic and other issues
which this session of the General Assembly will have
before it.

[The speaker continued in English.]
165. On behalf of the Canadian Government, it is
my pleasure to welcome as new Members of the
United Nations the Republic of Cape Verde, the
Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe and
the People's Republic of Mozambique. The entry of
these three States in the V tited Nations reflects the
maturing process of the ~.:coionization effort begun
by Portugal in April 1974. The proc~ss as regards
these three States has been a peaceful one and makes
us optimistic about their future as independent members of the international community. The two smaller
nations, the Republic of Cape Verde and the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, will face
many problems common to island territories and in
addition will be required to cope with the resettlement of large numbers of returning citizens. The task
is a major one, and the Canadian Government has
great sympathy for their aspirations. It will support
the fullest possible attention on the part of the institutions and the agencies of the United Nations to the
development of appropriate programmes which
respond to their Governments' priorities:

13

166. The emergence of Mozambique as an independent country is a watershed in the developing
situation in southern Africa. We hope and expect
that it will contribute to the solution of the remaining
grave problems in that troubled area of the world.
We offer our best wishes and firm support to the
Government of M~zambi9ue in its ef!ort~ to build
a strong and coheSive ~tlon and to umte ItS peoples
to face a future of prormse.
167. With the admission of these three States the
membership of .our Organization moves. increasingly
towar~~ the uI~lmate .g?al of a truly umversal me~bers~lp, we may. ~tlclpate, ~~ore the end of thJS
seSSIon, the: a~mlsslon of addItiOnal Members..We
hope that wlthm the span of a very few more sessions
of the General Assembly political problems which
are at present inhibiting the entry of independent
nations will have been resolved; that the process of
decolonization in even the smallest or most troubled
Territories which are not yet independent will have
reached a peaceful and successful conclusion; and
that we may look forward to a time when the United
Nations will be well on the way to achieving a genuinely
universal membership.
168. Mr. CORR~A da COSTA (Brazil): In his
statement at th~ ope!1i~.~ of this session's ge~e.ral
debate,. my F<?relgn Mlmster, as head of th~ Brazilian
delegation, ~dl convey te;' you, Mr. PreSident, .our
Government s congratulations on what we conSider
to have been your unanimous election to the presidency of the General Assembly. May I be allowed,
nevertheless, to extend to you on this occasion my
personal compliments on your assumption of the
high office you now hold.
..
..
169. It IS with deep s~tlsfactlon that the Gover:n• ~ent and. people ~f ~razd welcome today the admlsslon to thiS Orgamzatlon of t~ree new Member States,
all three of them. s!J closely hn~ed to us by ~lood a,!d
culture. The deCISion we have Just. taken ~nngs to SIX
the .number of P~rtugues~-speakmg nations so far
admitted to the Umted Nations.
170. We extend to the Republic of Cape Verde,
the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe
and the People's Republic of Mozambique our most
hearty congratulations, and we are certain that our
common struggle in the international arena, and particularly in the United Nations, for those objectives
which are common to us as developing countries
.will strengthen even more the bonds which our past
and our culture have already provided to unite our
peoples.
171. Mr. TIANDRAZA (Madagascar) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, may I, on behalf of my
delegation, tell you how pleased we are to see you
presiding over the thirtieth session of the General
Assembly, and extend to you our most heartfelt
congratulations. I shall have another opportunity to
convey to you the expression of our highest regard
and that of the Government of Madagascar.
172. The admission of new Members to our Organization has always afforded us an opportunity for
rejoicing. The presence among us of the Republic of
Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome
and Principe and the People's Republic of Mozambique bears witness to the fact that the principles

14

General Assembly-Tbh1IeIb SesdoD-Plenary Meetings

of the Charter prevail over the belated defence of
certain interests. We view their presence here, above
all, as the victory of the cause of liberation and independence in Africa and other continents.
173. Colonialism, regarded in the past as un unshakable force, is no more than the shadow of what it was,
thanks to the common struggle of erstwhile dominated,
subjected, alienated and exploited peoples. That
struggle, which is supported by peace-loving and
progressive forces throughout the world, will not
have been in vain; the sacrifices made by the united
Mrican people have borne fruit.
174. My country is honoured to be among those
which firmly believe that it is just and noble to recognize the legitimacy of the national liberation movements and to grant them any support they may require.
But regardless of the value of our recognition and
our assistance, it is only the determination of the
peoples concerned that counts. It is for this reason
that we pay very special tribute to FRELIMO, to
PAIGC and to MLSTP. For many years they have
struggled to overcome all the difficulties and obstacles
that colonialism and imperialism have placed in the~r
way. They have chosen to fight to liberate their peoples
and to build a new society free of all the constraints
that stem from domination and exploitation.
175. The revolutionary experience that Mozambique,
Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe bring to our
Organization cannot but enrich it. It shows that the
world can no longer remain insensitive to the upsurge
of progressive forces. It gives the international community a new impetus. It offers a picture of what
the world of tomorrow will be like.
176. Together with these three countries, we share
the same destiny, the same aspirations and the same
options. We are nurtured by the same traditions and
have grown up in the same culture. It is for this reason
that we most warmly applaud their access to international recognition. Because we have co-operated
with them in other groups and regional bodies, we
are acquainted with the committed and positive contribution they will bring to the promotion of our ideals
and the achievement of our objectives. That contribution will do honour to Africa as a whole and
provide proof that the peoples of Mozambique, Cape
Verde and Sao Tome and Principe act responsibly.
177. Our satisfaction today would have been greater
had we been able at the same time to applaud the
admission to the United Nations of the Democratic
Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South Viet
Nam. We deplore the fact that manoeuvres inherited
from the cold war and arbitrary conduct should have
prevented these brotherly nations from being able
to sit among us today.
178. Be that as it may, the struggle for the liberation
of peoples will be pursued and we hope that the path
traced by the national liberation movements of Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe will lead
to the definitive elimination of colonialism and imperialism in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
179. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of the German Democratic Republic, who will speak on behalfofthe Eastern
European States.

180. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic)
(interpretation from Russian): Mr. President. may
I congratulate you on your election to the lofty post
of President of the thirtieth session of the General
Assembly.
181. It is with great pleasure that the socialist countries welcome the People's Republic of Mozambique,
the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe
and the Democratic Republic of the Cape Verde
Islands as new Members of the United Nations. We
congratulate the peoples of those States who have
conquered and won their national independence after
a long struggle against thecolonialist yoke and exploitation which took many victims. At the present time
we pay a tribute to the victims of that struggle.
182. The fact that the German Democratic Republic
and other socialist States have given support to the
Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, the Cape Verde
Islands and Mozambique, in their struggle for independence, is entirely in accordance with the traditions
of the working classes in our countries and with the
principles of the foreign policy of socialist States.
183. The declaration of the People's Republic of
Mozambique on 25 June 1975 was not only a historic
event in the life of that country, but it was also a
further victory in the fight for the right of peoples to
self-determination throughout the entire world.
Friendly relations were established right away between
our States. Those relations are based on our cooperation in the fight for the independence of Mozambique and are characterized by common aspirations
for peace, security and social progress.
184. Under the experienced leadership ofFRELIMO,
the Petlple's Republic of Mozambique at the present
time is making a major effort to rid itself of the burdens
left by the colonialists. We know that this is a difficult
task and we wish to convince the people of Mozambique that it may always rely on our support.
185. Wc- welcome the ..umission of the People's
Republic of Mozambique, the Democratic Republic
of Sao Tome and Princip~ and the Cape Verde Islands
to the United Nations. We have a duty, at the same
time, to deplore the fact that the Democratic Republic
of Viet Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam
are not yet members. .
186. I should like to stress the fact that the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South
Viet Nam, in moral, political, and juridical terms,
are fully entitled to be members of our Organization.
It is our hope that the General Assembly in the coming
days will come out in favour of the admission of the
Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic
of South Viet Nam, so that this matter will be resolved
without further delay in the interests of the universality of the United Nations.
187. In conclusion, I should like to say to the representatives of the Republic of Mozambique, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe and the
Republic of Cape Verde Islands that we are prepared
to extend to them our close and friendly co-operation
in the interests of achieving the goals of the Charter
of the United Nations.
188. Mr. ACOSTA RODRIGUEZ (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, my delegation
wishes to reserve its right formally to offer congrat':lla-

235bt meetinR-I6 September 1975

Republic)
ent. may
ofty post
e General

list coun-

~ambique,

J Principe

pe Verde
tions. We
who have
ence after
Dd exploiesent time
:gle.
: Republic
ort to the
ape Verde
: for inde•traditions
d with the
States.
epublic of
a historic
vas also a
peoples to
re world.
lybetween
n our colfMozamaspirations
rRELIMO,·
he present
he burdens
, a difficult
If MozamIrt.
~ People's
: Republic
rde Islands
t the same
lc Republic
Viet Nam

the Demolic of South
ical terms,
ganization.
the coming
sion of the
e Republic
,e resolved
the univer) the reprethe Demope and the
re prepared
o-operation
the Charter
L) (interpre-

delegation
congratl;lla-

tions to you at a later stage. But here and now I wish
to pledge our constant co-operation.
189. We are speaking at this stage, at the very outset
of the session, for two specific reasons. The first is
that we wish to join with others in bidding welcome
to the new States which today are full-fledged Members of the United Nations. It is a source of sincere
pleasure for Cuba to see how perseverance in the
revolutionary struggle has demolished the foundations
of colonialism and ha5 led to triumphs over domination. The People's Republic of Mozambique, the
Republic of Cape Verde Islands and the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe are then,
in this context, entering our Organization today.
Cuba wishes to congratulate them whole-heartedly
and to pledge our militant solidarity.
190. Secondly, we wish to say that we support the
righting of an historic wrong, the result of political
short-sightedness on the part of those who have
denied the obvious facts. Here I am referring to the
vetoes of the United States cast against the admission of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and
the Repuhlic of South Viet Nam at the 1836th meeting
of tile Security Council which was held on 11 August
1975.
191. The delegation of Cuba spoke, when invited
to do so at that meeting, and stated very clearly that
if a veto was cast, then the discussion of the matter
would be continued in the General Assembly. Consistent with that statement, we will associate ourselves with the ct ..·· _;.ts of the letter addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the Permanent
Observers of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam
and. the Republic of South Viet Nam. 3 My delegation
is convinced that the joy with which today we welcome
Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe will, sooner or later, be part of the joy which
we shaH feel as we welcome the Democratic Republic
of Viet Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam.
Cuba will work constantly towards that end.
192. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call on the representative of Lebanon, who
will speak on behalf of the Asian Group.
193. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon) (interpretation from
Arabic): Mr. President, the head of the Lebanese
delegation will, in due course, extend his congratulations to you. But I should like to take this opportunity
to express to you my personal congratulations and
those of the Asian Group, which Lebanon has the
pleasure of presiding over this montn, on your election
as President of this session of the General Assembly.
This appreciation is directed also to your country,
which is noted for its civilization and for its love of
peace.
194. On behalf of the Asian Group, including Lebanon, I would like to welcome the new Members
which were admitted to the United Nations-namely,
the Republic of Mozambique, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, and the Republic of
Cape Verde. These States which have long struggled
to achieve independence will undoubtedly contribute
to the various activities of the Organization. Their
presence among us is of particular significance as we
are witnessing the liquidation of colonial times, the
increasing independence of free countries, and the

IS

attainment by this Organization of its goals and aspirations, namely. to bring about peace throughout the
world and to win respect for mankind and its right
to self-determination.
195. There are peoples who are still suffering under
the yoke of colonialism and foreign occupation in
Africa, Asia and other parts of the world. There are
peoples who are still subject to racism and apartheid,
and it is our duty to strive to liberate them. There are
independent and other countries in the final stages of
liberation, and we must hasten to bring them here
among us. All our efforts should be deployed here in
this Organization to bring about understanding and
co-operation in international relations and to lay the
foundation of justice, to consolidate peace and international security and to promote economic and social
development in all areas.
196, This is not a day of rejoicing for Africa alone
but also for Asia and the whole world. This is a day
when we honour the victory of the struggle for liberation and we hope that the struggle of other peoples
for their liberation will be successful and that all
countries will take their place in the world community.
197. The world will only know peace when it hears
the voice of all peoples, especially those who have
been under occupation and who are still under domination. Our Organization must ensure that these
efforts succeed; it mu~t also ensure that justice prevails
and that aggression is eliminated from the Earth so
that justir;e and peace may reign in the world.
198. Mr. SARIN (Cambodia) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, my delegation associates
itself with previous speakers in conveying to you its
sincere congratulations and best wishes for success in
your new office as President.
199. My delegation is very happy to welcome the
representatives of the People's Republic of Mozambique, the Republic of Cape Verde and the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe at the time
of the admission of these three countries to the United
Nations. May I be permitted to extend to the brave
peoples ofthese States the warmest and most brottlerly
congratulations and best wishes of the Government
and people of Cambodia. We are convinced that they
will make a most valuable contribution to our Assembly by bringing their co-operation and experience
in order to promote the cause of peace and sodal
progress throughout the world.
200. We must nevertheless deplore the absence
of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and the
Republic of South Viet Nam, which thus far, and by
reason ofthe veto cast by the United States ofAmerica,
have been unable to be in our midst. We believe that,
after waging a long and heroic struggle for over 30 years
for its national liberation and after winning a brilliant
victory, the people of Viet Nam do not deserve to be
further penalized by our Organization. We venture to
hope that, in the very near future, the Demo!::ratic
Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South
Viet Nam will be represented in this Assembly.
201. For many years. although geographically fal'
apart, the peoples of Cambodia. Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe,
as well as other countries of Asia and Africa, have
waged a common struggle side by side in defence of

f

~,j

g
i

j

16

General Assembly-ThIrtIeth Sesaion--PJeIW'Y Meedngs

man's ideal offreedom and dignity. Our peoples have
fought in the same trenches and are brothers in arms.
Our countries belong to the same family of the nonaligned. We are all the more happy to find that the
admission of these three countries to .e Unitl:d
Nations should occur at the time when Cambodia
has recovered its seat in this Assembly. And by this
we mean that our peoples have won their victory
almost at the same time, after an arduous struggle,
waged at the expense of untold suffering and sacrifice.
202. Our victory is that of determination. Our peoples
are poor, our countries are small. All we had were our
empty hands with which to face up to imperialism
and colonialism which possessed unlimited material
means. But, prompted by the indomitable will to
defend our rights, our peoples have triumphed over
the barbarous, ferocious aggression of the colonialists
and imperialists and have shown that a people determined to defend its just cause can conquer any aggressor, however great or powerful he may be.
203. My delegation is gratified at the happy conjunction of circumstances which enables us to recover
our seat in the United Nations at a time when he who
has constantly supported our people from the earliest
dark hours of its struggle was stili President 0; the
General Assembly. In fact, Mr. Abdelaz1z Bouteflika,
acting on the instructions of President Boumedi~me,
took to heart the struggle of the people of Cambodia,
which he has always regarded as the struggle of the
Algerian people. That is why my delegatio!). takes
pleasure in reiterating the sincere thanks of the Government and people of Cambodia to our brothers,
the people of Algeria, to President Boumediene and
to Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, President of the twentyninth session of the General Assembly,
204. Mr. SAITO (Japan): ~lr. President, the Chairman of the Japanese delegation will convey to you
the formal congratulations of the Government of
Japan on your election as President of this Assembly
at a later date. However, allow me to take this opportunity te: extend to you my personal congratulations
on your assumption of this high office.
205. Similarly, I should like to express my gratitude
to the President of the twenty-ninth sessicn of the
General Assembly, Mr. Abdelaziz Boutetlika, for his
untiring service in guiding this body throughout its
previous session and the seventh special session.

It is a great pleasure for my delegation that
the General Assembly has just decided unanimously
to admit the Republic of Cape Verde the Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome and Principe and the People's
Republic of Mozambique to membership in t'ne United
Nations. On this auspicious occasion I wish to express,
in the name of the delegation of Japan, our sincere
congratulations and warm welcome to these new
Member States. My personal gratification is a1! the
more because it was last month -that the Security
Council, during my term as its President, unanimously
decided to recommend to the General Assembly
lliat they be admitted.
206.

We rejoice with the Governments and the
peoples of these three nations on the achievement
of their complete independence. Their glorious independence has made it possible for them to take their
rightful place in this Organization and to join in our
207.

concerted efforts for the accomplishment of the
supreme objectives enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
208. My delegation is extremely gratified to see that
these three States have acceded to independence in
a peaceful and orderly manner according to the agreement reached with the Government of Portugal. We
are firmly convinced that they will soon overcome
the many problems they face in building their nations.
The international community will assist them in their
efforts for nation building and development.
209. My delegatioli believes that the Assembl~"s
decision today will bring the United Nations significantly closer to the universality of membership.
That in turn will strengthen the functions of the United
Nations in the fields of decolonization and the maintenance of international peace and security.
210. The Government of Japan recognized the
People's Republic of Mozambique on 25 June 1975,
the Republic of Cape Verde on 11 July 1975 and the
Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe on
22 July 1975. The Government and people of Japan
strongly desire to co-operate closely with the peoples
of the new Member States and to promote close and
friendly relations with them both within and outside
the United Nations.
211. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of Italy, who will speak on
behalf of the European Economic Community.
212. Mr. VINCI (Italy) (irterpretationfrom French):
Mr. President, since this :s the first time that I am
speaking in the General Assembly, I wish first of all
to perform a very pleasant duty. In a few days my
Foreign Minister will perform this same duty with
greater authority and more eloquence, but I wish to
say that my Government and my country are very
pleased at your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. Please accept our sincerest congratulations and our best wishes.
[The speaker continued in English.]
213. Speaking now on behalf of the European Economic Community and its member States, I should
like to take this oprortunity to welcome most warmly
the three new Membe,r§ of our world Organization
-Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and
Principe. May I add that we regard this event, namely,
the admission to the United Nations of these three
former Portuguese Territories, as a most significant
one, since it marks another shining milestone on the
road to independence of most of the African peoples.

214.

We rejoice furthermore that the accession to
and self-determination by these countries has gone through its final and fruitful stage thanks
to the full understanding, collaboration and support
nf the ,-~vemment of Portugal. The EEC countries
in fact have long advocated and urged such a constructive change in the relationship between Portugal
and these peoples as well as with Africa as a whole.
ind~pendence

215. On behalf of the EEC countries may I add,
with your permission, Sir, that we all look forward
to an era of full co-operation with the new Member
States. Our expectations rely confidently on their
capacity to bring into our Organization the healthy
approach and stamina of youth as well as the expe-

rience and mat
for independe
216. The PR
I call now on
will speak on
217. Mr. C
from Spanish)
of the Latin
congratulate y
of President
Assembly and
success in you
218. On beh
the Latin Ame
a privilege to g
sovereign and i
have joined th
219. We shar
tions of Moza
Principe. With
United Nation
becoming mo
representative
220. After 30
of colonialism
the great con
realization of
its Charter. Th
of Africa was
ence here sho
oppose the ti
Verde and Sao
States. But thei
they have thei
countries of th
of the developi
221. Latin A
Africa are bot
three new repu
occasion to tho
On behalf of ou
for its anti-col
at seeing Moz
and Principe e
shall be strivhli
222. The PRE
I now caU on 1
speak on behall
223. Mr. JA]
Arabic): Mr. PI
sure, on behalf
of that Group, t
ulations on you
session of the
convinced that
success under
I should like al
tion to your pr
Boutetlika, for
his presidency
224. On this
behalf and on
whole-heartedl
ted to our Orga

.;a.-----------------------...,ffT'----.I·
23SI!lt meeting-16 Sept';.,)f . ,,!

------------------rience and maturity acquired through a valiant struggle

for independence and self-determination.
216. The PRESIDENT (interpretQlionfrom French):
I call now on the representative of Venezuela, who
will speak on behalf of the Latin American Group.
217. Mr. CONSALVI (Venezuela) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, as the representative
of the Latin American Group, I hav~ the honour to
congratulate you upon your election to the high office
of President of the thirtieth session of the General
Assembly and, at the same time, to wish you every
success in your important tasks.
218. On behalf of all the countries which compose
the Latin American Group, it is for me an honour and
a privilege to greet and extend a welcome to the three
sovereign and independent States which this afternoon
have joined the United Nations.
219. We share the profound emotion of the delegations of Mozambique, Cape Ver.. ~e and Sao Tome and
Principe. With their presence they will invigorate the
United Nations, which, with each passing 'day, is
becoming more democratic and more genuinely
representative of all the peoples of the earth.
220. After 30 years we are witnessing the downfall
of colonialism throughout the world. This is one of
the great conqnests of the United Nations and the
realization of one of the fundamental principles in
its Charter. The struggle for liberation of these peoples
of Africa was not easy. Their triumph and their presence here show once again that it is always vain to
oppose the forces of history. Mozambique, Cape
Verde and Sao Tome and Principe are now sovereign
States. But their fight is not over. In the United Nations
they have their allotted task side by side with the
countries of the developing world, in the joint effor~s
of the developing countries in this world forum.
221. Latin America, whose ties with the peoples of
Africa are both close and of long date, greets these
three new republics and pays tribute on this memorable
occasion to those who led their liberation movements.
On behalf of our group, which has always been known
for its anti-colonialist views, I express 'our pleasure
at seeing Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome
and Principe enter this world Organization where we
shall be striviI.g for common aims.
222. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call on the representative of Qatar, who will
speak on behalf of the Arab Group.
223. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) (interpretation from
Arabic): Mr. President, it gives me honour and pleasure, on behalf of the Arab Group and as Chairman
of that Group, to extend to you our warmest congratulations on your election as President of the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly. We are eeply
convinced that this session will be crowned with
success under your leadership. On this occasion
I should like also to express our thanks and appreciation to your predecessor, our brother Mr. Abdelaziz
Bouteflika, for the great success he achieved during
hh, presidency of the twenty-ninth session.
224. On this occasion I should like, on my own
behalf and on behalf of the A:-ab Group, to welcome
whole-heartedly those States which have been admitted to our Organization: the Republic of Cape Verde,

17

th . ',l-'4!olic of Sao Tome and Principe and the Republic of Mozambique, wishing them all success. We
are convinced that their admission here among us will
enable them to make a contribution and to play a role
in attaining our common goals for the liberation and
independence of those peoples who are still living
under racist settlement regimes in Africa, in the Middle
East and in other parts of the world.

18

2

225. We hope to see here among us in the very near
future the true representatives of South Africa, Palestine, Rhodesia, Namibia, Angola and all the colonized peoples who are living under racist settlement
regimes.
226. Mr. MALINGA (Swaziland): On behalf of my
delegation, I ask you, Mr. President, to accept our
sincere congratulations on your election as the thirtieth
President of this body.
227.

As Africans, my delegation's sentiments with
to the acceptance of the three new brother
States of Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe and
the People's Republic oi Mozambique have been
eloquently expressed by the representative of Egypt,
Chairman of the African Group for the month of
September, and were again well articulated by the
representative of Uganda, the current Chairman of
the OAU.
r~gard

228. I.. s a southern Africa.n, as a friendly neighbour
of the People's Republic of Mozambique and, above
all, as a blood brother of the people of Mozambique,
I would be failing in my duty if I did not express, on
behalf of His Majesty King Sobhuza 11 and the people
of the Kingdom of Swaziland, how happy we are
in Swaziland that at last our brothers have done it.
They have made it after a very long and bitter struggle.
It was a high price to pay; I know no other price as
high ~H, the price of life. It was worth it.

229. The independence of Mozambique represents
a new era to us. It is a significant step on the long road
to the total liberation of the whole area. The gaining
of independence by Mozambique through the gallant
FRELIMO-the true heroes of the independence of
that country-has brought a new ray of hope, not
only to us as Swazis, but to the people of southern
Africa as a whole. Words cannot convey with sufficjent
accuracy the expectations of our brothers who aspire
one day to run the affairs of their people. Negotiating
machinery is in motion to fulfil those aspirations.
Talk of independence is in the air. The winds of change
which have long been blowing in Africa have gathered
new momentum; old men and children are dreaming
dreams of freedom. It is the belief of my country
that through peaceful means those dreams, will one
day materialize and our brothers in the region as a
whole will one day participate in the decision-making
process of their country, the country they helped to
build.
230. The admission of our three brother countries
symbolizes the resistance of the African people to a
dominant superculture that has been imposed on them
throug:' the long, long years with vigorous brutality.
They have survived. We have all survived the strongest
"mega-machine" that this century h9..• ever known.
We all wish that our brothers in Mc ~ambique look
forward to the future with courage.

23

m
to
pi
of
th
in
w

h
th

a
23
ex
an
an
de
g
V

an
de
th

23'

,/hJ

rm
wh
pel
ow
is
w

ch
op

23
joi
nat
da
so
tio
all

18

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session-Plenary Meetlnp

231. The inter-State system is witnessing a new era.
We seem to be moving in a new direction of negotiation, and it is my delegation's wish that our unfortunate brothers in Angola should take advantage of
this mood, that they should sit down and talk, talk to
one another as brothers. This is the time for them to
celebrate; this is the time for them to think of what
they have done, and I hope that reason will prevail.
232. Mr. MITCHELL (United States of America):
Mr. President, I am sure that the leader of our delegation would have me say that he congratulates you
on your election to your high position. I am sure also
that in his own way and at another time he will make
a similar and more gracious statement.
233. As a representative of the host country, it brings
me great satisfaction to welcome three new Members
to the United Nations family. We are particularly
pleased to welcome the delegation of the Republic
of Cape Verde. As many of you who are here know,
the greatness of the United States of America is due
in part to the fact that we have been blessed by fortune
with contributions from many lands. Our culture
has been enriched by almost all of you who are here
through those who left your countries to come here
and become citizens of our nation.
234. A long history of friendship and co-operation
exists particularly between the peoples of Cape Verde
and the United States. We have enjoyed co-operation
and there is a bond of kinship that binds us. Over the
decades a large number of Cape Veraeans have emigrated to the United States. Leaders of the Cape
Verdean community estimate that between 200,000
and 300,000 American citizens are of Cape Verd~an
descent. That number approaches the population of
the Cape Verde Islands themselves.
235. We extend our congratulations to the rerresentatives of the Republic of Cape Verde. the People' s
Republic of Mozambique and the Democratic Republic
of Sao Tome and Principe. We assure them of the
full co-operation of the delegation of the United States
and extend to them the warm greetings of all the
American people.
236. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfhull French):
I now take pleasure in inviting the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Cape Verde. Mr. Abilio
Augusto Monteiro Duarte, to address the General
Assembly.
237. Mr. DUARTE (Cape Verde> (interpretatio/l
fhull French): We had to travel a long and difficult
road before reaching the historic date of 5 July last.
when our national independence was declared. Our
people's attainment of sovereignty and control of its
own destiny and its recovery of its national identity
is part of the great struggl~ of the peoples of the third
world for true freedom. dignity. the well-being of all
citizens and economic progress and social de'lelopment.
238. Today is the day when our young State has
joined the United Nations. the most important international Organization of all time. This is a red-letter
day for our people. Today our people becomes a
sovereign people and henceforth wil! make a contribution to its own development on all equal footing with
all the other peoples of the world.

239. Many of our companions have fallen on the
field of honour and they have not seen the sun of
freedom shine. They have made the supreme sacrifice
in order that we may today win back our dignity.
which for centuries was clouded.
240. We would address to our heroic companions.
and particularly to Amilcar Cabral. our highest tribute
and the expression of our great respect. because, in
their devotion to the sacred cause of our people, they
showed themselves to be the most valorous of the
sons of our country. We deeply regret that Amilcar
Cabral is not with us today 1:0 experience these moving
moments. He was our guiding genius and the principal
architect of our victories; he foresaw the whole development of our struggle for liberation and mobilized
the moral and material forces which were necessary
for victory.
241. The gigantic efforts made by our people during
our struggle for national liberation were never made
in isolation. Thus. today. we have attained our objectives. Our sovereignty. formally recognized here
today. is also the work of the United Nations. the
African countries in the Organization of African
Unity. the socialist countries and all peace-loving
and freedom-loving forces throughout the world.
242. On this occasion. on behalf of our people and
our Government. may I address our sincerest thanks
to the Secretary-General. Mr. Kurt Waldheim. to
the outgoing President. Mr. Abdelaziz Boutetlika.
to the African Group in the United Nations and to
all those representatives who throughout the many
years ofour struggle for liberation stubbornly defended
our cause in the Fourth Committee and in particular
in the Committee of 24. Through their tireless efforts
in defence of the fundamental rights of our people.
they have made an inestimable contribution to our
liberation. thus making it possible for their countries
to rise to the level of the noble and lofty moral principles governing this international Organization.
243. Our warmest thanks also go to all those countries
which recognized our country so promptly after the
declaration of our independence. That gesture showed
undeniably that they were in favour of the liberation
of our people. and was a considerable contribution
to the consolidation of our young State. Our warmest
thanks go also to the members of the Security Council
for favourably and decisively recommending our
admission to this General Assembly.
244. We are pleased and proud that when our country
attained independence the United Nations acted consistently in respect of the inalienable rights of our
people to independence. progress and peace.
245. Our bonds with our companions from GuineaBissau are very special. We are militants in the same
party. we fought side by !iide for the same cause. We
pay an earnest tribute to our hrothers who made a
direct contribution with lheir sacrifices and their
blood to the liberation of Cape Verde.
246. The thirtieth session of the General Assembly
is taking place at a particularly complex time in international relations. On the one hand. we welcome with
joy the liberation of many countries in Africa and
Asia and a certain degree of detente in one part of the
world: but on the other hand. we see that elsewhere
pence is in danger. the legitimate r:ghts of people

are not f
under-dev
are fighti
more equi
241. Reg
from this
weighsoh
he found
our indep
social. fi
we were
The appe
munity sh
himself wi
smaller co
248. Thi
of our pe
tatives to
the appea
long colon
able unde
arose as a
we now h
early retu
Cape Vef
and war in
independe
249. On
sincere de
the basis
countries
follow our
the princi
ence in int
tage. Our
relations
have alrea
countries
Ivory Coa
Sweden an
250. Hav
centuries
contributio
of building
all men. WI
of goodwill
to do that
alignment.
sible for OUI
for aggres1
that that pc
interest of
to create tb
necessary 1
all its citize

251. We
bership in
lic of Sao
lie of Mo
hope that
and difficu
thirtieth se
significance
present in
Mr. Presid
We are con

19

23Slst meetlng-16 September 1975

are not respected everywhere in the world and the
under-developed or developing peoples of the world
are fighting stubbornly for the establishment of a
more equitable andjusi international economic order.
247. Regardless of the many responsibilities arising
from this complex international situation which
weigh so heavily on the Secretary-General's shoulders,
he found the time, even before the declaration of
our independence, to concern himself with the serious
social, financial and economic problems to which
we were heir as the result of Portuguese colonialism.
The appeal which he made to the international community shows very clearly that he has concerned
himself with the problems of the great as well as the
smaller countries of the world.
248. This is a time of great importance for the future
of our people. At this time we would urge representatives to convey to their respective Governments
the appeal made ~y the Secretary-General. After a
long colonial night, which was the legacy of unimaginable under-development, after the emergency that
arose as a result of seven and a half years of drought,
we now have the difficulties in cm1Oexion with the
early return of thousands of refugees originally from
Cape Verde as a result of the situation of instability
and war in Angola in its legitimate struggle for national
independence.
249. On behalf of our Government, we reaffirm our
sincere desire to establish the best of relations, on
the basis of friendship and co-operation, with all
countries of the world, provided that our right to
follow our own path be respected. We wish to respect
the principles of peaceful coexistence, non-interference in internal affairs, equality and common advantage. Our Government intends to establish friendly
relations of co-operation with those countries that
have already traditionally welcomed our emigrants,
countries such as Argentina, Brazil. France, the
Ivory Coast, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Senegal,
Sweden and the United States of America.
250. Having won back our dignity, which had for
centuries been flouted, our country will now make a
contribution in freedom to the great human adventure
of building a new world of peace and happiness for
all men. We shall make Cape Verde a country for men
of goodwill, for people who cherish peace. In order
to do that in accordance with the principles of nonalignment, we are firmly determined to make ,it impossible for our homeland to constitute a point ofdeparture
for aggressinn against anyone. We are convinced
that that position is in keeping with the fundamental
interest of our people. We shall also work tirelessly
to create the economic, social and cultural foundations
necessary to make Cape Verde a meeting-place for
all its citizens scattered throughout the world.
251. We welcome with joy the admission to membership in our Organization of the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe and the People's Republic of Mozambique and we express otir sincerest
hope that they will enjoy great success in this new
and difficult stage of national reconstruction. The
thirtieth session of the General Assembly is of great
significance in view of the burning problems of the
present internati(lnal situation. For that reason,
Mr. President, Wf>, congratulate you on your election.
We are convinced that you will dischar~e your duties

with skill, honesty and wisdom, as you undertake
the difficult task assigned to you.
252. In conclusion, we wish solemnly to declare
that our Government will always be prepared to
respect strictly the principles set forth in the Charter
of the United Nations and to work for the application of these noble objectives which are the defence
of peace and the strengthening of fraternity and cooperation among all nations.
253. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now have pleasure in inviting the Prime Minister
of the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe,
Mr. Miguel Trovoada, to address the General Assembly.
254. Mr. TROVOADA (Sao Tome and Principe)
(interpretation from French): In the life of man there
are such exalting moments that sometimes he is
tempted to believe that he has achieved the aim of his
whole existence. I am living one of these moments
by coming to this rostrum of the General Assembly
to convey to you the feelings of my people at a time
when you have just unanimously admitted the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe as a State
Member of the United Nations. I would have wished
to do so with .all the serenity demanded by the solemnity of this act and the august atmosphere of this Assembly. But I must confess that I feel unable to do so
because I am so deeply moved by my feelings. You
will ui1derstand the authenticity of these feelings
when you realize that I happened to be the first spokesman of Sao Tome and Principe in the Fnurth Committee at the seventeenth session of the General Assembly and that I am today the first to make its free,
independent voice heard in the highest international
forum on Earth.
255. The message I bring the Assembly is first of
all to convey the profound relief of our people who,
on 12 July last, saw. five centuries of dreadful colonialism brought to an end. It is next a message ofthanks
to all those who far and near, directly or indirectly,
have made a concrete and positive contribution to
the liberation of my country, thus making its presem:e
possible in this great family of nations which you and
we from now on represent.
256. In fact, the declaration of national independence
on 12 July 1975 and the accession of my countrY to
full sovereignty were made possible thanks to our
unswerving determination to break the chains of
colonial subjection. This was a great victory for our
people who, under the banner of the liberation movement of Sao Tome and Principe, once again have
shown the sceptical that a determined and resolute
people, however small, can change the course of its
own history. Then came the victories of the peoples
of Angola, Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde and Mozambique who, weapons in hand, destroyed Portuguese
colonialism and brought Salazar-Caetano fascism to its
knees. It was also the victory of the Portuguese people
themselves and of their revolutionary army, which
recovered its dignity and honour by participating
actively and honestly in the liberation of those who
had helped them ""erate themselves. It was a victory
for the OAU, whicn has made the Iiberat:on of Mrica
its very raison d'etre. It was a victory for the United
Nations, too, which has taken persistent, many-sided
action in favour of territories under foreign domi-

.'

20

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session-Plenary Meetings

nation. It was, finally, a victory for all the oppressed
peoples and progressive forces of the world against
the obscurantist machine of domination and exploitation which is still struggling, vainly but desperately,
in Africa and elsewhere to stop the forward march of
progress towards dignity and justice.
257. To all of them I wish to express here the profound gratitude of the people of Sao Tome and Principe, and that gratitude can find no better expression
than in our will to participate in and contribute to
the extent of our very limited means to every action
aimed at accelerating the reconquest of freedom for
peoples deprived ofliberty. Our support ofall measures
aimed at achieving that end will be unstinting, and
we commit ourselves to helping all victims of domination and exploitation.
258. Yesterday, as slaves, the people of Sao Tome
and Principe gave their blood and sweat to nourish
the sugar plantations of America. Later they cDntinued
to shed their blood and sweat for the prosperity of
a few colonizers producing coffee. Today, having
taken their fate into their own hands, those people
are firmly determined to expend even more blood
and sweat in order to build their own future, a future
of peace, prosperity and progress. They have faith
in themselves and in the community of men of good
will, with whom they intend to work for the building
of a better world.
259. The PRESIDENT (interpretation!rom French):
I now call upon the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the People's Republic of Mozambique, Mr. Joaquim
Alberto Chissano.
260. Mr. CHISSANO (People's Republic of Mozambique): I am speaking today to express, on bel.alf of
the People's Republic of Mozambique and its vanguard
organization FRELIMO, our profound appreciation
and gratitude for the warm welcome to the United
Nations given to our country. I should like particularly to thank all those who sponsored our entry
into the United Nations, and the members of the
Security Council for having unanimously and without
hesitation decided that Mozambique deserved to be
represented in this Assembly. That was one of the
aims of our struggle-for our people to take their
place in the concert of nations so that they might
represent themselves and discuss the world issues
which affect their destiny.
261. The admission of Mozambique to the United
Nations is one more victory in the struggle of the
Mozambican people against colonialism and imperialism. It is one tJrther step for the consolidation
of the independence achieved through a bitter struggle
in which many lives were lost and much blood of our
people was shed. We are giad to state that this victory
is a victory also for the United Nations. For more
than one third of the lifetime of this Organization, in
this same Hail, a bitter struggle ·has been waged
particularly against Portuguese colonial domination,
the only retrograde colonial system. It was through
the United Nations that the people of Mozambique
tried, first of all, to persuade the fascist G..-vernment
of Portugal to accept the right of the Mozambican
people to independence, but the refusal of that fascist
Government led our people and the Portuguese people
into an undesirable struggle which resulted in calamity

not only for our people in Mozambique but also for
the people of Portugal.
262. Today we are happy that we may spe'1k another
language with the Portuguese representatives in this
Hall. That is due to the fact that we in Mozambique,
as in the other Portuguese colonies, knew how to
co-operate with the revolutionary forces in order to
annihilate not only colonialism but also fascism in our
countries.
263. We wish the Portuguese people success in
their continued struggle to consolidate that victory
over fascism. We know that many countries represented in this Hall have not always been in favour of
our liberation. It took a long time to make them understand that this was also our right. But today it seems
that there is no reason for us to harbour any bitterness, and we are glad to state here that we are ready
to co-operate with all in order to achieve international
peace and securi~y, co-operation and understanding,
and the well-being of humanity. We are ready to
co-operate with all those who will respect our independence and sovereignty; and judging by the congratulatory speeches which we have just heard, we
have reason to be optimistic and to say that this is a
new era, one in which co-operation among nations
will grow steadily, and the objectives of the United
Nations will be achieved with greater success.
264. Allow me to congratulate the Committee of
24 on the arduous work it undertook during the struggle
for the liberation of the Portuguese colonies. In particular, I should like to stress the efforts of the Chairman of that Committee. May I also indicate our appreciation to the African Group in the United Nations for
its unwavering interest in us and for the way it constantly supported our struggle against Portuguese
colonialism.
265. We are appreciative also of the interest shown
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
particularly at the final stage when we had to struggle
against the vestiges of fascism in Portugal, which
attempted to turn us away from the path of independence or to delay it, or to change th~ meaning of independence and to install neo-colonialism in our
countries.
266. Today we have come into the United Nations
together with the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome
and Principe and the Republic of Cape Verde. This
is just, and it is not by chance, because we have been
fighting together; we have been co-ordinating our
strategies together. In fact, we have been moving
as one against colonialism and imperialism. To congratulate them would be the same as to congratulate
our own country. May Ijust say that we in Mozambique
are happy that we could share this new achievement.
267. It is very difficult to speak of small sacrifices
and big sacrifices. In this world, we who have been
fighting with weapons in hand know only sacrifices;
we have always felt the same way, whether we lost
one soldier or 100 soldiers. We have always felt that
it was a matter of bloodshed and sacrifice.
268. But I think the Assembly will agree with us if
we say that the people of Viet Nam, in the North and
in the South, have been one of the fundamental factors
in the victories of those peoples in the world which
have fought against imperialism. I think the Assembly

will
adm
plet
us,
De
of
this
of t
De
Sou
that
soli
269.
Nat
und
for
Nati

_.IIIIIIIIiI.-----------------------------------------------__•

--,Ibll.

235lst meeting-16 September 1975

will agree with us also that although we rejoice at our
admission to the United Nations our joy is incomplete and tinged with pain without the presence among
us, as full Members of the United Nations, of the
Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and of the Republic
of South Viet Nam. We hope sincerely that during
this session-and, if possible, during the early days
of the activities of this session-our brothers of the
Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of
South Viet Nam will be seated together with us so
that we may continue to strengthen co-operation and
solidarity and to consolidate peace in the world.
269. We know that our admission to the United
Nations is a new responsibility, and we are ready to
undertake this responsibility and to perform our duties
for the achievement of the noble goals of the United
Nations.

21

270. Last but not least, allow me, Mr. President,
to congratulate you. on your election to preside over
this Assembly and to wish you a good and successful
leadership so that we may achieve the best results
from our activities, as expected ofus by all our peoples.
The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m.

NOTES
1 AIAC.176/7.

2 Official

Records of the Security Council. Thirtieth Year.
1835tb meeting, paras. 94-107.
3 Ibid.. Thirtieth
Year. Supplement for July. August and
September 1975, document S/11798.
