S/2002/211

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 February 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 27 February 2002 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 20 February
2002, from the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-26689 (E) 010302

*0226689*

S/2002/211

Annex
Letter dated 20 February 2002 from the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency addressed to the
Secretary-General
In his statement of 4 November 1994 (S/PRST/1994/64), the President of the
Security Council requested that the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
continue to report to the Council on the implementation of the Safeguards
Agreement with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I last wrote to you on
this subject on 2 February 2001. As a follow-up to that letter, I now enclose a copy
of my report (GC(45)/26 of 6 August 2001) submitted to the General Conference of
IAEA at its forty-fifth regular session, and of resolution GC(45)/RES/16 adopted by
the Conference on 21 September 2001.
Since my letter of 2 February 2001, IAEA has maintained a continuous
inspector presence in Nyongbyon to monitor the freeze of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s graphite moderated reactors and related facilities foreseen in
the Agreed Framework of October 1994 between the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the United States of America. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea continues to accept IAEA verification activities solely within the context of
the Agreed Framework and not under the Safeguards Agreement. That Agreement is
binding and remains in force.
The IAEA Safeguards Implementation Report for 2000, issued in May 2001,
pointed out the continuing inability of IAEA to verify the correctness and
completeness of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s initial declaration of
nuclear material and hence its inability to conclude that there has been no diversion
of nuclear material in that country.
In May 2001, IAEA proposed concrete steps to be taken towards the
verification of the initial declaration and expressed its readiness to start the relevant
activities as early as possible. At a technical meeting in November 2001 the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea did not agree to begin implementing the
Agency’s concrete proposals for the verification of the correctness and completeness
of its initial declaration, citing the delay in implementation of the Agreed
Framework between the United States and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea as the principal reason for declining. It should be kept in mind that the work
required to verify that all nuclear materials subject to safeguards in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea had been declared to IAEA could take 3 to 4 years to
complete with full cooperation on the part of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
The IAEA General Conference, in September 2001, adopted resolution
GC(45)/RES/16, in which it once more expressed deep concern over the continuing
non-compliance of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea with its Safeguards
Agreement. The General Conference again noted that IAEA continues to be unable
to verify the correctness and completeness of the initial declaration of nuclear
material made by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and urged the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply fully with its Safeguards
Agreement. It also strongly encouraged the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to respond positively and at an early date to the detailed proposal for the first
concrete steps needed for the implementation of the generic requirements for the

2

S/2002/211

verification of the correctness and completeness of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s initial declaration.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter and its enclosures to the
attention of the Security Council, to which I will continue to report developments.
(Signed) Mohamed ElBaradei

3
