The situation prevailing in and adjacent to the United Nations
Protected Areas in Croatia

"The Council strongly condemns this outrageous act, which is a
flagrant challenge to the authority and inviolability ofUNPROFOR.
"The Council notes that, despite the prompt and commendable
intervention of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
neither of the hostages has been released, and it demands that the
Bosnian Serb forces proceed immediately to release them. The
Council reminds the perpetrators of this act that they are obligated
to ensure that no harm comes to the individuals being held and that
those responsible for violations ofinternational humanitarian law will
be held personally accountable for their actions.

Decision
At its 3163rd meeting, on 25 January 1993, the Council discussed
the item entitled "The situation prevailing in and adjacent to the United
Nations Protected Areas in Croatia: letter dated 25 January 1993 from
the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/25156)". 2

"The Council requests the Secretary-General to undertake a
thorough investigation of the incident and to report to the Council
without delay. It urges all parties and others concerned to refrain
from taking any action which might further exacerbate the situation.

Resolution 802 (1993)
of25 January 1993

"The Council condemns all attacks and hostile acts against
UNPROFOR by all parties in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as in the Republic of Croatia, which have become more
frequent over the last weeks, and demands that they cease forthwith."

The Security Council,
Reaffinningits resolution 713 (1991) of25 September 1991 and all
subsequent relevant resolutions,
Reaffirming in particular its commitment to the United Nations
peace-keeping plan,64

In a letter dated 11 November 1993,61 addressed to the President of
the Security Council, the Secretary-General referred to the President's
statement of9 November 1993,60 in which the Council had requested
that a report be submitted without delay on the incident on 8 November
1993 involving the taking hostage by Bosnian Serb forces of two
persons travelling in armoured vehicles of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR). In response to the above request, the
Secretary-General attached an extensive report submitted to him by
UNPROFOR. The Secretary-General further stated that following
intensive negotiations under the direct supervision of his Special
Representative, Mr. Thorvald Stoltenberg, the two persons concerned
were released on 11 November 1993 at 1300 hours local time.

Deeply concemed by the information provided by the Secretary-General to the Security Council on 25 January 1993 on the rapid
and violent deterioration of the situation in Croatia as a result of military
attacks by Croatian armed forces on the areas under the protection of
the United Nations Protection Force,
Strongly condemning those attacks which have led to casualties and
loss oflife in the Force, as well as among the civilian population,
Deeply concemed also by the lack of cooperation in recent months
by the Serb local authorities in the areas under the protection of the
Force, by the recent seizure by them of heavy weapons under control
of the Force, and by threats to widen the conflict,

In a letter dated 12 November 1993,62 addressed to the President of
the Security Council, the Secretary-General referred to the presidential
statement of 28 October 1993 ,58 in which the Secretary-General was
requested to submit a report as soon as possible on the responsibility,
inter alia, for an incident on 25 October 1993 in which two humanitarian aid convoys were subject of an attack near Novi Travnik in central
Bosnia. The Secretary-General attached a report by the United Nations
Protection Force containing the conclusions of a board of inquiry
established to investigate the incident, as well as the action taken in
following up on the findings of the board. The Secretary-General at the
same time took this opportunity to express his condolences to the
Government of Denmark and the family of the driver, Mr. Bjarne
Nielsen, who was killed in the above incident. The personnel involved
in the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Bosnia and Herzegovina
deserved the admiration of the international community for their
courage and determination in pursuing this difficult and dangerous task.

1. Demands-the immediate cessation of hostile activities by Croatian

armed forces within or adjacent to the United Nations Protected Areas
and the withdrawal of the Croatian armed forces from these areas;
2. Strongly condemns the attacks by these forces against the United
Nations Protection Force in the conduct of its duty of protectinS
civilians in the Protected Areas and demands their immediate cessation;
3. Demands also that the heavy weapons seized from the storage
areas controlled by the Force be returned immediately to the Force;
4. Demands further that all parties and others concerned comply
strictly with the cease-fire arrangements already agreed and cooperate
fully and unconditionally in the implementation of the United Nations
peace-keeping plan, including the disbanding and demobilization of the
Serb territorial defence units or other units of similar functions;

In a letter dated 28 December 1993,63 addressed to the President of
the Security Council, the Secretary-General transmitted the report
addressed to him on 23 December 1993 by the Co-Chairmen of the
Steering Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia on the latest developments in the search for peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
61

S/26726.

62

S/26742.

63

S/26922.

5. Expresses its condolences to the families of the personnel of the
Force who have lost their lives;
.
6. Demands that all parties and others concerned respect fully the
safety of United Nations personnel;

64
Official Records- ofthe Security Council, Forty-sixth Year,
Supplement/or October, November and December 1991, document
S/23280, annex ill.

19

7. /,wires the Secretary-General to take all necessary steps to ensure
the safety of the Force personnel concerned;

"Having examined the situation in the United Nations Protected
Areas (UNPAs) in the Republic of Croatia, the Security Council is
deeply concerned by the failure of the Krajina Serbs to participate in
talks on the implementation of its resolution 802 (1993) of 25
January 1993 which were to be held in Zagreb on 26 May 1993. It
deplores the interruption of the dialogue between the parties, which
had recently produced encouraging signs of progress.

8. Calls upon all parties and others concerned to cooperate with the
Force in resolving all remaining issues connected with the implementation of the peace-keeping plan, including allowing civilian traffic freely
to use the Maslenica crossing;

"The Council stresses its support for the peace process under the
auspices of the Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia and urges the parties to solve all problems which
might arise by peaceful means and resume the talks immediately
with a view to the rapid implementation of resolution 802 (1993)
and all other relevant resolutions. The Council expresses its willingness to help ensure the implementation of an agreement on this basis
reached by the parties, including respect for the rights of the local
Serb population.

9. Calls again upon all parties and others concerned to cooperate
fully with the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia and
to refrain from any actions or threats which might undermine the
current efforts aimed at reaching a political settlement;
10.

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the 3163rd meeting.

"The Council reminds the parties that the UNPAs are integral
parts of the territory of Croatia, and that no action inconsistent with
this would be acceptable.

Decisions
At its 3165th meeting, on 27 January 1993, the Council discussed
the item entitled "The situation prevailing in and adjacent to the United
Nations Protected Areas in Croatia: letter dated 25 January 1993 from
the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/25156)". 2

"The Council reiterates its demand that international humanitarian
law be fully respected in the UNPAs.
"The Council urges the Government of the Republic of Croatia,
in cooperation with other interested parties, to take all necessary
measures to ensure the full protection of the rights of all residents of
the UNPAs when Croatia exercises fully its authority in these
Areas."

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier with the
members of the Security Council, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 65

In a letter dated 14 July 1993,67 addressed to the President of the
Security Council for the attention of the members of the Council, the
Secretary-General, with reference to Council resolutions 802 (1993) of
25 January 1993 and 847 (1993) of 10 June 1993, stated that he had
met with his Special Representative, Mr. Thorvald Stoltenberg, and had
come to the conclusion that developments at the Maslenica bridge and
the Zemunik airport in Croatia deserved the urgent attention of the
Council, which might wish to consider the danger posed by that
situation and decide upon appropriate action.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned to learn from the
Secretary-General that the offensive by the Croatian armed forces
continues unabated in flagrant violation of resolution 802 (1993) of
25 January 1993, at a crucial time in the peace process.
"The Council demands that military action by all parties and
others concerned cease immediately. It further demands that all
parties and others concerned comply fully and immediately with all
the provisions of resolution 802 (1993) and with other relevant
Council resolutions.
"The Council once again demands that all parties and others
concerned respect fully the safety of United Nations personnel and
guarantee their freedom of movement. The Council reiterates that it
will hold the political and military leaders involved in the conflict
responsible and accountable for the safety of the United Nations
peace-keeping personnel in the area.

At its 3255th meeting, on 15 July 1993, the Council discussed the
item entitled "The situation prevailing in and adjacent to the United
Nations Protected Areas in Croatia: letter dated 14 July 1993 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/26082)". 51

"The Council will remain actively seized of the matter, in
particular with a view to considering what further steps might be
necessary to ensure that resolution 802 (1993) and other relevant
Council resolutions are fully implemented."

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier with the
members of the Security Council, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 61
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the information
contained in the letter of the Secretary-General dated 14 July 1993
on the situation in and around the United Nations Protected Areas
(UNPAs) in the Republic ofCroatia. 67 It recalls its resolutions 802
(1993) of25 January 1993 and 847 (1993) of30 June 1993 and in
particular the demand in the former that all parties and others
concerned comply strictly with the cease-fire arrangements already
agreed and the call on them in the latter to reach an agreement on
confidence-building measures.

At its 3231 st meeting, on 8 June 1993, the Council discussed the
item entitled "The situation prevailing in and adjacent to the United
Nations Protected Areas in Croatia".

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier with the
members of the Security Council, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 66
65

S/25178.

67

S/26082

66

S/25897.

61

S/26084

20
