UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/2000/1
13 January 2000
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4089th meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 January 2000 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Promoting
peace and security: humanitarian assistance to refugees in Africa", the
President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
"The Security Council recalls its previous statements concerning
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situation, the situation in Africa, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, and the role of the Security Council in the prevention of armed
conflicts. The Council further recalls its previous relevant resolutions,
as well as relevant resolutions of the General Assembly.
"Bearing in mind its primary responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council underlines the importance of taking measures aimed at
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa. The Council stresses the
need to address the root causes of armed conflict in a comprehensive manner
in order to prevent those circumstances which lead to internal displacement
and the outflow of refugees. The Council notes with concern that the
majority of refugees, returnees and internally displaced persons and others
affected by conflict are women and children and stresses the need to
intensify efforts to meet their special protection needs, including their
vulnerability to violence, exploitation and disease, including HIV-AIDS.
The Council underlines the obligation of all Member States to seek to
settle their international disputes by peaceful means. The Council
condemns the deliberate targeting of civilians and practices of forced
displacement. The Council reaffirms its commitment to the principles of
the political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
States. The Council emphasizes that national authorities have the primary
duty and responsibility to provide protection and humanitarian assistance
to internally displaced persons within their jurisdiction. The Council
reaffirms the obligation of States to prevent arbitrary displacement in
situations of armed conflict, and reaffirms as well their responsibility to
meet the protection and assistance needs of internally displaced persons
within their jurisdiction.

00-23928 (E)

130100

/...

S/PRST/2000/1
English
Page 2

"The Security Council expresses its grave concern that alarmingly high
numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons in Africa do not
receive sufficient protection and assistance. In this context, the Council
notes that refugees are protected under the 1951 United Nations Convention
and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees, the 1969
Organization of African Unity Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of
Refugee Problems in Africa, and other relevant initiatives in the region.
The Council also notes that there is no comprehensive protection regime for
internally displaced persons and that existing norms are not being fully
implemented. The Council recognizes that large-scale human suffering as
well as violations of human rights and humanitarian law are consequences of
and contributing factors to instability and further conflict. In this
regard, the Council affirms the need to ensure adequate protection and
assistance for both refugees and internally displaced persons, taking into
account the special difficulties in the provision of humanitarian
assistance to internally displaced persons in Africa.
"The Security Council urges all parties concerned to comply strictly
with their obligations under international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law, and emphasizes the need for better implementation of relevant
norms with regard to internally displaced persons. The Council invites
States which have not already done so to consider ratifying the relevant
instruments of international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.
The Council takes note of the efforts made within the United Nations system
aimed at promoting an effective collective response of the international
community to situations of internal displacement. The Council calls upon
States, in particular States with situations of internal displacement in
Africa, to cooperate fully with such efforts. The Council further notes
that the United Nations agencies, regional and non-governmental
organizations, in cooperation with host Governments, are making use of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement,* inter alia, in Africa.
"The Security Council reaffirms the responsibility of States hosting
refugees to ensure the security and civilian and humanitarian character of
refugee camps and settlements in accordance with existing international
standards and international refugee, human rights and humanitarian law. In
this regard, the Council underlines the unacceptability of using refugees
and other persons in refugee camps and settlements to achieve military
purposes in the country of asylum or in the country of origin.
"The Security Council underlines the importance of safe and unhindered
access, in accordance with international law, of humanitarian personnel to
civilians in armed conflict, including refugees and internally displaced
persons, and the protection of humanitarian assistance to them, and recalls
the responsibility of all parties to conflict to ensure the safety and
security of such personnel. The Council condemns recent acts of deliberate
violence in Africa against humanitarian personnel.

* E/CN.4/1998/53 and Add.1-2.
/...

S/PRST/2000/1
English
Page 3

"The Security Council recognizes the extensive experience and burden
of African States in hosting refugees and in dealing with the effects of
refugee camps and settlements. The Council welcomes the efforts made to
support the needs of refugees in Africa, in particular those of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and host countries. Noting with
concern the shortfall in funding for refugee and internally displaced
persons programmes in Africa, the Council calls upon the international
community to provide such programmes with the necessary financial
resources, taking into account the substantial needs in Africa."

-----
