S/PV.9007

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9007

th meeting
Tuesday, 29 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Tenkorang
Mr. Vinito
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Roscoe
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2022/252)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-30308 (E)
*2230308*

S/PV.9007

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy on the passing away
of Ambassador Jim Kelly, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Ireland to the United Nations
The President: The members of the Security
Council were deeply saddened to learn of the recent
and untimely passing of Ambassador Jim Kelly,
distinguished diplomat and Deputy Permanent
Representative of Ireland to the United Nations.
Ambassador Kelly was a true champion of the
United Nations and of the Council. As a committed
multilateralist, he believed in the power of diplomacy
to change the world for the better. He brought a sharp
intellect and encyclopaedic knowledge of the Council
to our discussions around this table and outside this
Chamber. As a colleague and friend, he was described
by many members as warm and generous, with a great
sense of humour. Within his Mission, Jim was a mentor
to many of his younger colleagues, who will miss him.
The members of the Security Council express their
heartfelt condolences to the family of Ambassador Jim
Kelly, to the Permanent Mission and the Government of
Ireland and to all the people touched by Jim, in Ireland
and beyond.
On behalf of Council members, I would ask that we
all stand and observe a moment of silence in memory of
Ambassador Jim Kelly.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2022/252)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
2/21

29/03/022

briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Bintou Keita,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and
Ms. Léa Babite Inyobondaye, civil society briefer.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/252, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to express my gratitude for being given
this opportunity to address the Security Council in
order to provide an update of the current situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo following the
issuance of the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral in that regard (S/2022/252). I also welcome
the participation of Ms. Léa Babite Inyobondaye, in
her capacity as representative of civil society in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Since my previous briefing to the Council in
December (see S/PV.8918), the security situation in the
east of the country has deteriorated. Military operations
of the defence and security forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in the context of the state of siege,
have been carried out by the joint military operations of
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) and the Ugandan People’s Defence
Force (UPDF). However, the number of civilian losses
and displaced persons has increased as a result of the
bloody reprisals perpetrated by the Allied Democratic
Forces against civilians living in North Kivu and Ituri,
where they are displaced.
In those traumatized provinces, the tragic
consequences of repeated attacks perpetrated by the
majority Lendu armed group, known as the Coopérative
pour le développement du Congo, either on camps for
displaced persons in the Hema community of Djugu
territory or on villages in the Alur community in Mahagi
territory, are exacerbated by the reprisals carried out
by a majority Hema armed group and the Zaire militia
and its spread into Mambasa territory in an attempt to
control gold resources and fund its activities. Over the
past three months, there has been an alarming increase
22-30308

29/03/022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in activities by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) in
North Kivu, which led to major attacks with FARDC
and attendant population displacement. Yesterday M-23
elements also perpetrated horrific attacks, targeting
civilians in communities near Rutshuru, and fighting
broke out in the three-border region near the border
town of Bunagana.
In the Hauts Plateaux and Moyens Plateaux of Uvira
and Fizi territories in South Kivu, fresh violence against
civilians is regrettable, following attacks carried out by
Mai-Mai groups on the villages of the Banyamulenge
community and reprisals by the Banyamulenge militia
in response to attacks on FARDC positions.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) has recorded an average of 250 civilian
deaths every month in each province — a total of more
than 2,300 deaths in three months.
In North Kivu, the situation is compounded by
the disturbing use of improvised explosive devices
by the Allied Democratic Forces, whose leadership
renewed its allegiance to the Islamic State on 11 March.
MONUSCO has also recorded an approximately 10 per
cent increase, on average, in human rights violations
since December 2021. Attacks carried out by the
members of armed groups on civilians, restrictions on
democratic space and an increase in hate speech are the
primary causes of such violations.
Following the deterioration in the security situation
and the increase in the level of violence against civilians,
the needs for humanitarian assistance have again
increased in the east of the country. Limited access
and incidents against humanitarian workers continue to
hinder the response. Over the past three months, four
humanitarian workers have been killed, one has been
wounded and six have been kidnapped.
I must raise the alarm here about the considerable
erosion in the protection of the civil status of sites
for displaced persons and the frequent attacks on
military medical services and other kinds of civilian
infrastructure. I therefore take this opportunity to
remind all parties to the conflict of their legal and moral
duty to facilitate the provision of humanitarian aid.
In the light of these very worrisome security
developments, MONUSCO has redoubled its efforts
to better protect civilians by conducting offensive
operations in Ituri, working jointly with FARDC and

S/PV.9007

UPDF, deploying support units for FARDC to increase
the deterrent effect against M-23 in North Kivu, and
continuing mobile deployment to provide protection to
displaced persons in South Kivu. Our civilian teams
are also working tirelessly with the communities
concerned in an attempt to ease tensions, encourage
dialogue and document those responsible for crimes in
order to continue the fight against impunity. However,
we must be realistic and face the actual situation on
the ground.
Without a combined approach that addresses
the causes and the symptoms alike, our means and
those of the FARDC will remain inadequate, given
the deteriorating security situation. That proves the
inherent limits of having recourse solely to security
operations to resolve conflicts. Therefore, while we
firmly condemn attacks by armed groups on civilians,
I reiterate my call for the implementation by the
Government of comprehensive political strategies that
also include reforms and measures aimed at addressing
the structural and root causes of those conflicts,
allowing us to ensure lasting peace and stability.
The beginning of national consultations in the
area of transitional justice are a step in the right
direction. Progress in addressing the illegal trade in
and exploitation of natural resources, which continue
to fuel these conflicts, as well as in security sector
reform to improve performance and efficiency, and
in increasing resources earmarked for combating
impunity for criminals, traffickers and the accomplices
of armed groups are key components.
In that context, I welcome the opening on 15 March
of the new parliamentary session and the inclusion
on its agenda of essential proposals and draft bills,
including a review of the electoral bill, a bill on
combating discrimination, racism and xenophobia,
and a bill on military training. With the setting up of
the Independent National Electoral Commission and
the start of preparations for the electoral process, I
also welcome the goal expressed by the President of
the National Assembly to conduct a consensus-based
review of the electoral law so as to ensure the most
inclusive, transparent and peaceful process possible
to allow for, in particular, the active participation of
women and young people within the constitutional time
frame. The strategic importance of the review of the
electoral law for the stability of the country cannot be
underestimated. It is a key moment for the majority of
the political class and for a civil society that expects

22-303083/21

S/PV.9007

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

concrete measures to restore trust in the management
of the electoral process.
(spoke in English)
I am glad to report that since my last briefing to
the Security Council (see S/PV.8918), I have seen
progress in the common efforts of MONUSCO, the
United Nations country team and the Government to
implement the joint transition plan. The joint working
group has produced an initial report of the benchmarks
and indicators to measure progress on the plan that we
have drawn up.
The sub-working groups have also begun
their work, with notable developments in the
operationalization of the protection of human rights,
as well as the disarmament, demobilization and
community reintegration and stabilization. I take this
opportunity to highlight the importance that I attach
to the successful implementation of the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Reintegration and
Stabilization programme.
Indeed, MONUSCO, together with the United
Nations Development Programme, continues to
support the work of the national coordination structure
and facilitates its engagement with the provincial
and local stakeholders to enable the implementation
of community-based approaches to disarmament,
demobilization and community reintegration and
stabilization. The validation of the national strategy
for the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Reintegration and Stabilization programme on
28 March, which is expected to be formally adopted
in a ceremony chaired by President Tshisekedi on
4 April, will be an important stepping-stone in the
operationalization of the programme.
The implementation of a progressive, responsible
and sustainable transition also advances at field level
with a view to ensuring that national and provincial
institutions and partners continue to deliver on key
tasks and preserve the gains achieved, with the
support — as required — of United Nations agencies.
To reduce some of the existing vulnerabilities in areas
from which MONUSCO is progressively disengaging,
efforts are also under way to advance the humanitarian
development and peace nexus approach towards a
common analysis and coherence in terms of planning
and action among partners.
4/21

29/03/022

In line with that approach, MONUSCO remained
engaged with the United Nations country team and the
provincial authorities of the Kasais after its withdrawal
from the area last year. In Tanganyika province, the
Mission is closely monitoring the evolution of the
security dynamics, particularly in Nyunzu territory
and the Bandera area, to maintain a nimble planning
for the scheduled withdrawal of MONUSCO in June
this year.
We must not forget that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s stability is also tied to the support of
its nine neighbouring countries. The interdependence
of the States of the region, particularly the need to seek
common solutions to challenges impacting all, was
highlighted during the recent summit in Kinshasa of
the tenth High-level Meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism, reuniting the signatory countries and
guarantor institutions of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.
I welcome the efforts deployed under the leadership
of President Tshisekedi to increase regional cooperation,
as well as the participants’ pledge to continue engaging
in dialogue and diplomacy to resolve tensions and
strengthen their coordination and collaboration in the
fight against negative forces. In that regard, I also
salute the decision of the East African Community to
admit the Democratic Republic of the Congo as a full
member, as announced today during the nineteenth
extraordinary summit of the Heads of State.
To conclude, allow me to thank the Council for its
commitment to supporting MONUSCO, as evidenced
by resolution 2612 (2021), extending the Mission’s
mandate, and by its continued engagement on these
quarterly discussions. I would also like to express my
gratitude to the troop- and police-contributing countries
for their vital support enabling the implementation of
the mandate, despite the challenges imposed by the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
As multiple global challenges requiring the attention
of Member States emerge, I urge the international
community to continue supporting the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in achieving long-term stability,
peace and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Keita
for her briefing.
22-30308

29/03/022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

(spoke in English)
Due to technical difficulties, we will not be able to
connect with the civil society briefer, Ms. Babite, this
morning. We will, however, distribute her remarks to
all Council members.
(spoke in Arabic)
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Keita for her briefing.
We have just learned that a United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) helicopter
disappeared today in the Rutshuru area. I pay tribute to
all of the Mission’s personnel who dedicate themselves
each day to achieving peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
I would like to highlight three points.
First, progress at the political level and in the region
must be accompanied and supported. France welcomes
the progress made in preparing for the presidential
and legislative elections in 2023. Work must continue
in accordance with the road map of the Independent
National Electoral Commission. Parliament’s revision
of the electoral law should strengthen confidence in the
country’s institutions and the democratic process.
At the regional level, the Addis Ababa Framework
Agreement follow-up summit confirmed the will for
dialogue. The commitments made must be implemented.
Here, I refer to the many bilateral agreements reached
in recent months to strengthen good-neighbourly
relations. Cooperation must be further strengthened in
order to fight against armed groups and crime.
We have taken note of the concerted actions of
the Ugandan and Congolese armed forces against the
Allied Democratic Forces, as well as the agreements
reached between the Rwandan and Congolese police.
Depending on progress on arms control, the framework
for military assistance could be made more flexible by
the Council.
Secondly, we must disable negative forces. Armed
groups continue their abuses. France condemns the
cowardly and unjustifiable attacks on camps for
displaced persons. Those camps shelter the most
vulnerable populations, including women and children.

S/PV.9007

MONUSCO and the Congolese armed forces must
continue to protect them.
The results of operations on the ground must
be visible. The Force Intervention Brigade has been
reconfigured for that purpose. Coordination between
the Congolese and Ugandan armed forces and
MONUSCO must continue. The protection of civilians
will be ensured only if there is full respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law.
In order to address the root causes of the conflicts,
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
strategy must be operationalized without delay. The
fight against impunity must be strengthened, both for
armed groups and for certain members of the security
forces. In that sense, France welcomes the conviction of
24 members of the Coopérative pour le développement
du Congo in Ituri for crimes against humanity.
The traceability of natural resources must be
ensured so that they do not fall into the hands of armed
groups. It is up to the Security Council to sanction those
who plunder the resources of the Congolese people.
Finally, the Congolese must continue to count
on the support of their partners. The indicators in
MONUSCO’s transition plan are now being regularly
monitored and will help regulate the gradual
withdrawal of the Mission. United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes must be ready to take over and
begin immediately to invest in Tanganyika, from which
MONUSCO will withdraw in June.
France will support the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in its transition. The French Development
Agency will mobilize half a billion euros between
now and 2025 to support health, agriculture and the
empowerment of women, which is a major investment.
The European Union will allocate €44 million this
year to meet the needs of the most vulnerable in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region. It will contribute to care for survivors
of sexual violence, as well as promote access to water
and education.
On the road to peace, the Democratic Republic of
Congo is not alone. Let us continue to accompany it.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I would like to
thank Special Representative Keita for her honest and
informative briefing.

22-303085/21

S/PV.9007

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We too express our regret after hearing about the
helicopter crash this morning in North Kivu and we
will closely follow any updates from the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We pay tribute to
its peacekeepers for their hard work.
Norway is deeply concerned about the security and
humanitarian developments in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. After more than 10
months of the state of siege, we see no decline in the
threat from armed groups. The humanitarian response
plan also remains severely underfunded.
The attacks by the Allied Democratic Forces this
month — and the attack by the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo on Savo camp for internally
displaced persons in February — illustrate the constant
threat faced by the civilian population, and such
attacks must stop. We underscore that all parties must
fully respect international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Allow me to focus on two main points, namely,
the illicit exploitation of natural resources and the
MONUSCO transition.
First, the illicit exploitation of natural resources
remains a conflict-driver in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It generates significant revenues for
armed groups and represents a lost opportunity for the
Congolese State. These activities also inflict additional
suffering on the civilian population. We are deeply
concerned about the use of children in mines and the
exploitation of women in the mining sector.
Regional cooperation is key to curb this trade. We
urge relevant States to implement the recommendations
from the Khartoum workshop last year. Additionally, a
well-functioning sanctions regime can have a preventive
effect and promote accountability for perpetrators.
Norway supports the work of all relevant stakeholders,
including the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to the Great Lakes region, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the African Union, in
establishing mechanisms to address this root cause
of conflict.
Secondly, the ultimate success of MONUSCO
hinges upon a well-executed transition. This must
include a strong focus on the protection of civilians. We
welcome the recent meetings in the joint working group
and the sub-working group on the transition, which
6/21

29/03/022

are crucial to ensuring a conditions-based drawdown.
We welcome the inclusion of civil society actors in
that exercise.
The milestones and indicators set forth in the
joint transition plan illustrate that stabilization cannot
be achieved by military means alone. It must be
accompanied by inclusive political and community
dialogue and efforts to promote economic and social
development. We encourage MONUSCO and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities to continue
to include civil society, local community leaders as
well as women and youth in identifying concrete steps
to further stabilization efforts and dialogue.
The progress report (S/2022/252) shows that time,
concerted efforts and close cooperation between
relevant actors is needed to achieve the milestones in
the joint transition plan. This process cannot be rushed.
It must be based on the situation on the ground, rather
than fixed deadlines. Norway remains committed to a
timely and responsible draw-down and eventual exit
of MONUSCO. Norway stands ready to work with
all relevant stakeholders for sustainable peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita, for
her briefing.
It is with great alarm that we have learned about
the missing helicopter belonging to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We support the
activities of peacekeepers in the country.
It is with further alarm that we note that problems
in the area of security have escalated in the eastern and
north-eastern parts of the country, specifically in Ituri
and North Kivu provinces. There, since May 2021, a
state of siege has been in effect, and since November
2021, a joint military operation has been carried out
with armed units of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda.
We welcome efforts to counter the militias.
However, it behoves us to note that the Congolese
armed forces, alongside their regional partners and
MONUSCO peacekeepers, have not yet managed to
fundamentally curb the capacity of the numerous
militias proliferating in the area. We note the steppedup activities of a number of armed groups, first and
22-30308

29/03/022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

foremost, the Allied Democratic Forces. It is with
alarm that we have learned of late that the activity of
the Coopérative pour le développement du Congo has
increased. On 1 February, following an attack by that
entity in Ituri, more than 50 people died, including
women and children.
The Russian Federation supported the adoption
of a Security Council press statement on 4 February
(SC/14787) to condemn this heinous act. In the first
few months of this year, attacks targeting civilians were
repeatedly carried out. We are particularly troubled by
attacks on camps for internally displaced persons and the
use by armed groups of improvised explosive devices.
We believe that, in order to successfully vanquish the
fighters, it is necessary to further step up coordination
between the peacekeepers and the Congolese security
forces, as well as to facilitate capacity-building for the
latter.

S/PV.9007

disarmament, demobilization and social reintegration
of former combatants.
A key pillar for politics in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo over the near term is presidential elections.
It is necessary for elections to be carried out in line with
the timetable set out under the Constitution, to ensure
that they be inclusive and in line with international
elections standards. We welcome the efforts of the
authorities in preparing for the organization of elections.
We commend the commitment of the neighbouring
countries of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
develop practical cooperation aimed at stabilizing the
situation in the Great Lakes region, as well as progress
in bilateral dialogue between regional stakeholders
vis-à-vis, first and foremost, security issues,
strengthening of national borders and combating illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons.

We welcome the establishment, in October 2021,
of a centre to coordinate the operations of MONUSCO
and the Congolese army. We also welcome the
establishment of tripartite cooperation, with the
participation of Ugandan military personnel. We
support the reinforcement of MONUSCO’s Force
Intervention Brigade.

We welcome the efforts of the leaders of the States
in the region, the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. We believe it is important that
another meeting of the High-Level Meeting of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was held in February.

We believe during the implementation of the joint
transition plan adopted on 15 September 2021 by the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the leadership of MONUSCO with regard to the
Mission’s drawdown and withdrawal from the country
in 2024, it is important to account for the situation and
developments on the ground and to operate in a phased
and responsible way. There is an acute persistent
problem of fighters illicitly exploiting natural resources
to fund operations and build up military capabilities.
We hope that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, working alongside United
Nations peacekeepers and international partners, will
manage to restore control over the security situation
and normalize the situation.

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking the Special Representative of SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Bintou Keita, for her informative briefing.
I welcome the participation of the delegation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in this meeting. I
will raise three points today.

It is crucial to implement non-military measures
to strengthen local institutions of State governance,
alleviate the humanitarian situation and provide
conditions for sustained socioeconomic development.
The priority in making headway for a long-term
resolution and reconciliation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is, with the assistance of the Blue
Helmets, the implementation of the programme for the

First, the security situation in Ituri province is
cause for great concern. As described in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/252), the last
few months have witnessed an escalation of violence
by armed groups. The Security Council issued a press
statement (SC/14787) on the particularly brutal attack
perpetrated by militias of the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo on Savo camp for internally
displaced persons, which left dozens of civilians dead.
The situation in North Kivu province is no
less worrisome. Brazil is particularly concerned by
the increasing number of attacks using improvised
explosive devices. In South Kivu, there are signs
of increased activity by armed groups. The civilian
population has been directly affected by the violence,
with no exception being made for women and children.

22-303087/21

S/PV.9007

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Moreover, insecurity continues to hamper much-needed
humanitarian support.

29/03/022

The statement of the A3 will focus on three main
points: the political situation, the security situation and
the humanitarian situation.

That leads me to the second point of my
With regard to the political situation, we welcome
statement: the safety and security of United
Nations personnel. Dozens of incidents have affected the opening of the March parliamentary session and are
United Nations programmes and personnel, not all of
them directly caused by non-State armed groups. We
take note of the fact that Congolese authorities and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) are
engaged to address the incident in which a MONUSCO
patrol was fired at by soldiers of the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC).
Brazil has had the honour of contributing to
MONUSCO by appointing some of its most distinguished
officers to the position of Force Commander. They have
borne witness to the bravery and sense of duty of the
troops and the civilians who perform their mission in
adverse and oftentimes dangerous conditions. We are
therefore saddened and concerned about the news of
the missing MONUSCO helicopter in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Lastly, we note recent steps to increase crossborder cooperation between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda, as well as the joint military
operation involving the FARDC and the Uganda
People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). Those initiatives,
provided that they are fully respectful of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, could create conditions for more effective
efforts in the stabilization of the region. Tripartite
coordination among MONUSCO, the FARDC and the
UPDF must be encouraged.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Kenya,
Gabon and Ghana.
I take this opportunity to commend the outstanding
work of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bintou Keita. Her detailed briefing provides additional
elements enabling a better assessment of the activities of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the situation in the country. I also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo at this meeting.
8/21

encouraged by the commitment of President Mr. FélixAntoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo to hold elections in 2023,
in accordance with the constitutional timelines. We
welcome the adoption of the electoral road map by the
Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI).
The express commitment the Congolese authorities to
respecting the electoral deadlines will give credibility
to the democratic process leading to free, inclusive and
transparent elections.
By appointing Ms. Marie-Josée Kapinga as the
Deputy National Executive Secretary of the CENI — the
first woman to hold that position— the Congolese
authorities have clearly grasped the importance of the
full participation in the electoral process by all segments
of society, especially young people and women.
Strengthening institutions and consolidating the
democratic gains of recent years are the main political
challenges vis-à-vis the upcoming elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security
Council must support the positive momentum of the
Congolese authorities by bringing realistic and concrete
proposals that are commensurate with the crucial
challenges on the ground.
The magnitude of what is at stake demands
of us an even more steadfast commitment to the
Congolese people in encouraging all political actors
to demonstrate self-sacrifice and a spirit of consensus.
We urge development partners to provide the financial
and material support necessary for the implementation
of the Government’s 2021-2023 programme of action,
including the holding of local and national elections
in 2023.
The complexity of the issues facing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo makes regional dynamics
particularly relevant. In that regard, the A3 welcomes
the holding the High-level Meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. The Mechanism,
which is important and agreed upon by the States of
the region, prioritizes diplomacy and dialogue to
resolve border-related challenges and promote their
economic development.
22-30308

29/03/022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The signing by the Congolese authorities of
respective memorandums of understanding with
Uganda and Rwanda, as well as the concerted military
actions under way, are helping establish a constructive
regional approach. In the interest of effectiveness and
sustainability, the A3 recommends that the joint effort
be expanded to cover all problems that are undermining
stability in the region, including the thorny issue of the
illicit exploitation of mineral resources. The authority
of the Congolese State must be restored throughout the
country, and the rule of law re-established in every part
of the country.
The A3 is particularly concerned about the
deteriorating security situation, especially in the
provinces of Ituri and Kivu, owing to recurring attacks
by armed groups. The eastern part of the Congo has
been continuously faced by a cycle of unprecedented
massacres and violence, the increased recruitment
of child soldiers and barbaric acts perpetrated by the
Allied Democratic Forces, the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo (CODECO) and other rebel
groups, all of which are clearly intended to create a
climate of fear among the population.
The cycle of terror perpetuated by the armed
groups has gone on for far too long. The supporters of
armed groups and those who supply them with weapons
must stop. The perpetrators of those crimes must be
prosecuted and held accountable for their abominable
actions. The conviction of 24 members of CODECO by
the Congolese military courts merits acknowledgement
in that regard.
In order to build on that progress, the A3 advocates
strengthening the judicial capacities of the Congolese
State. In addition to those measures, the Council must
address the issue of the arms embargo, which, in our
view, limits the effectiveness of States’ military actions
against rebel movements, which maintain and often
build their capacity to cause harm through obtaining
supplies through parallel markets.
We ask the Council to accede to the legitimate
request of the Congolese authorities to lift the
notification requirement for the acquisition of arms.
By strengthening its weapons and ammunition
management system, the Government has demonstrated
its commitment to implementing measures to ensure the
control and management of weapons in its possession.

S/PV.9007

(spoke in English)
As we all know, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is a victim of the richness of its mineral
resources. Their illicit exploitation is the main source of
destabilization and violence. We welcome the adoption
by the Congolese Government of a national strategic
plan for the exploitation and certification of mineral
resources, which we very much hope will bring clarity
to the exploitation of mineral resources in the Congo.
We encourage neighbouring countries to implement
their commitments under the Regional Initiative
against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources.
They should also adopt the certification mechanism
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region into national laws and practices in line with
internationally agreed minimum standards, as well
as establish internal systems of control, monitoring
and verification to eliminate the presence of illicit
mineral trade.
In echoing the call of the Congolese authorities,
the A3 stresses the value of sanctioning all individuals
and entities involved in the illicit trafficking of mineral
resources. Those activities incentivize armed groups to
sustain their violence and contribute to intercommunal
tensions. Undercutting the economic lifelines of armed
groups is one of the keys to restoring sustainable peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The response
against armed gangs must also be accompanied
by substantial financial and material support for
the disarmament, demobilization and community
reintegration and stabilization programme. The success
of that important programme will undoubtedly have
a positive reflection on security, stabilization and
development processes.
The A3 notes with concern the increasing use of
improvised explosive devices by rebels. Their use has
a catastrophic impact on the safety and movement of
populations. We condemn those barbaric acts in the
strongest terms.
The A3 also notes with serious concern an upsurge
in atrocities and the clear presence of terrorist groups in
the region. The international community must commit
to doing more to challenge those groups, not only in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but also throughout
the continent. We must take the necessary measures to
curb that scourge before it takes root. Identifying the
root causes and proposing viable solutions seem to us
to be the beginning of strong action. In that regard,

22-303089/21

S/PV.9007

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

we commend the invaluable support provided by
MONUSCO to the Congolese defence forces. We also
welcome the coordination and communication efforts
between the Congolese authorities and MONUSCO.
It is essential that the MONUSCO transitional
withdrawal plan be implemented based on an assessment
of the benchmarks achieved. The withdrawal must be
gradual, coordinated and concerted with the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) to avoid any recurrence of violence. We
welcome the progress made in the implementation of
the 18 benchmarks set out in the joint transition plan by
the Congolese authorities.
The security environment is an aggravating
factor in the humanitarian situation. With 5.5 million
displaced and 27 million people facing food insecurity,
the humanitarian crisis in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is very alarming. We urge international and
regional donors, as well as all Democratic Republic of
the Congo partners, to support the 2022 humanitarian
response plan, launched by the Congolese Government
and the United Nations.
We commend the remarkable work of humanitarian
workers who, at the risk of their lives, provide continued
support to the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We pay well-deserved tribute to all the
peacekeepers, humanitarian workers and members
of the FARDC who lost their lives working for peace
in that country. We call on the Congolese authorities
to continue their efforts to ensure the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and humanitarian
workers so that they can carry out their mandates
without hindrance.
In conclusion, the A3 reiterates its unwavering
support for the Congolese Government and MONUSCO.
We also reaffirm our commitment to the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Keita for his briefing and for
her commitment to her mission. I would also like to
welcome our colleague the Permanent Representative
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
Chamber today.
Also, let me express concerns about the report of
the downed helicopter and my condolences for any
10/21

29/03/022

loss of life. This is just one more bit of evidence of
the extraordinary danger that the troops of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) face
in working in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would like to use my time today to discuss
the recent attacks in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, our efforts to disrupt illicit resource
networks, transition planning, the 2023 election and
peacekeeper conduct.
First and foremost, the United States strongly
condemns continued attacks by armed groups, including
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, also known as the
Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), and the Coopérative
pour le développement du Congo (CODECO). We are
concerned by the grave threats to civilians posed by
armed groups with networks across the region. As the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/252) notes, those
also include a potentially reconstituted Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) and Burundian armed groups.
We are particularly disturbed, as others have
mentioned, by the recent attacks in Plaine Savo internally
displaced persons camp, in Ituri providence. There,
in the late hours of 1 February, CODECO assailants
slaughtered more than 60 people, mostly women and
children, before MONUSCO intervened jointly with
the Democratic Republic of the Congo armed forces
to repel the assault. The United States holds in high
regard the work of non-governmental organizations
and advocates who go to great lengths to shine a light
on those kinds of attacks and abuses against civilians,
which often target particular ethnic groups. And we
are glad to see the Special Representative and her team
thinking critically about how to bolster MONUSCO
forces, including through enhanced use of standing
combat deployments, to best protect the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s vulnerable populations.
To that end, the United States welcomes the initial
steps taken by the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC), the Ugandan People’s
Defence Force (UPDF) and MONUSCO to achieve
effective communication and deconfliction. We urge
all parties to fully implement the agreed coordination.
We also continue to urge Member States to maintain
adherence to Security Council sanctions resolutions
and all relevant obligations under international law in
the conduct of all cross-border operations in the east.
22-30308

29/03/022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.9007

Secondly, everyone sitting here in this Chamber
and tuning in today knows full-well that illegal natural
resource trafficking in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and cross-border regions directly fuels and
finances activities that threaten the lives of Congolese
people every single day. Instead, those resources
ought to be used to build a future for the people of the
Democratic Republic of Congo. We are concerned by
the finding in the Secretary-General’s report that, in
areas of South Kivu, there is an increased presence of
the armed groups that are connected to the regional
criminal groups orchestrating illegal mining. We must
put an end to that, which is why we remain committed
to working with Member States to make robust use of
the resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo sanctions regime. The United
States sanctions on Alain Goetz and his network
demonstrate our commitment to unearth and disrupt
the networks of those who would profit at the expense
of the country’s security and development and of
their people.

discuss that role and track all progress in the weeks
to come.

Thirdly, we welcome the ongoing coordination
among MONUSCO, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo Government, and all partners, including
provincial authorities, to operationalize MONUSCO’s
transition plan. And as we think about the future, I
know many eyes are looking at the elections set for
December 2023. To that end, the United States supports
strengthened protections for the freedom of expression,
which is critical to a credible electoral process. And
we stand ready, with the Council, to ensure that our
Democratic Republic of the Congo Government partners
have all the tools they need to plan and hold free, fair,
transparent, timely, secure and inclusive elections.

India expresses serious concern about the
crash of the MONUSCO helicopter, which was on a
reconnaissance mission earlier today near Rutshuru.
We pray for the safety and well-being of the crew and
the passengers. We look forward to an update on that
incident by Special Representative Keita.

Fourthly, and finally, within the MONUSCO
context, we must not lose sight of a fight we continue
to wage across United Nations field operations, that is,
ending sexual exploitation and abuse. In 2021 alone,
MONUSCO received reports of 23 allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse perpetrated by United Nations
personnel. I know the Mission’s conduct and discipline
team is hard at work processing and investigating
those allegations. And I hope the countries whose
personnel stand accused are working just as hard
to hold perpetrators accountable when allegations
are substantiated.
Between the recent attacks, the illegal mining and
the December 2023 elections, MONUSCO’s role is as
important as ever. We look forward to continuing to

Mr. Vinito (India): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Bintou
Keita for her update on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the developments in
the country. I also welcome the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to today’s meeting.
India’s peacekeeping contributions to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo date back to 1960,
when our peacekeepers helped in the orderly withdrawal
of colonial forces and the establishment of a national
Government. Since then, 51 of our soldiers have made the
ultimate sacrifice, the highest of any troop-contributing
country keeping the peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. As the second-largest troop contributor
to MONUSCO, with over 2,000 personnel, India takes
keen interest in the Mission’s operations, as well as in
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I will focus my remarks on the two main objectives
concerning MONUSCO’s mandate — the protection
of civilians and support for the stabilization and
strengthening of State institutions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and key governance and
security reforms.
The primary responsibility to protect civilians
rests with the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. MONUSCO’s role is to supplement
those efforts, including in its areas of deployment. In
that regard, we note that the persistent violence and
insecurity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
eastern provinces — mainly in Ituri, the Grand Nord
area of North Kivu and parts of South Kivu — is a cause
for concern. The Coopérative pour le développement du
Congo, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and other
armed groups continue to be active, killing scores of
civilians and attacking Government security forces and
United Nations peacekeepers. The Islamic State-Central
Africa Province has also claimed responsibility for the
25 December improvised-explosive-device attack in
Beni, which had the bearings of a typical terror attack.

22-3030811/21

S/PV.9007

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We strongly condemn those attacks and offer our
condolences to families of the victims.
The established links between the ADF and
terrorist groups and the potential spread of terrorism
to the Central African region is a cause for concern.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities
have been raising the issue of the presence of terrorists
operating under the cover of the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda and the ADF in Ituri, North
Kivu, South Kivu and Maniema. That needs to be taken
seriously. We welcome the enhanced regional efforts
among the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda
and Rwanda to combat armed groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also underscore
the critical need of regular tripartite coordination among
MONUSCO, the Ugandan People’s Defence Force and
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo during military operations, especially at the
tactical level.
We take note of the ongoing preparations for
MONUSCO’s withdrawal from Tanganyika by June
2022. A successful drawdown, as per the timeline,
would further boost the Mission’s own plans for
rationalizing the resources and focusing on the three
eastern provinces.
We have also noted the steps taken in implementation
of the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Reintegration and Stabilization Programme against the
benchmarks and the establishment of the provincial
coordination mechanism. Tangible progress in its
implementation, with the equal and meaningful
participation of women at all stages, will be crucial
to the eventual establishment of peace and stability
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We encourage MONUSCO to continue to support the
efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo with regard to security sector and
judicial reforms.
With regard to MONUSCO’s operations on
the ground, we believe that greater clarity on the
interpretation of the mandate as it relates to the Force
Intervention Brigade and other battalions is important.
That would help TCCs to have a clear understanding of
operations to be undertaken and to equip themselves
appropriately, and it is especially important for the
safety and security of peacekeepers.
The authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have made progress towards the holding of
12/21

29/03/022

elections by way of appointments to the Independent
National Electoral Commission, the unveiling of an
electoral road map and the submission of the requisite
draft legislation. We welcome those developments,
while noting the challenges in the road map. We
encourage all stakeholders to keep up the positive
momentum and create an enabling environment for the
holding of peaceful, inclusive and transparent elections.
India also welcomes that the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has assumed the role
of Chairperson of the Economic Community of Central
African States and welcomes the country’s admission
into the East African Community as a full member. We
believe that will help promote the country’s continued
leadership and engagement with its neighbours and
the wider Central African region. We also welcome
the convening of the tenth high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, which took
place in Kinshasa on 24 February. The Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework has enabled countries of
the region to collaborate and work together to eliminate
negative forces operating within the region. We firmly
believe that the framework remains the key architecture
to usher in and safeguard lasting peace and stability in
the region.
In conclusion, a peaceful and stable Democratic
Republic of the Congo will contribute immensely to the
overall development of the region. That potential can
be seen in the increased partnership and cooperation
among regional stakeholders. The country’s leadership
has shown its firm resolve to address existing
challenges, and the international community needs to
take cognizance of the same and continue supporting
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On our part, India will remain steadfast in
supporting the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative Keita for her briefing,
and I welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in today’s meeting.
We are deeply worried about the missing helicopter
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and hope that its whereabouts and the
22-30308

29/03/022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.9007

safety and of its crew and passengers will be confirmed
as soon as possible.

stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
essential to the country’s peace and development.

The security situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo saw continued deterioration
in the recent period, with escalating violence by
armed groups and more frequent attacks on civilians
and displaced persons. China strongly condemns
such incidents of violence and supports the swift
and strong Council response through the issuing of a
press statement (SC/14787). We hope that, through the
implementation of the state of siege in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Government
will enhance coordination with MONUSCO in order to
effectively protect civilians.

We note that the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2022/252) indicates recent political volatility,
controversy and challenges concerning the 2023
elections. China welcomes the commitment of President
Tshisekedi Tshilombo to holding free, democratic and
transparent elections within the constitutional time
frame. We welcome the adoption of the electoral road
map by the Independent National Electoral Commission
and call on all political leaders to overcome their
differences, maintain unity and jointly advance
specific matters, such as electoral reform, and finalize
the electoral calendar and budget.

The safety of the lives and property of thirdcountry nationals should also be taken seriously
and protected. We call upon the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to thoroughly
investigate the egregious cases of armed looting,
attacks and kidnappings, among other things, and hold
perpetrators accountable.

The humanitarian and development needs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo must not be
ignored. Although the world today is turbulent, with
hotspot issues arising more frequently, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other Africa-related agenda
items must not be marginalized. China strongly calls
on the international community to ramp up its help and
assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other African countries. China recently donated
yet another batch of anti-virus supplies to the hospital
of the University of the Kinshasa and will continue to
contribute to peace and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The causes for the prolonged turbulence in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo are intricate
and complex and will not be rooted out by military
means alone. China supports the Government’s efforts
to strengthen its governance capabilities, promote
reform in key sectors, implement the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Reintegration and
Stabilization Programme and exercise effective control
over its eastern region.
It is important to value the role of development in
enhancing security and to take advantage of natural
resources in order to create jobs, improve livelihoods
and eliminate poverty, so as to break the vicious
cycle of violence. Strengthening mutual political
trust and engaging in mutually beneficial cooperation
among countries of the region are conducive to the
improvement of the security situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We welcome the successful convening of the
summit of the tenth high-level meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region and support MONUSCO
in enhancing cooperation with the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region and
playing a positive role in achieving peace and stability
in the country and the region. Maintaining political

MONUSCO has played a vital role in stabilizing
the security situation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. China appreciates the tireless efforts
of the Special Representative and the troop- and
police-contributing countries in that regard.
The recent incident involving the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo firing at
patrolling MONUSCO personnel is shocking. We hope
that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will investigate and more effectively manage its
military and police.
With regard to the MONUSCO drawdown, China’s
supports MONUSCO in stepping up coordination
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the relevant United Nations agencies
to advance the drawdown plan in an orderly and
responsible manner, according to the situation on
the ground and the benchmarks for withdrawal. The
drawdown progress report recently submitted to the
Council by MONUSCO and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo helps improve

22-3030813/21

S/PV.9007

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

our knowledge of the situation on the ground and the
changes made to, and progress in, the drawdown.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I begin by joining
others in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Keita for her characteristically
thorough and clear briefing. We look forward to reading
Ms. Babite Inyobondaye’s contribution in due course.
I would also like to share the concern expressed
by others around the Security Council table about the
news that a helicopter went down today in Rutshuru,
North Kivu. We hope that the rescue mission under
way today is successful, but we are also reminded of
the risks taken daily by peacekeepers across the world
to implement our mandates.
The United Kingdom is extremely concerned, as
we have heard today around the Council table, about
the violence facing civilians in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including the persistent
attacks by armed groups. In addition to armed groups
such as the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and the
Coopérative pour le développement du Congo, we are
increasingly concerned about the resurgent Mouvement
du 23 mars group. We welcome the efforts of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to
enhance protection in the Djugu area of Ituri but note
that insecurity around camps for internally displaced
persons continues.
Also of concern is the number of recent kidnappings
in North Kivu, which has made a large proportion
of the province inaccessible to humanitarian actors.
While we take note of the efforts of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to address
the security in the east of the country, we call upon it
to intensify those efforts in order to improve security
and humanitarian access and lessen the suffering of the
Congolese population.
Almost a year after the declaration of the state of
siege, the United Kingdom welcomes the reinstitution
of civilian judicial processes. We urge the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue
to mitigate the negative impacts of the state of siege.
That includes setting clear objectives and an exit plan
and addressing the recommendations of the national
defence and security committee.
With regard to joint Democratic Republic of the
Congo-Uganda military operations, we welcome
14/21

29/03/022

efforts to deconflict operations. However, we remain
concerned about the fact that joint operations in the
Beni area of North Kivu have not yet been successful in
improving the security situation or decisively tackling
the threat of ADF.
We urge the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda to increase their
coordination with MONUSCO. Not only is that essential
to ensuring the protection of civilians and the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and humanitarian
workers, but it could also support efforts to hold cleared
areas and prevent the ADF from spreading into new
territory where they can re-establish their foothold.
With regard to the safety and security of United
Nations personnel, the firing at a MONUSCO patrol
by soldiers of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo in North Kivu is also deeply
concerning. We echo the Secretary-General’s call for
those responsible to be held to account.
The United Kingdom welcomes progress made
to develop and operationalize the new Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Reintegration and
Stabilization Programme. It is essential to learn
from previous disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts, including by adopting a
decentralized and community-based approach. We
welcome the technical support provided by the United
Nations in that regard. As the operational phase begins,
the establishment of inclusive coordinated structures
among the United Nations, the international community
and the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Reintegration and Stabilization Programme will
be critical.
Turning to MONUSCO’s transition, we share the
Secretary-General’s view that the transition plan and
its associated benchmarks offer a comprehensive
framework for mobilizing the collective efforts of the
Government, the United Nations and international
partners. Establishing baselines and tracking progress
against transition indicators, collectively by the United
Nations and the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, will be particularly important as the
Council looks to assess progress in the implementation
of the transition plan. We look forward to future updates
on the transition, as part of the regular reporting cycle.
In conclusion, let me commend the work of Special
Representative Keita and her team in extremely
challenging circumstances. It is our sincere hope
22-30308

29/03/022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

that the collective efforts of MONUSCO and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
can soon create a more stable and peaceful environment
for the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): As other speakers who have taken the floor
before me, I would like to thank Special Representative
Bintou Keita her very comprehensive briefing today. Of
course, I pay tribute to her work.
Over the past three months, we witnessed major
changes on the political front, in particular the drafting
of the road map for the holding of elections. We trust
that the necessary legislative, logistical and budgetary
changes will continue to be consolidated to ensure
that elections in 2023 are held within the time frame
established by the Constitution.
With regard to the security situation and the
protection of civilians, we must express our deep
concern and condemn the violence perpetrated by armed
groups, such as the Coopérative pour le développement
du Congo, against civilians, including girls and boys
and, in particular, the deliberate attacks carried out on
camps for internally displaced persons. The information
the Special Representative just shared with us is very
serious and could jeopardize progress on the political
front. Also very serious is the apparent downing or
disappearance of a helicopter of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which clearly shows the extreme
volatility and fragility of the security situation.
Mexico believes that the investigation undertaken
by the Congolese authorities in response to the attack
on the Plaine Savo camp is, of course, a step in the
right direction. However, violence also has a serious
impact on humanitarian access, and that is why various
humanitarian organizations have had to suspend
their work in regions such as Beni. We therefore
underscore the need to ensure full respect for the
work of humanitarian staff, as well as the importance
of measures to strengthen security along distribution
routes where humanitarian aid and personnel circulate.
In the light of this disturbing situation, it is
essential to restrict the flow of weapons. Without that
key element, armed groups would be unable to carry out
violent campaigns with the relative ease with which they
appear to do so. Of course, we acknowledge the progress
in implementing the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Reintegration and Stabilization Programme

S/PV.9007

and the measures taken in the area of transitional
justice. We encourage the stakeholders concerned to
continue to make progress in those areas. We believe
that their efforts have a multiplier effect and provide
opportunities for former combatants, which will help
promote national reconciliation.
With regard to accountability, we take note of
the verdict rendered by a military court that has
found 50 people guilty of the death of United Nations
experts Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp and their
four Congolese companions. However, we call for
the moratorium on the death penalty that has been in
force in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since
2003 to be maintained and for perpetrators to receive a
custodial sentence rather than capital punishment.
Regarding MONUSCO’s exit strategy and transition
plan, Mexico will remain attentive to progress made on
the benchmarks, as well as everything related to the
Mission’s withdrawal programme in Tanganyika, which
will take place in June. It is important that the transition
process aligns with the reality on the ground and is able
to evolve in accordance with developments there.
MONUSCO’s work and the presence of the
United Nations country team cannot be considered
separately, as we always say, from the underlying
causes of the conflict such as population displacement,
violence and, as highlighted this morning, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. For Mexico, a
comprehensive approach, taking into account all
development parameters, is indispensable for building
sustainable peace.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Special Representative Keita for her
insightful and important briefing this morning. Ireland
welcomes her leadership and the essential work of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
I also acknowledge the presence this morning of our
colleague from the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
who is most welcome.
I would like to make three points.
First, Ireland welcomes President Tshisekedi’s
express commitment to holding elections in 2023, in
accordance with the Constitution. We welcome the
adoption of an electoral road map by the Independent
National Electoral Commission and stress the
importance of an inclusive and credible electoral

22-3030815/21

S/PV.9007

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

process held in the proper conditions. Failure to ensure
that could undermine social cohesion.
Creating stability in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo depends on many factors.
Regional cooperation should be strengthened,
including through the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework Agreement for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
We congratulate President Tshisekedi on holding
the tenth session of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
in Kinshasa. That meeting and its communiqué
demonstrate the continued commitment to joint
efforts to establish lasting peace through dialogue,
coordination and collaboration. A comprehensive
strategy on security sector reform is also necessary.
Strengthening the justice system, combating
impunity and implementing a community-based
disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration process
for ex-combatants are also essential. The inclusion and
meaningful participation of women will be essential for
the success and sustainability of all those efforts.
(spoke in English)
My second point concerns the fact that Ireland is
gravely concerned by the continuing insecurity and
dire humanitarian and human rights situations in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge the
Government to ensure that the implementation of the
state of siege is time-bound, with clearly measurable
objectives. Military operations must be consistent with
international law, including international human rights
law and international humanitarian law.
Ireland welcomes the efforts to establish effective
tripartite coordination between MONUSCO, the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) and the Uganda People’s Defence Forces.
That is essential to ensuring the protection of civilians
and the safety and security of United Nations personnel
and humanitarian workers. We remain concerned
by the incident in which FARDC soldiers fired at
a MONUSCO patrol in North Kivu, and welcome
the Congolese authorities’ assurances that they will
initiate investigations.
Ireland strongly condemns all attacks against
civilians and notes Ms. Keita’s concerning remarks in
that regard today. Persistent and sustained attacks by
armed groups on civilians in the eastern Democratic
16/21

29/03/022

Republic of the Congo, as well as the attack last month
on the Plaine Savo internally displaced persons site,
where more than 60 of the country’s most vulnerable
people lost their lives, show just how challenging it
will be to build a sustained peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They are also tragic reminders
of how badly that is needed.
Ireland notes the verdict in the case of the
assassination of United Nations experts Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalán and their four Congolese
companions. We call on the authorities to maintain
the moratorium on the death penalty and to take steps
towards abolishing it in law.
We remain deeply concerned about violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law, including conflict-related sexual
violence, committed by armed groups and State agents.
All survivors of such violations must be provided with
safe and unhindered access to appropriate medical
and other services and to reparations. We urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to accelerate the work on a national transitional justice
commission in that regard.
Thirdly, we welcome the transition plan and
its benchmarks, which can offer a comprehensive
framework for mobilizing the collective efforts of
the Government, the United Nations system and all
stakeholders, including civil society and youth. The
recent progress report is a starting point, although we
would wish to see more regionally disaggregated data
and more clarity in relation to the measurement of
progress against benchmarks.
Ireland is pleased to see strengthened planning and
coordination between the Government and the United
Nations system to ensure MONUSCO’s sustainable
withdrawal from Tanganyika province. Given the
security challenges that persist in certain areas, we
believe it vital that the drawdown of the Mission’s
presence in the province be conducted in a phased and
responsible manner. Such a drawdown will help to
preserve the hard-won gains made by and for the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Before concluding, like others, we have become
aware of reports this morning that a MONUSCO
helicopter has crashed in the North Kivu region of
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
understand that the circumstances of the incident are
being investigated and that a search-and-rescue mission
22-30308

29/03/022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

is being prepared. Of course, details on casualties
remain to be confirmed, but I want to say that our
thoughts are with the MONUSCO personnel on this
very difficult morning. They serve on the front lines
of peace in an extremely difficult context. We await
further details on that serious incident.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I join the other speakers
in thanking the Special Representative for her briefing
and welcome the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to this meeting.
We also join the other members of the Council
in paying tribute to the peacekeepers who may have
lost their lives today in the crash of a United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) helicopter. This
is indeed a sad day and reminds us of the risks that
peacekeepers take on a daily basis.
As we have heard, the political situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains tense.
Ahead of the country’s elections in 2023, we call on all
the parties to avoid actions that could produce a negative
fallout by placing their personal agendas aside. It is of
great importance to maintain the positive momentum
of the ongoing preparations and the electoral road map,
which will ensure the elections’ credibility, as will the
participation of women and youth. We take note of the
violations of democratic space mentioned in the report
(S/2022/252) and call on the authorities to refrain from
actions that may harm the electoral climate.
The security situation, particularly in the eastern
provinces of North Kivu and Ituri, is ever more
alarming, considering the ongoing state of siege and
attacks on civilians. In South Kivu, we have also
witnessed persistent intercommunal violence fuelled
by hate speech in local and social media.
Albania is deeply concerned about the conflictrelated sexual violence against women and children
committed by armed groups, but also by State agents.
Moreover, there is an alarming new trend in the use of
improvised explosive devices in recent attacks, raising
new questions with regard to the link between armed
groups and international terrorist organizations. What is
more devastating are the attacks on internally displaced
persons sites, followed by serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. We condemn
in the strongest way these acts. Instead of bloodshed,
Albania believes that the way forward is accountability,
not impunity, and reconciliation, not mistrust.

S/PV.9007

Cooperation with third States to bring a military end
to the conflict in the east of the country has not achieved
the anticipated results. We urge that these operations be
made even more transparent and coordinated, and we
welcome the first steps being taken towards this end. We
also call on the authorities for a robust implementation
of the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme, which needs
to be supported by all stakeholders, including civil
society, women and youth.
It is vital for MONUSCO to step up its efforts to
respond effectively to the challenges on the ground
and the mandate given to it. Albania supports a
phased transition and the exit of the Mission based
on the implementation of the agreed benchmarks to
avoid any gaps and secure what it has achieved so
far. Nevertheless, for this process to succeed, United
Nations system agencies and other international
stakeholders must work together and urgently provide
funding in such critical areas as Tanganyika.
In conclusion, it is important that the resources
that are now fuelling the conflict and illegal trafficking
should be redirected to the socioeconomic development
of the country and for the benefit of Congolese people.
Albania supports the work of the Security Council
Committee established by pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) in holding accountable those responsible
for the illegal exploitation of natural resources and
for violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Bintou Keita, for her comprehensive
briefing and her work. I welcome the participation
of the Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to today’s Council meeting
and congratulate his country on joining the East
African Community.
I join others in expressing our condolences to the
people and the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the families of the victims of the most
recent attacks in Ituri and North Kivu. These attacks
underscore the need to further address the complex and
interconnected security challenges facing the country,
particularly in its eastern region, if sustainable peace
is to be achieved. Key among these challenges is the

22-3030817/21

S/PV.9007

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

persistence of intercommunal violence, the spread
of hate speech, the rise of sexual and gender-based
violence, the illicit trade in natural resources, and crossborder crime, which have all unfortunately exacerbated
the already fragile humanitarian situation.
The United Arab Emirates emphasizes the
importance of upholding international humanitarian
law and mitigating the impact of violence on the
most vulnerable. In addressing security challenges,
the protection of civilians needs to remain front and
centre in all stakeholders’ considerations. We are also
concerned about continued attacks against United
Nations personnel, including those working to protect
civilians. It is important to ensure the protection of
humanitarian workers. Additionally, special attention
must be paid to the situation of women in areas of
heightened violence to ensure that they have access to
adequate protection and support.
Furthermore, it is important to build on the
existing cooperation between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its neighbours and regional partners,
including the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Economic Community of Central
African States. Having an integrated regional approach
is key to addressing common security challenges,
strengthening diplomatic relations and economic
cooperation. A combination of these factors could
contribute to the security and stability of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the entire region.
With regard to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), we are encouraged by its
continued cooperation with the Government in the
implementation of the 2021-2023 transition plan. We
join others in acknowledging the important role that
MONUSCO plays in supporting the Government’s
efforts, including through the promotion of women’s
full, meaningful and equal participation in the political
process, as well as their continued empowerment.
In conclusion, as part of our presidency’s
commitment to bringing attention to the implementation
of resolution 2565 (2021), I want to take this opportunity
to highlight the ongoing challenge that the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) still poses in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. According to the World Health
Organization and the most recent reports, infections are
on the rise and the number of people fully vaccinated
is far less than 1 per cent of the population. We call
18/21

29/03/022

on the international community to intensify its efforts
in supporting the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
response to the COVID-19 pandemic to alleviate the
burden on the country’s health system.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Nzongola-Ntalaja (Democratic Republic of
the Congo) (spoke in French): I join the members of
the Security Council who have expressed their concern
about the helicopter accident that took place in the
Rutshuru region. We too are very affected by this news.
We hope that the group that went looking for this plane
will do what is necessary to prevent any unfortunate
circumstances from arising. We hope that most of the
people who were on that plane will be found alive.
I am also very pleased that the Council has seen
fit to invite us to this meeting on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), and I would like
to thank Ms. Bintou Keita for her work and for her
briefing, which we are discussing today.
I would like to begin by congratulating the
President on her country’s presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March 2022 and thank her for
taking the initiative to organize today’s meeting on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, for his
determination and commitment to my country’s cause
and for his report on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2022/252), which is the
subject of our discussions today. I would like to thank
all the members of the Security Council whose qualities
I have greatly admired; I see that most members of the
Council are truly committed to improving the situation
in the Congo, and we thank them for that.
Allow me also to welcome the presence in the
Chamber today of our compatriot Ms. Léa Babite
Inyobondaye, founder of the “Young People Enemies of
Hunger” association.
My delegation has taken note of the report of
the Secretary-General on MONUSCO, covering the
period from 1 December 2021 to 16 March 2022,
which Ms. Bintou Keita, Special Representative of
22-30308

29/03/022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO, just
presented to us.
Let me make a few comments on the issues raised in
the report and the concerns raised by Council members.
As the report before us highlights, the political
situation in my country has been mainly dominated by
preparations for the upcoming elections and the pursuit
of regional partnerships.
With regard to preparations for the 2023 general
elections,
President
Félix-Antoine
Tshisekedi
Tshilombo, as the report underscores, reiterated during
his speech on the state of the nation on 13 December
2021 his commitment,
“to making the Democratic Republic of Congo a
truly democratic State, which cannot be achieved
without the holding of free, democratic and
transparent elections within the constitutional
time frame”.
That resolve has been reflected by the following
progress: the completion of the composition of the
Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI),
as several Council members underscored earlier; the
appointment of a woman as the Commission’s Deputy
National Executive Secretary; the gradual allocation
by the Government of resources to CENI; the adoption
of the road map for the 2021-2027 electoral process by
CENI; and the adoption by the Government of three
draft decrees. The first of the latter concerns the
organization of the pooling of operational activities
within the framework of voter identification and
registration, population identification and the general
census. The second and third draft decrees concern
the creation of a national identity card and general
population database, respectively.
Despite challenges related to security and financial
and logistical constraints, the Government, under the
leadership of the Head of State, is working to ensure
the success of the electoral process, and all other forms
of support, facilitation and constructive contributions
that can help make the process a success are welcome.
Moreover, in confirming the desire that he
expressed at the beginning of his term to strengthen
good-neighbourly relations and cooperate with the
leaders of the region, the President of the Republic
recently participated in two major regional events: the
Conference of Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of Central African States, held

S/PV.9007

in Brazzaville on 19 January, and the tenth High-level
Meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, held
in Kinshasa on 24 February. Both summits reaffirmed
the shared resolve expressed by member States to
cooperate further in bringing peace to the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Concerning the security situation, it remains
generally calm throughout the country, apart from
the activities of armed groups in certain territories in
the east of the country. Joint operations by the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) and the Ugandan People’s Defence Force
(UPDF) in the framework of the state of siege against
the terrorists of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF)
and the Madina Tawheed wal Muwahedeen (MTM) are
being pursued and developing at a regular pace in the
Grand Nord area and in the southern part of Ituri.
Those operations have led to the dismantling and
destruction of several of the groups’ strongholds,
thereby forcing them to change their combat strategy.
They have evolved into small and mobile groups,
raping and massacring the civilian population in their
path. In addition, they are also using terrorist methods,
such as the use of suicide bombers, for example, in Beni
on 24 and 25 December 2021, and the parcel bomb at
Oicha on 5 January. In retaliation for the operations, the
ADF and MTM terrorists and their supporters are also
using improvised bombs to terrorize the population.
On top of that, we note the resurgence of activity by
the Coopérative pour le développement du Congo
(CODECO), which was mentioned here earlier several
times, in Ituri.
Those operative methods require the FARDC and
MONUSCO to readapt and recalibrate their strategies
and pool additional joint efforts to neutralize those
negative groups and provide lasting security for the
populations of the eastern part of my country. In addition
to the military strategy, in upholding his commitment
to restore peace and security in the east of the country,
the Head of State of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo continues to engage in regional diplomacy that
could eventually change the situation in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well
as in the entire region.
In addition to the regional approach to pacify the
east, my Government is also considering non-military

22-3030819/21

S/PV.9007

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

solutions for both domestic and foreign armed groups
to bring peace to the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region.
The synergy among the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, the
National Monitoring Mechanism of the Framework
Agreement of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other regional and international guarantors that are
working to promote cooperation around non-military
measures will contribute to the gradual eradication of
negative forces in the region.
Pacifying the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo must also inevitably lead to the strengthening
of the fight against the illegal trafficking of arms
and ammunition, as well as the plundering of natural
resources, which was mentioned by several speakers
earlier. In that regard, an effective and well-targeted
sanctions policy must not be ruled out as a means of
disrupting all mafia-like networks.
Finally, in the context of the many current and
future acts of surrender by combatants operating in
the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the new Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Reintegration and Stabilization Programme, established
by President Tshisekedi Tshilombo, is a key instrument
to pacifying the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We echo the call for increased
partnership and support to ensure the full functioning
of the programme.
Despite those efforts of the President of the
Republic in his pursuit of regional partnerships to
change the narrative of the security situation both in the
east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region, unfortunately, on the night of 27 to 28 March,
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) carried out
incursions and attacked FARDC positions in Chanzu
and Munyonyi, in Rutshuru territory. After all the
agreements signed with the M-23 and its annihilation,
by inter alia the United Nations Intervention Brigade,
there is reason to wonder about the resurgence of the
M-23. Moreover, many questions remain, including the
source of their supplies and who is supplying them with
arms and ammunition and why?
With regard to the fight against violations of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
sexual violence, my delegation would like to emphasize
that this fight remains at the heart of the work of the
President of the Republic, as well as his Government;
20/21

29/03/022

from the outset, he has committed himself to working
to establish the rule of law. The various existing State
structures, as well as other agencies newly set up by
the President since 2019, such as the Agency for the
Prevention and Fight against Human Trafficking and
the National Committee for the Prevention against
Torture, are all hard at work to achieve that goal.
In the same vein, my Government is also
committed to fighting impunity within the army and
the police. Paragraph 26 of the Secretary-General’s
report under consideration illustrates that focus: in
addition to the severe sentences handed down for
the perpetrators, the operationalization of a new
military court in February 2022 in Beni, on account of its
proximity, will contribute to the fight against impunity.
With regard to the allegations of violations
committed by elements of the security forces, the
Congolese military justice system has adopted
measures to prosecute the perpetrators of the crimes,
and they will continue. In addition, it is worth noting
the efforts undertaken by the Government for the
operationalization of transitional justice, as well as
the implementation of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
The alarming humanitarian situation observed in
my country is largely attributable to the activity of
armed groups and the conflicts that are also affecting
neighbouring countries, whose people sometimes
take refuge on our territory. Those armed groups, in
particular the ADF and CODECO, have been carrying
out unacceptable deadly attacks. We emphatically
denounce such attacks against displaced persons
camps, as well as against peaceful citizens.
My country continues to address this delicate
and difficult situation, given the very high number
of internally displaced persons and all the attendant
challenges. That is why my Government, in partnership
with the United Nations, launched a humanitarian
response plan on 17 February. The plan is targeted at
8.8 million of the most vulnerable people. As the needs
are immense, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
would greatly appreciate any additional assistance
that other partners could provide to this population
in distress.
With respect to MONUSCO, my Government
makes the following requests.
22-30308

29/03/022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

First, the United Nations and the Security Council
should allocate sufficient resources to the Mission so
that it can effectively carry out its mandate.
Secondly, considering that the reconfiguration
process of the MONUSCO force is more or less
complete, including that of the Intervention Brigade,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo requests that
more joint, planned and intense FARDC-MONUSCO
operations be conducted, in accordance with resolution
2556 (2020). The objective is to increase pressure on the
armed groups and prompt them, if possible, to surrender.
The result of those operations, in the context of the
2023 elections, could also facilitate the smooth conduct
of the electoral process in the respective territories.
Thirdly, the Council should ensure that the vacuum
left by the withdrawal of the Ukrainian unit in terms
of personnel and equipment can be filled within a
reasonable amount of time to prevent the weakening
of certain essential operational capabilities of the
MONUSCO force in this context of asymmetrical war.
Fourthly, the Council should ensure an even
more impactful strengthening of partnership between
MONUSCO and the defence and security forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has already
been initiated, in terms of transfer and effective
capacity-building.
Lastly, my delegation encourages the use of
the Comprehensive Planning and Performance
Assessment System and its horizontal implementation
within MONUSCO.
Concerning the implementation of the transition
plan and the gradual and phased withdrawal strategy
of MONUSCO, the Government of the Democratic

S/PV.9007

Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO are working
in close cooperation on the basis of the road map that
has been drawn up. The initial joint assessments reflect
progress achieved on the 18 benchmarks and indicators
set out. In connection with the withdrawal from
Tanganyika province, scheduled for June 2022, a joint
field assessment, as a prelude to the withdrawal, would
be desirable. My Government favours the withdrawal
and is preparing for it.
As for the investigation into the murder of the two
United Nations experts, the sentence was handed down
in the first trial against the 51 people found guilty.
My Government takes this opportunity to express its
solidarity with the families and the countries affected
by this incalculable, painful loss and wishes to reassure
the international community that justice will be done.
I would like to conclude by once again thanking
Ms. Bintou Keita, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO, for her
commitment. My Government highly values the
excellent work that she is carrying out in my country in
a difficult time. We assure her of our full cooperation
to ensure the success of her work.
I must not fail to thank the MONUSCO troops in
general, and the Intervention Brigade in particular, for
the sacrifices they continue to make so that peace can
be restored in the eastern part of my country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

22-3030821/21
